Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/02/2006 
Report No.:  AC2427
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Romania 
Project ID:  P100470 
Project Name:  Avian Influenza Control & Human Pandemic Preparedness & Response 
Project 
Task Team Leader:  Matthias Grueninger 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 5, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: September 1, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Health (50%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other communicable diseases (P);Rural 
policies and institutions (S);Health system performance (S);Participation and civic 
engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
37.10 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
20.60 
 Financing 
Gap 
7.68
28.28 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project will support and constitutes an integral part of a national program to increase 
Romania's avian and human influenza preparedness, i.e. the country's capacity to prevent 
and control the spread of influenza among animals and humans. In this context, the 
overall development objective of the project is to reduce the threat posed to humans and 
the poultry sector in Romania by HPAI and other zoonoses, and to support the 
preparation for, control of, and response to influenza pandemics and other infectious 
disease emergencies in humans. To achieve this, the project will support activities in the 
three areas of prevention, preparedness and contingency planning, response and 
containment under the three components: (i) animal health; (ii) human health; and (iii) 
public awareness, communications and implementation support.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will finance activities under four components: (i) Animal Health; (ii) Human 
Health; and (iii) Public Awareness, Communications and (Implementation Support.  Even 
though the activities are organized by sectoral components, the project strongly endorses 
Page  2
an integrated national plan that ensures common objectives across sectors for dealing 
with the avian flu issue.  
 
COMPONENT 1:  ANIMAL HEALTH  
 
Total component cost are estimated at EUR19.8 million, with Bank financing in the 
amount of EUR10.2 million and a Government contribution of EUR9.7 million.  
 
(A) Strengthening National HPAI Preparedness and Prevention Capability  
 
A1 - Strengthening the Institutional Framework (EUR2.5 million)  
 
Evaluation of National Veterinary Services. The organizational and functional review of 
the main governmental veterinary services undertaken by experts from EU member 
countries and international organizations, and the rapid assessment undertaken by the 
Bank team, suggest the need for an in-depth assessment of the national veterinary 
services, followed by appropriate reforms as may be warranted. To meet international 
standards set by the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE), the EU requirements, 
and the recommendations developed by FAO and EU experts, the veterinary services 
need to develop and document appropriate procedures and standards for the 
implementation and management of animal health measures and international veterinary 
certification activities. As a basis for activities in support of institutional enhancements 
(below), the project will provide technical assistance to support the self-evaluation of and 
by the national veterinary services based on OIE's "Performance, Vision and Strategy for 
Veterinary Services" evaluation guidelines in order to establish the current level of 
performance, form a shared vision with service providers and clients in the private sector, 
establish priorities, and facilitate strategic planning.  
 
Strengthening Veterinary and Food Safety Institutions. Once the evaluation of 
veterinary and related services (above) has been completed, the project will provide 
technical support for realigning institutional structures and resources with priority 
objectives, mandates, and tasks. In collaboration with and complementary to ongoing and 
planned advisory activities funded by donors and international organizations, the project 
will provide technical assistance for institutional and organizational restructuring at 
national and county levels as may be warranted; training of staff; equipment and 
materials. In particular, the project will support the establishment of animal disease 
control centers at the national and county levels.  
 
A2 - Improving HPAI Prevention and Control Planning (EUR1.0 million)  
 
Contingency Plan Implementation Guidelines and Manuals. While governmental 
authorities have developed individual contingency plans for animal and human health, 
overall national contingency planning and coordination still needs improvements. The 
Government has established a National Disease (AI) Control Center that has started a 
comprehensive process of reviewing, integrating, and consolidating existing contingency 
plans. The project will provide technical assistance to support this process of refining and 
Page  3
finalizing the draft contingency plan(s) and to develop the necessary detailed 
implementation guidelines and manuals for relevant agencies and services.  
 
(B) Strengthening Disease Surveillance, Diagnostic Capacity, and Research  
 
B1 - Strengthening Monitoring and Surveillance Systems (EUR0.2 million)  
 
Surveillance Capacity of Veterinary Services. The project will provide technical 
assistance and training for staff of veterinary service institutions at national and local 
levels, focusing on the structured routine collection of samples on a national scale, on 
intensive follow-up sampling around outbreaks areas, as well as routine investigation of 
dead wild birds that are regularly collected for such purposes (support for serological 
testing under active surveillance schemes is provided under the diagnostic capacity 
component B2 and support to local mobility is provided under the institutional 
strengthening component A1).  
 
Epidemiological Surveys. The second wave of HPAI outbreaks in Romania, starting on 
May 11, 2006, has shown that the lack of reliable epidemiological information, and the 
sound analysis thereof, has hampered the development of rational, targeted disease 
control measures and slowed down the containment of the disease. The project will 
provide technical assistance and training for epidemiological studies and surveillance 
programs to support decision makers in continuously fine-tuning and improving disease 
control measures based on improved risk assessment. In Romania where 70 percent of 
poultry is produced in backyard systems, small-scale and semi-commercial poultry 
production systems are the major control target.  
 
B2 - Strengthening Diagnostic Capacity (EUR11.2 million)  
 
Diagnostic capacity in Romania's national reference laboratory (IDAH) and county 
laboratories. In order to equip existing laboratories for the increased work load under 
active surveillance schemes and to minimize the length of the period between infection 
and control action (i.e. the high risk period being the time needed for detection, reporting, 
sampling, testing, and decision-making for response), the project will finance priority 
laboratory equipment and laboratory consumables including sampling kits, materials for 
transporting and conditioning of samples, reagents, as well as technical assistance and 
training, in order to increase the capacity for virology and serological tests, screening 
surveys for the confirmation of the disease and the preparation for the differentiation of 
AI sub-types. The sub-component will also provide personal protective and laboratory 
waste disposal equipment. Twinning arrangements with appropriate institutions outside 
Romania will be explored in order to facilitate sustained capacity strengthening.  
 
Quality control of veterinary medicinal products. This sub-component will provide 
equipment, consumables, technical assistance and training for increasing the capacity of 
the Institute for Control of Biological Products and Veterinary Drugs to fulfill its 
responsibility in providing quality control for vaccines and other veterinary medicinal 
products for which formal quality assurance has to be provided by the State.  
Page  4
B3 - Strengthening Animal Diseases Information Systems (EUR2.3 million)  
 
This sub-component will support the development of a comprehensive integrated 
national animal disease information system which will enable Romania to participate in 
global disease information sharing and comply with its obligations as a member of OIE, 
contributing towards progressively better global and regional control and eradication. The 
system will be linked with rapid and standardized methods of routine analysis of 
surveillance data in order to track important changes in the H5N1 situation and promptly 
supply this information to field personnel. The system supported under the project is 
intended to enable an effective and efficient flow of information among relevant agencies 
and individuals (esp. field veterinarians, laboratory experts, epidemiologists, etc.), 
providing the necessary support to decision-makers charged with the prevention and 
control of animal diseases at local and national levels. The project will provide technical 
assistance, priority equipment and supplies, and training, for the design, establishment 
and use of the system. The animal health information system also includes a geo-
referenced database for all poultry farms, confirming to the requirement of municipalities 
to register all backyard flocks under their authority.  
 
B4 - Strengthening Applied Veterinary Research Capacity (EUR0.3 million)  
 
Applied Veterinary Research Program. A Government Decision under preparation at the 
time of project appraisal is to provide ANSVSA in the near future with a new mandate on 
establishing the Research Center for Cross border Diseases, Emergencies, Reemergence 
and Zoonoses of the Institute for Diagnosis and Animal Health, situated on premises at 
Tulcea. This sub-component will be limited to the provision of preparatory support to 
initiate applied research on epidemiology, bird migration and ecology, and other subjects 
related to HPAI (and other zoonotic diseases) by providing technical assistance for 
ANSVSA to assist with the design a research program as well as to assist with the design, 
construction and refurbishment plans for the physical facilities for the Research Center. 
Twinning arrangements with appropriate institutions outside Romania will be explored in 
order to facilitate sustained capacity strengthening. Upon completion of the design 
additional project funds may be made available subject to a separate request and 
subsequent appraisal.  
 
Infectious disease research on live animals. Research with highly infectious agents (such 
as HPAI virus) on live animals - as may be required for the testing of vaccines and the 
practicing of vaccination and post-vaccination sampling - requires a high-containment 
laboratory environment. The project will finance goods, consumables, and civil works for 
minor refurbishments in existing laboratory facilities for the installation and operation of 
isolators at the Institute for Control of Biological Products and Veterinary Drugs.  
 
(C) Strengthening HPAI Control Programs  
 
C1 - Targeting Virus Eradication at the Source (EUR1.9 million)  
 
Page  5
Quarantine, Culling and Disposal. Although capable teams are in place to effectively 
control HPAI outbreaks, the recent wave of out outbreaks has overwhelmed authorities 
and veterinary services. The wide distribution of small flocks across a country where 70 
percent of poultry are produced in backyard systems is a particular challenge for the 
control of the disease. The project will contribute to the enhancement of existing 
capacities for the control of HPAI outbreaks as required by existing national contingency 
plans. Weaknesses have been identified in the areas of quarantining (disinfection 
stations), culling of infected and at-risk poultry, and the safe disposal of poultry carcasses 
and potentially infectious materials in a bio-secure and environmentally acceptable 
manner. Disinfection practices will be improved with support from other than project 
sources. The project will focus its assistance on the culling of poultry and on the disposal 
of carcasses in small-holder systems - which dominate Romania's poultry sector. The 
project will finance the purchase and operation of containers where CO2 is applied in an 
animal welfare acceptable manner. The project will also finance the purchase and 
operation of mobile incinerators with a combined daily capacity of about 40,000 kg.  
 
C2 - Supporting Poultry Vaccination Campaigns (EUR0.1 million)  
 
Vaccination planning and implementation. A policy on the use of vaccination for the 
containment of HPAI outbreaks has not yet been formulated. In situations where other 
measures failed to control the spread of the disease and where the virus has become 
endemic, vaccination might in future become an option for the containment of the 
disease. The project will therefore provide technical assistance and training to develop 
Romania's vaccination policy, contingency plan and implementation manuals in the 
context of its near-future EU membership, and train officials, as a contingency planning 
exercise, in the implementation of poultry vaccination campaigns and post-vaccination 
monitoring.  
 
(D) Improving Bio-security in poultry production and trade (EUR0.3 million)  
 
Bio-security on small-scale poultry farms. The level of bio-security both on commercial 
and on backyard farms is insufficient and represents a major risk for new waves of 
infections. The project will support enhancements of bio-security on small-holder farms 
with the following instruments: (i) Bio-security on poultry farms is - primarily - the result 
of managerial decisions and behavior (such as restricted access to poultry production 
farms, quarantining of new purchases, separation of sick animals, separation of species, 
personal hygiene, etc). The project will therefore support awareness campaigns and 
knowledge transfer activities - including on-farm demonstrations and training of farmers, 
extension agents, and other rural services providers - aimed at managerial and behavioral 
changes. (ii) The project will also finance technical assistance for a comprehensive 
poultry sector assessment which - together with improved epidemiological evidence - 
will help shape state support to increased bio-security on small-holder farms. This study 
will assess the structure of the poultry production sector, assess bio-security issues in 
different production systems, and formulate technical options for upgrading on-farm bio-
security, especially in small-holdings. It will result in the publication of biosecurity 
manuals for different stakeholders (iii) Investment incentives (on a matching grant basis) 
Page  6
for infrastructure upgrades on small-holder farms in compliance with enhanced bio-
security requirements (such as fencing, compartmentalization, caging, and manure 
disposal.), based on the results of the poultry sector assessment and successful pilot 
activities, could be an option for project follow-up activities and were endorsed by the 
appraisal mission but have not been included in the final project design.  
 
COMPONENT 2: HUMAN HEALTH  
 
The Human Health Component will comprise three subcomponents for a total estimated 
cost of EUR21.7 million, with Bank financing in the amount of EUR16.8 million and a 
Government contribution of EUR4.9 million:  
 
(A) Enhancing Public Health Program Planning and Coordination (EUR0.3 million)  
 
Activities under the first subcomponent will aim at enhancing coordination and program 
planning by providing financial and technical support for additional studies and research 
as well as for conferences and workshops, including the organization of a regional 
coordination meeting on preparations for a human influenza pandemic.  
 
(B) Strengthening of National Public Health Surveillance Systems (EUR1.8 million)  
 
The second subcomponent will help strengthen the national public surveillance system 
by: (i) Upgrading of the National Influenza Laboratory to BSL 3 through the financing of 
minor civil works (partitioning and creation of decontamination rooms), the supply and 
installation of additional security devices, and the installation of a system for maintaining 
negative pressure in the rooms; and (ii) Strengthening of regional laboratories by 
providing critical equipment and training of staff.  
 
(C) Strengthening Health System Response Capacity (EUR19.6 million)  
 
The third subcomponent will help strengthen the capacity of the health care system to 
respond to the disease, through:  
 
(i) The strengthening of the isolation and case management capacity in both national 
and regional hospitals. The project will finance equipment for the intensive care units of 
the two Bucharest infectious diseases hospitals and the establishment of isolation and 
intensive care units in the 7 regional centers for infectious diseases (Brasov, Craiova, 
Constanta, Cluj, Iasi, Timisoara and Tg. Mures). According to the National Plan, during 
the inter-pandemic period, all suspected cases shall be transported to and isolated at the 
Institute of Infectious Diseases Prof Dr Matei Bals, where medical assistance can be 
provided by specialized dedicated personnel. The centralization of patient care is the only 
possible way at this point in time as there is no medical unit able to ensure high quality 
care to suspected or confirmed AI human cases in the rest of the country. However, in the 
future, patients would have to be hospitalized within their region of residence. Therefore, 
there is a need to develop isolation and intensive care capacities in the regional centers 
for infectious diseases.  
Page  7
(ii) The upgrading of the influenza vaccine production unit at the Cantacuzino Institute 
including the rehabilitation and equipment of the influenza production department, and 
the completion and equipment of the filling and sealing unit. A significant part of the 
vaccines needed in Romania during the inter-pandemic and pandemic periods can be 
produced by the Cantacuzino Institute. Making the Institute able to significantly increase 
up to 2.5 million doses and its production in full compliance with GMP standards 
requires the upgrading of both the production unit and the filling and sealing station. This 
intervention will help both to increase the production capacity and to ensure that the 
production is at the required Good Manufacturing Practice standards.  
 
COMPONENT 3: 
PUBLIC AWARENESS, COMMUNICATIONS, AND  
 
IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT  
 
(A) Public Awareness and Communications (EUR2.8 million)  
 
The Public Awareness and Communications Sub-Component will support the GOR's 
efforts in designing and implementing an integrated and comprehensive communications 
strategy and action plan. The component will be implemented by ANSVSA, and will 
comprise the following three sub-components:  
 
(i) Strengthening institutional capacity for ANSVSA: the project will support assistance 
for and training of communications staff, and additional equipment and operating costs 
for the communications teams in the two agencies.  
 
(ii) Development of an integrated communications strategy and action plan for both 
human and animal health based on qualitative and quantitative research: the project will 
build on the experience gained from the information campaigns of UNDP, UNICEF, 
USAID, as well as on the sectoral communications strategies of WHO and UNICEF, and 
the communications needs assessment of ANSVSA. The strategy will define parameters 
of specific audiences in various generic target groups, the degree of social acceptance of 
proposed hygiene and bio-security measures, the associated messages which will need to 
be persuasive without creating panic, and the most efficient delivery tools and vehicles 
for a nation wide campaign.  
 
(iii) Delivery of several information campaigns: these will aim to obtain the public's 
support and participation in reporting and monitoring; to promote and induce a set of 
behavior changes which will diminish the possibility of AI outbreaks and contamination; 
and to educate different key audiences (farmers, people living in villages, traders, local 
authorities, media, food inspectors, front line workers, consumers, other stakeholders). 
The campaigns, even if targeted especially for HPAI, will lead to other important positive 
externalities. The proposed bio-security measures and associated campaigns will also 
affect the spreading and prevention of other animal diseases such as Newcastle disease, 
Classical swine fever, or Rabies, and will provide support for other on-going ANSVSA 
programs such as animal welfare, identification and registration of animals and 
traceability. Also, the campaigns will improve the general hygiene and sanitation of the 
Page  8
population. In close collaboration with and complementary to the animal health related 
and overall coordination activities supported under the project, human health related 
communications activities will be entirely financed through USAID support and from 
governmental budgets under MOPH.  
 
(B) Implementation Support, Monitoring and Evaluation (EUR2.2 million)  
 
The project will be implemented by the MOPH and ANSVSA, and will build upon the 
already existing Project Management Units in the two agencies. In order to ensure 
effective implementation of the project in accordance with Bank fiduciary and 
procurement policies and guidelines, the project will finance: (i) Incremental support to 
the two PMUs in terms of staff and operating costs; (ii) Studies, technical services, 
manuals; and (iii) Surveys for monitoring and evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is a national project which covers the entire country, to varying degrees, 
depending on the location of outbreaks for purposes of virus eradication at the source. 
Capacity will be strengthened to allow proper disease monitoring throughout the country. 
This will require specific interventions at the local level through country animal health 
laboratories. On the human health side, project activities will be both country-wide and 
regional.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
Ms Amy Evans (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project's prevention-focused activities are expected to have a positive environmental 
impact as the Project's investments in facilities, equipment, and training for animal and 
Page  9
public health workers and facilities will develop capacity to improve the effectiveness 
and safety over existing avian influenza handling and testing procedures.  This would be 
reinforced by the mainstreaming of environmental safeguards into protocols and 
procedures for the culling and disposal of animals during AI outbreaks, and for laboratory 
safety and appropriate waste management procedures.  The Environmental Management 
Plan (EMP) will address culling methods and carcass disposal by (mobile) incineration, 
burial and composting, use of disinfectants, and laboratory and medical facility biosafety 
and waste management practices.  
 
No large scale, significant or irreversible impacts are anticipated.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement Policy will not be triggered as acquisition of private land or 
relocation of households is not expected under the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
n/a   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The cost, operating considerations, safety and environmental impact of several different 
carcass disposal methods were reviewed during project preparation and appraisal so that 
the most appropriate methods could be identified for support from project proceeds, 
consistent with Romanian and EU legislation and OIE guidelines.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Since the Project is assessed as a B-category project, an Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) will be prepared and implemented with project support (see project components). 
The EMP will address safe culling practices, and disposal of carcasses, laboratory wastes, 
and medical waste. The EMP will also cover the clean up of animal wastes of culled 
poultry by the local public veterinary services and minor civil works supported under the 
Project.  A waiver for the requirement to complete the EMP during project preparation 
has been sought per para. 12 of OP 4.01. and approved.  Preparation of the EMP is 
ongoing, and its adoption by the Government is set as a disbursement condition for goods 
and workds under the Animal Health and Human Health components of the Project.  
 
The borrower's institutional capacity for safeguard policies will be assessed during 
appraisal.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Meetings will be held to discuss the EMP provisions with representatives of commercial 
poultry producers and farmer organizations familiar with the socio-economic issues 
currently faced by backyard and commercial poultry producers, particularly in the areas 
where AI outbreaks in poultry have been concentrated.  Other stakeholders including 
Page  10
implementing and regulatory agencies, financing and technical cooperation partners, 
community organizations and NGOs will also be consulted. Formal disclosure of the 
EMP will be arranged in cooperation with the implementation team and the Ministry of 
Environment.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/01/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/30/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/02/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Disclosure is expected prior to disbursement of project funds for goods and works under 
the Animal Health and Human Health Components of the project, in accordance with the 
waiver that  was sought per para. 12 of OP 4.01.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  11
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Matthias Grueninger 
07/06/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Amy Evans 
07/06/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan 
07/06/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
07/06/2006 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Benoit Paul Blarel 
07/07/2006 
Comments:  Cleared for sector management 
