Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/09/2006 
Report No.:  AC2318
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Romania 
Project ID:  P094808 
Project Name:  Revenue Administration Reform Project 
Task Team Leader:  Munawer Sultan Khwaja 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 8, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 13, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSPE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Tax policy and administration (P);Administrative and civil service reform 
(P);Law reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
36.00
36.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the proposed project is to implement a sustainable revenue 
administration system for Romania that will: improve the level of voluntary compliance, 
increase administrative efficiency, and reduce the potential for corruption. The project 
would have ap positive impact on the business climate by improving client services and 
reducing the burden of taxpayer compliance. It would also help Romania to meet its 
European Union accession obligations through increased revenue collection and 
improved administrative capacity.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project consists of seven components:  
 
1. ANALYTICAL CAPACITY AND STRATEGY FORMULATION COMPONENT 
that would finance activities to build in-house capacity to: (i) conduct compliance, 
distribution and revenue projection studies to identify and propose measures for 
i
mproving the efficiency and effectiveness of revenue collection; (ii) develop NAFA’s 
strategicand operational plans and to monitor performance indicators to inform 
management, policy makers, and the public at large of the achievement of expected 
outcomes of the revenue administration reform.  
Page  2
2. ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT COMPONENT that aims at developing 
the capacity of NAFA in (i) providing an organizational framework and structure for 
NAFA, and a management system that includes modules governing accountability, 
internal control, and integrity of managerial processes; (ii) establishing a modern HR 
managament function in NAFA, which will include modernizing recruitment, selection, 
and hiring procedures, compensation policies and practices, performance incentive 
systems, workforce planning, career development, and management development.  
 
3. LEGAL FRAMEWORK AND APPEALS COMPONENT that aims at developing 
NAFA’s capacity to understand and improve the legal framework it operates under so 
that it can serve adequately all key stakeholders: MOPF, the Social Houses, and the 
taxpayers.  
 
4. INCREASING OPERATIONAL EFFICIENCY COMPONENT that aims at 
promoting the NAFA’s operational efficiency by introducing new streamlined business 
processes that take full advantages of the possibilities offered by automation in its 
operations at the back office as well as in the interaction with taxpayers and contributors.  
 
5. TAXPAYER SERVICES AND CORPORATE COMMUNICATION COMPONENT 
that aims at promoting NAFA’s identity, developing a Taxpayer and Contributor Charter 
of Rights;assuring citizen voice and participation in shaping NAFA, creating mechanisms 
for transparency and accountability, participation in improving the appeals procedures to 
ensure fair community input; expanding Call Centers at the regional level to provide 
information and services to taxpayers and contributors; and External and Internal 
Communications plans aimed at the community and NAFA staff.  
 
6. FACILITIES UPGRADING COMPONENT that would finance activities related to 
civil works needed to upgrade NAFA facilities and working environment, and esprit-de-
corps for optimum revenue collection operations.  
 
7. PROJECT COORDINATION AND MANAGEMENT COMPONENT that would 
manage the overall change that would take place in NAFA, ensure the timely and 
efficient allocation of resources, carry out project procurement, financial management, 
and audit activities, and interact with all local and international entities involved in 
project execution.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Bucharest and regional offices of NAFA   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No potential large-scale, significant impacts are envisaged as a result of implementation 
of project activities.  
 
The immediate impact of proposed civil works/rehabilitation activities on the 
environment would be limited.  Potential adverse environmental impacts are summarized 
below and are restricted in scope and severity:  
 
•
Dust and noise during construction activities;  
 
•
Inappropriate disposal of construction debris;  
 
•
Unsafe disposal of hazardous building materials, if any are encountered;  
 
•
Unsafe practices during operation of the building.  
 
These risks are anticipated in advance of project implementation and addressed by local 
regulations and direct mitigation activities in the design, planning, supervision process as 
well as during the operation of facilities.  
 
The selected sites are located in residential zones, well developed urban areas.  The land 
is state-owned and new land is not going to be acquired from private owners.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been prepared by the Borrower in order 
to integrate environmental concerns into the design and implementation of the proposed 
Page  4
project.  The EMP has been cleared by the ECA Region's Safeguard Unit. The EMP 
would support:  
 
•
inclusion of follow-up procedures in the operational processes of the NAFA;  
 
•
highlighting the follow-up responsibility in the job description of the NAFA 
Environmental Department or Environmental Management Team;  
 
•
training of designated staff from the Environmental Department or 
Environmental Management Team participating in the project as well as from NAFA 
staff with responsibilities in implementing and controlling the EMP;  
 
•
Site-specific environmental screening concerning all components supported 
activities for the activities and work to be developed in this program;  
 
•
monitoring and evaluation of mitigation measures identified  in the site-specific 
reviews; and  
 
•
Elaboration of Environmental Guidelines for Environmental Management System 
in the planning and design of the activities to be developed under this project, considering 
the need for a Manual and Operating Procedures.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are: the National Agency for Fiscal Administration (NAFA) and the 
Ministry of Public Finance. The EMP has been disclosed on the NAFA website, and a 
meeting of leading Environmental NGO has been conducted to obtain feedback on 
environmental safeguard issues.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/14/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/08/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/08/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  5
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Munawer Sultan Khwaja 
04/27/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Serena Adler 
04/27/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Deborah L. Wetzel 
05/05/2006 
Comments:  The project includes construction and renovation activities, but the relevant safegauard 
measures have been undertaken. 
