Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/20/2006 
Report No.:  AC2444
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Russian Federation 
Project ID:  P089733 
Project Name:  Judicial Reform Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  Amitabha Mukherjee 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 28, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSPE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Law and justice (50%);Information technology (50%) 
Theme:  Access to law and justice (P);Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms 
(P);Legal institutions for a market economy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
120.00
120.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project aims to strengthen judicial transparency and competence as a means to a 
more efficient and accountable judiciary worthy of public trust and confidence.  
Appropriate results indicators will be developed during project preparation.  
Pragmatically, though, the limited goals are to help (a) put the modernization process on 
an appropriate path, (b) reformers build momentum for further change, and (c) establish a 
results framework whereby progress on key project aspects can be objectively and 
transparently assessed and publicly disseminated.   
 
3. Project Description 
The JRSP will finance the following components:  
 
A. 
Institutional Development.  (US$7.25 million)  
 
This component will finance: (i) periodic surveys of users of judicial services on access 
to, quality of and satisfaction with judicial services and enforcement of judicial decisions, 
and public dissemination of the survey results; (ii)  research and analysis on further 
development of transparency, publication, openness and accessibility of judicial 
decisions, processes and practices, including obligatory publication of judicial decisions; 
(iii) research and analysis on introduction of modern information and communication 
Page  2
technologies in judicial systems and on further integration of the RF judicial system; (iv) 
the creation, implementation and dissemination of common case management standards, 
guidelines and processes; and (v) the development and piloting of criteria, indicators and 
a
policy to assess and periodically report on the effectiveness of the judicial system, and 
related capacity-building; and (vi) implementation of a communications strategy to 
promote judicial reform.  
 
B. 
Harnessing ICT for Judicial Transparency and Effectiveness.  (US$123.15 
million)  
 
The objectives of this component are to: i) improve judicial transparency through the 
publication and public dissemination of judicial decisions at every level in the three 
branches of the judiciary; ii) improve judicial effectiveness through the implementation 
of common (or standardized) ICT solutions for such key activities as case flow 
management, document flow management, facilitating access to justice in remote 
locations, and a judicial electronic archiving and iii) improve the enforcement of judicial 
decisions through the implementation of an information interchange link between the 
CGJ and that of the Federal Bailiff Service under the RF Ministry for the Interior.  
 
This component will finance activities for the CC, SC, JD/CGJ and the SAC to: (i) 
modernize, develop, and deploy integrated information systems for courts to facilitate 
document flow, record management, information collection, and internal knowledge 
sharing; (ii) improve public access and availability of judicial information through 
enabling online publication of judicial decisions and other relevant information; and (iii) 
more effectively link courts, Judicial Department offices, and relevant facilities through 
integrated information systems by enhancing mobile capabilities and video-conferencing.  
 
C. 
Strengthening Human Capital.  (US$34.10 million)  
 
This component will finance: (i) a judicial education and training (JET) needs 
assessment, policy and strategy update; (ii) a methodology and indicators to evaluate JET 
impact; and (iii) delivery of JET activities.  JET will comprise training for judges and 
court personnel for the Constitutional Courts and the Courts of General Jurisdiction (the 
Supreme Abritrazh Court is excluded from this training component).  
 
Training for the judges and staff of the judiciary is primarily provided by the Russian 
Academy of Justice, established pursuant to the Decree of the President of the Russian 
Federation of 11 May 1998, #528, ?On the Russian Academy of Justice? and the 
Resolution of the Government of the Russian Federation of 28 October, 1999, #1199, 
?On the Russian Academy of Justice? specifically for the purpose of training and skill 
upgrade of judges and staff of the judicial system.  Some judicial staff also undergo 
training in other higher educational institutions, although in subjects not directly related 
to the administration of justice.  
 
Currently, judges from all over the Russian Federation travel to Moscow to participate 
in such training.  The current system puts a strain on the level of resources allocated to 
the Academy to conduct such training in Moscow for all judges in the country.  To avoid 
disruption of the Academy of Justice?s activities and to build its capacity to carry out its 
Page  3
mandated functions, the Project will support continued training and capacity building of 
the Academy in the first year of the project, while simultaneously financing an 
independent training needs assessment for supplemental courses to add to the existing 
curricula.  Such supplemental courses may be added to the existing curricula of the 
Academy?s or may be supplemented by other training institutions as deemed necessary 
and through a transparent and competitive selection process.  
 
D. 
Project Implementation and M&E.  (US$5.50 million)  
 
This component will finance: (i) logistical and secretarial support for the Coordination 
Council and operating costs of the designated Project Implementation Unit; (ii) the 
development and implementation of a change management and communications strategy 
for the judiciary; (iii) the implementation of a project results framework and M&E 
indicators.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in Moscow and various regions in the Russian 
Federation.  No civil works are involved.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Svetlana G. Golubeva (ECSIE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
None. Nevertheless an Environmental Assessment (EA) has been done as part of project 
preparation and included as Annex 10 to the draft PAD.  The EA has been reviewed and 
approved by the Regional Safeguards team.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not applicable.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Amitabha Mukherjee 
07/18/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Cheryl W. Gray 
 
Comments:   
