Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/21/2007 
Report No.:  AC2823
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Russian Federation 
Project ID:  P100563 
Project Name:  Microfinance Infrastructure Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Samir M. Suleymanov 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 14, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 17, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Micro- and SME finance (100%) 
Theme:  Other financial and private sector development (P);Rural markets (P);Rural 
services and infrastructure (S);Regulation and competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
50.00
50.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Objective of the proposed World Bank Project on Microfinance Infrastructure 
Development is to strengthen the microfinance system, through an improvement of its 
legal and regulatory framework and the capacity building of the microfinance industry in 
order to improve access to financial services to the underserved, particularly in rural 
areas.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Legal, Regulatory and Supervisory Framework and IT Capacity: The 
project will help the Government finalize the work it has initiated on improving the legal 
and regulatory environment for microfinance institutions (both financial cooperatives and 
non-deposit taking microfinance institutions). The project will  also develop standards 
and clear definitions, to provide for the design and implementation of an internet based 
platform for financial management, accounting, and monitoring of FCs and MFIs, with 
real-time access within the industry, for the regulator and relevant service groups.  
 
Component 2: Financial Cooperative Network Institutional Development: The new legal 
and regulatory environment currently being envisaged will allow for a pre-determined 
amount of time for the industry to meet new requirements.  The project will help the 
Page  2
industry meet these new requirements through a mix of capacity-building level activities 
and training programs.  
 
Component 3:  Development of Service Organizations: In addition to the need to 
strengthen the institutions within the industry, the project will investigate the need for and 
the feasibility of creating or strengthening additional services to the microfinance 
industry (audit industry , mutual insurance; credit bureau;and ratings services). The 
Component will also launch a considerable communication to ensure a coordinated effort 
which will combine a number of media such as conferences, newsletters or mass media 
and support an effort in financial literacy and awareness to the existing (and potentially 
future) members/clients of the sector.  
 
Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation: This component will 
finance the project management function, as well as periodic monitoring and evaluation. 
This will be undertaken by a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) selected by the Ministry 
of Finance.  An Inter-Agency Working Group has been established to oversee project 
implementation.  Further implementation arrangements will be further defined to ensure 
that the views of the industry are reflected in project design and implementation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project does not affect any of the safeguard policies. It mainly includes technical 
assistance and training activities provided to the microfinance industry. Activities on the 
regional level will be implemented through training centers established on the basis of 
existing institutions. It does not target particular regions or particular social groups. Yet, 
main impacts on the poorer population and on the rural population of the country can be 
identified.  
 
The Project will provide significant benefits and positive impact on the poor. These 
include: (i) a deepened financial sector that fosters broad-based, economic growth, 
reduces poverty and contributes to macroeconomic stability; (ii) strengthened policy, 
legal and regulatory frameworks for an enabling environment that will increase 
transparency and disclosure; (iii) increased access to services for the poor in rural and 
remote areas; (iv) improved sustainability and performance of service providers through 
accredited national training programs; and (iv) increased financial literacy and 
empowerment of the poor, and consumer protection for microfinance clients, including a 
viable system for the poor to make inquiries or complaints.  
 
The Project will benefit rural areas because (i) commercial banks, MFIs, and urban 
CCCs are present in urban areas, whereas financial intermediation in rural areas is 
virtually absent; (ii) the largest microfinance client group are household plot owners 
located in rural agricultural areas; (iii) cooperatives play more that financial 
intermediation role in rural areas, and have clearly social benefits for providing access to 
information sharing and financial education; and (iv) poverty is still wider, salaries are 
lower, and unemployment is higher in rural areas than in urban areas.   
 
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria L. Amelina (ECSSD) 
Mr Vladimir V. Tsirkunov (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  4
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Samir M. Suleymanov 
03/13/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Vladimir V. Tsirkunov 
03/13/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria L. Amelina 
03/13/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
03/15/2007 
Comments:   
