Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2503 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/05/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Russian Federation 
Project ID: P079033 
Project Name: RENEWABLE ENERGY (GEF) 
Task Team Leader: Helmut Schreiber 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 22, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Renewable energy (75%);District heating and energy efficiency services (25%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
82.10
82.10 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the project is to facilitate a sustainable market for renewable 
energy (RE) by supporting the development of an enabling policy, institutional capacity, and 
financing mechanisms. Specifically, the project will change the current unfavorable investment 
and incentive conditions and create an enabling environment in Russia that fosters the 
development of biomass, solar, wind and other renewable energy utilization for heating and 
electricity generation applications through providing financial, methodological, informational, 
and institutional support. The project's global environmental objective is to achieve significant 
and sustainable reduction in the level of emissions of greenhouse gases in Russia, by reducing 
some of the more salient barriers to increased utilization of renewable energy resources.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component A: Policy and Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building Component  
 
The project would support the creation of an enabling legal and regulatory framework for RE 
development through (i) development of Renewable Energy Policy subcomponent, which will 
Page  2
focus on supporting the Government in designing and implementing policy, improvement of 
legislation and normative-regulatory basis, preparation of national and regional strategies, action 
plans and programs on the use of renewable energy resources; (ii) Market Infrastructure 
Development subcomponent that will support the Government on the feed-in tariff design, 
regulation of heat prices applicable to renewable energy projects, development and adoption of 
standards, development of a biomass fuel industry, and establishing streamlined permitting 
procedures; (iii) Renewable Energy Program in natural reserves and national parks 
subcomponent that will demonstrate innovative approaches to productive uses of renewable 
energy for biodiversity conservation and other essential services in natural reserves, national 
parks and other protected areas; (iv) Partnership on Innovative Financing Mechanisms and 
Regulations subcomponent that will provide additional financial resources to extend the REEEP 
program in Russia, and in particular, in implementation of additional 10-12 projects 
competitively selected in accordance with its procedures and criteria; (v) Knowledge and 
Information Collection and Dissemination subcomponent that will support creation and 
maintenance of  interactive web-portal on renewable energy, establishment of a Network of 
National Biomass Centers; long-term educational and training capacity building; and  awareness-
raising campaigns in the mass media.  
 
Component B: Renewable Energy Financial Facility consisting of three instruments:  
 
(i) Project Preparation Window will focus on development of a sustainable pipeline of potential 
projects that can provide deal flow for the NPAF, commercial banks and investors. Grant support 
will be provided to project developers and sponsors to defray the costs of feasibility studies and 
other project preparatory activities.  
 
(ii) Revolving Soft Loan Facility based on the institutional framework and financial resources 
of the NPAF will constitute a financial mechanism for provision of selective financial support to 
companies implementing renewable energy development projects. NPAF committed to allocate 
up to US$20 million of its resources (repayments from initial sub-borrowers) for cofinancing of 
RREP investment sub-projects. The GEF resources (US$4.5 million) will be used for 
establishing of the Contingent Grants Window for support of demonstration projects. Contingent 
grants will be provided to cofinance subprojects, and 30% is the maximum coverage that can be 
paid from the GEF funds.  
 
(iii) Revolving RER Facilities in 2-3 pilot regions will be created for testing of similar financial 
instruments (cost-sharing of project preparation and contingent grants and soft loans ) at sub-
national level.  Several regions with good potential to host the Revolving RER Facilities were 
pre-identified: Krasnodar krai, Karelia, Buryatia and Komi Republics, Arkhangelsk oblast.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
It is planned that the project would be implemented nation-wide, starting with three priority 
regions: North-West  federal Okrug, Southern federal Okrug, Baikal region.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project will be implemented by the NPAF ED, which possesses experience of executing the 
Bank's operations. The NPAF had established criteria and procedures for its services related to 
Page  3
the selection, design, appraisal, and supervision of investment projects, outlined in its Operating 
Instructions.  It has adequate capacity for implementation of the RREP.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
Mr Vladimir V. Tsirkunov (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Screening level EAs will be necessary for all subprojects under the RREP. They are 
generally expected to fall into EA category B. The subprojects are likely to include biomass, 
solar, wind, small and medium hydropower and potentially other renewable energy projects. 
Investments in physical and civil works, as well as technical installations are expected to be 
small to mid-sized plants, facilities, transmission lines and access roads, of potentially 
significant, but local, manageable and reversible environmental impact. Should potential 
investments be identified during the project lifeline, which might pose a significant 
environmental risk, they will be flagged as category A and will receive a full environmental 
assessment, including an analysis of alternatives including the "no project" option.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
While the project locations are not yet finalized, one project subcomponent specifically 
addresses the development of renewable energy in natural parks and reserves, to provide cleaner, 
sustainable energy supply and pilot local energy self-sufficiency.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Due to the overall geographical target area of the projects, forests will be affected in small, 
localized scale by the construction and operation of renewable energy projects. The impacts are 
expected to be moderate and localized, and will be managed, mitigated and monitored 
appropriately.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
This OP would be triggered in the case of biomass facilities processing agricultural crop 
residues for energy generation, which might have been exposed to and contain pesticides and/or 
herbicides. This would call for special considerations on the waste management plan as part of 
the subproject-specific EMP.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Depending on the project location and due to Russia's richness in physical cultural heritage, 
this OP could be triggered and was thus set to TBD. In such case a cultural management plan 
would be prepared for specific subproject(s).   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Indigenous peoples inhabit several regions, mostly in Northern Siberia. Depending on the 
project location, this OP could be triggered and was thus set to TBD. In case of triggering an 
indigenous peoples management plan would be prepared for specific subproject(s).   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Actual physical resettlement of people is highly unlikely, but land acquisition or land use 
might be necessary for some of the subprojects, depending on the project location. Thus this OP 
could be triggered and was set to TBD. In case of triggering, an RAP (resettlement action plan) 
plan would be prepared for specific subproject(s).   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
As small and medium hydropower is included in the project portfolio as potential renewable 
energy subprojects, dam safety might potentially become an issue. Should this OP be triggered, a 
determination will be made if the dam is to be classified as small or large and the appropriate 
measures be taken. These could include the establishment of a Panel of Experts (large dams), a 
plan for construction supervision and QA, an instrumentation plan, an operation and maintenance 
plan and an emergency preparedness plan.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
Small and medium hydropower potentially included in the project portfolio as potential 
renewable energy subprojects might, if located on rivers flowing into other political territories 
from Russia, trigger this OP. In such case, a diligent assessment will be made regarding the 
likelihood and scale of potential transboundary impacts and, if indicated, the affected riparian 
state notified about the planned project.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/16/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
TBD   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Helmut Schreiber 
10/02/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
10/03/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
10/04/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
