Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2322 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/06/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Russian Federation 
Project ID: P100563 
Project Name: Microfinance Infrastructure Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Samir M. Suleymanov 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 10, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 17, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Micro- and SME finance (100%) 
Theme: Other financial and private sector development (P);Rural markets (P);Rural 
services and infrastructure (S);Regulation and competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Objective of the proposed World Bank Project on Microfinance Infrastructure Development 
would be to assist the Government in developing a sustainable, safe and sound national financial 
cooperative system in order to enhance access to financial services by the poorer and 
underserved segments of the population, especially in the rural areas. Under this overarching 
objective the Project would aim to: (a) provide assistance to develop and implement an 
appropriate legal and regulatory framework; (b) establish an integrated system of FCs through 
technical assistance, institution building, and infrastructure support; and (c) strengthen the 
technical capacity of the financial cooperative system.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Enabling Environment for the Financial Cooperative System. The project would 
support the creation of an enabling legal and regulatory framework for the FC system through: 
(i) Establishing a Single Regulatory Body responsible for supervising, monitoring, developing 
and implementing the Federal Law, and the management of a unified information system on 
financial cooperatives. The subcomponent would include a comprehensive training program for 
Page  2
the staff of the Regulatory Body to perform its functions, and a capacity building program on 
supervision; (ii) Improving the Legal Framework governing cooperatives, focusing on clarifying 
the status, attributes, and roles of the FC system; as well as strengthening the role and capacity of 
contributing elements, such as credit bureaus and rating services.  
 
Component 2: Institutional Development. The project would support the transition of the 
financial cooperative system to new legislation, standards, norms, rules and regulations. Special 
monitoring indicators would be developed to assess the performance of these cooperatives and 
their impact.  The Component would include (i) Technical Assistance to Financial Cooperatives 
for the consolidation and integration of this industry and the development of the institutional 
structure for the cooperative system, based on the newly developed laws and regulations; (ii) TA 
and Training system for Cooperative Staff  in such areas as credit evaluation, risk assessment, 
financial management, accounting, asset liability management, governance, agricultural credit 
and services tailored to rural areas, and impact assessment; as well as the establishment of 
training centers; (iii) Assistance in the Establishment of a Mutual Insurance System, including 
the development of norms and standards for a unified specialized system of deposit insurance; 
and strengthening the current system of credit disability and life insurance; (iv) Audit Capacity 
Development; and (v) The Establishment and Licensing of Central Liquidity Funds.  
 
Component 3: IT Capacity Development. The project would provide for the design and 
implementation of an internet based platform for financial management, accounting, and 
monitoring of FCs, with real-time access for the regulator and relevant service groups. The 
component would finance the design and implementation of required software systems, and 
installation of essential hardware. Institutional and member information would also be made 
available for agricultural marketing and communications purposes.  
 
Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation. This component would 
finance the project management function, as well as periodic monitoring and evaluation. This 
would be undertaken by a Project Management Unit (PMU) selected by the Ministry of Finance.  
An Inter-Agency Working Group would be established to oversee project implementation.  
Further implementation arrangements would need to be discussed to ensure that the views of the 
cooperative system are reflected in project design and implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
To be determined. It is planned so far that the Project would be implemented nation-wide, 
starting with areas with well-developed cooperative systems.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be determined. The Borrower, through the establishment of project management unit will 
develop/acquire adequate capacity for implementation of a project of this type.  The Ministry of 
Finance (MOF) has been designated as a counterpart for the project. Project Management Unit 
staff will be trained to carry out the evaluation and monitoring of project activities according to 
environmental safeguards if any.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria L. Amelina (ECSSD) 
Page  3
Mr Vladimir V. Tsirkunov (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/05/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No specific safeguard related studies are yet needed.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Samir M. Suleymanov 
08/29/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
09/05/2006 
Comments:  Cleared as a "C" assuming only very minor renovation is required for IT equipment 
installation. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
09/05/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
