                                                                                     41020
                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                       CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.:


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: September 20, 2007

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Russian Federation                   Project ID: P101994
                                              Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Ulyanovsk ­ Landfill Project
Task Team Leader: Helmut Schreiber
Estimated Appraisal Date: 12/13/2007          Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: ECSSD                          Lending Instrument: Carbon Finance
Sector: Landfill Management
Theme: Climate Change Mitigation
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):              3.6
Other financing amounts by source:
Environmental Category: B
Is this a transferred project                     Yes [ ]                   No [X]
Simplified Processing                             Simple [X]                Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)              Yes [ ]    No [X]


B. Project Objectives:
The Project objective is to contribute to sustainable development of the host country by
promoting the utilization of an LFG and will achieve several goals:
Environmental benefits:
-Lined basins for landfill leachate containment and disposal;
-Reduction of CO2 emissions, volatile organic compounds into the atmosphere by 75%;
-Final cover system including revegetation as each disposal area is completed.
Social Benefits:
-Extra jobs creation for local community;
-Cleaner air;
-Reduction of odors and factors (birds, rodents).
Economic Benefits:
Concession payments to the regional authorities.




                                                                                            1

C. Project Description:
Disposal of solid waste on landfills is the main waste disposal strategy in Russia. At the moment,
the organic part of household waste is being decomposed under anaerobic conditions in landfills
generating methane emissions which are emitted to the atmosphere. Nowadays, capture and
utilization or flaring of LFG is a well proven technology to reduce the methane emissions.
However, currently, the extraction and utilization or flaring of methane gas from landfill is not
widely implemented in Russia and there are no landfills in Ulyanovsk Oblast that are capturing
and flaring the LFG.

The Project envisages the installation and operation of the Gas Flaring System plant fuelled by
landfill gas at the Baratayevka landfill site in Russia. The main components of applied
technology include gas extraction wells, gas transportation pipes, condensate wells, blowers and
flaring stack. Reductions of methane emissions will be achieved through flaring of captured
landfill gas. The equipment that will be installed will have gas metering system recording gas
quality and quantity in accordance with the UNFCCC verification criteria.

JSC GPM will implement a day-to-day operations management process of the LFG collection
and utilization system at the landfill.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):
The landfill has been operative for about three decades. The project area covers 30 ha, of which
the landfill are 23 ha. The landfill today contains just over 1 Mill m3 (0.5 Mill t) of municipal
waste. The project foresees a total capacity of around 4.5 Mill t. Current waste production of
Ulyanovsk amounts to about 350,000 t/year thus the lifetime of the project is estimated to about
11.5 years.

The landfill is located about 5 km from the western boundary of Ulyanovsk on a river terrace
elevated about 30 m above the Wolga valley and dipping gently southwards. There are two
villages near the LF, Barataevka (ca. 1.5 km S) and Krotovka (ca. 3 km SW). About 3 km NW of
the LF a group of drinking water wells is located, which draw water from an aquifer below the
landfill level.

Near surface groundwater and surface water from a small stream (Seld, ca. 1 km S) have been
shown to be affected by landfill related contamination.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:
Regarding sector and type this is a pilot project in Russia. The project management of the
operating company JSC "Green Project Management" (GPM) is also cooperating with the WB in
other carbon finance projects and is one of the first companies in Russia to invest in Landfill gas
reduction projects.

The landfill is operated according to the Russian sanitary regulation SP 2.17.1038-01 "Hygienic
Requirements to Arrangement and Maintenance of SDW Disposal Landfills," which specifies the
types of solid wastes allowed on the landfill and the requirements for sanitary and
epidemiological supervision.



                                                                                                 2

The regulatory authorities in Ulyanovsk are the environmental agency and the territorial center
for sanitary and epidemiological supervision. The list of permissible wastes used for reclamation
of disposal quarries during their exploitation should also be coordinated with the territorial
agency of the Federal Service for Supervision of Consumer Rights Protection and Human
Welfare (Rospotrebnadzor) in the Ulyanovsk District. This organization also reviews analytical
and toxicological data from environmental monitoring operations in the landslide vicinity.

The project has gone through Russian environmental approval process (OBOC/OVOS) and was
approved by local and Oblast level regulatory authorities. In the course of the OVOS process a
detailed environmental and technical study was prepared by the landfill operator.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
     Environmental Specialist: Wolfhart Pohl,
     Social Specialist, TBD

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                          Yes         No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                       X
The project is assigned Category B as the potential environmental impacts are well defined and
site-specific, and the environmental risks associated with the project are probably lower than the
risk of continued operation of the landfill facility as it is.

The project itself is not expected to have negative environmental impacts beyond those of routine civil
works sites. Instead, the project is expected to create an overall positive environmental balance:

(i)The potential for groundwater contaminations would likely be reduced by the impermeable cover
system, which would form a key component of the Methane capture system, as the percolation of
precipitation water through waste body would be restricted.

(ii) The installation of a gas capture system and the utilization of GHG, especially the conversion of
Methane to CO2 by combustion, and the additional benefit of energy generation, will be clear positive
impacts under the climate change agenda.

However, there are risks of harmful impacts and poor environmental performance of continued landfill
operation.

Contaminations from the landfill could already have reached groundwater bodies, which are used as
drinking water sources, or surface water courses. This hazard should be carefully investigated and
monitored during project preparation and implementation to exclude and additional risk induced by
project activities.


Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                           X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                    X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                               X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                         X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                              X
According to Russian regulations LF operations have to be surrounded by a 0.5 km wide buffer zone,


                                                                                                     3

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                                       Yes               No               TBD
which must not be used for agricultural purposes or be inhabited. This cordon sanitaire is not enforced;
agriculturally used land starts immediately adjacent to the LF. The project team will need to establish
whether implementation of the project will impose restrictions on the use of the buffer area (i.e., whether
the regulations will be enforced as a result of the project). If so, this would be equivalent to the taking of
land, the safeguard would be triggered and a Resettlement Action Plan would have to be prepared and
disclosed before appraisal.
The project is not expected to have any negative social impacts. There will be positive signal for the local
job market, the quality of life for the neighboring population and regional economic activity is expected
to be improved by the project.

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                    X
Disclosure Policy 17.50                                                                   X
All relevant safeguard documents will be disclosed prior to appraisal.


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared: N/A

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS:12/05/07

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
    The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
EIA with an EMP before appraisal including all necessary public disclosures and consultations.
If OP4.12 would be triggered a Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared and disclosed before appraisal.

IV. APPROVALS

  Signed and submitted by:
  Task Team Leader:                              Helmut Schreiber                                                 09/25/2007
  Approved by:
  Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Agi Kiss                                                            Date
    Comments:
  Sector Manager:                                Charles Feinstein                                                   Date
    Comments:




1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.




                                                                                                                                   4

