Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/15/2007 
Report No.:  AC2107
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Russian Federation 
Project ID:  P092429 
Project Name:  Second State Statistical System 
Task Team Leader:  Misha V. Belkindas 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 20, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSPE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Economic statistics, modeling and forecasting (P);Debt management and fiscal 
sustainability (S);Analysis of economic growth (S);Other economic management 
(S);Macroeconomic management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
42.50
42.50 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main objective of the project is to build a sustainable state statistical system, which 
provides timely, coherent and trustworthy statistical data concerning the economy and 
social conditions in Russia, that are required by government, business and society to 
make informed decisions.  The project will support the implementation of the 
Government of Russia's development strategy to continue topromote economic growth, to 
achieve ambitious social goals and targets, such as halving the incidence of poverty, and 
to ensure significant improvements in the efficiency of federal government agencies 
performance.  The improved availability of comprehensive sets of macroeconomic, 
social, poverty-related and labor market indicators, with regional breakdowns, will 
contribute to the monitoring of policy implementation.  
 
The project will support the implementation of the third FTP Development of the State 
Statistics in Russia in 2007-2011, aimed at consolidation of the state statistical system 
(SSS).  The modernized SSS will help to improve economic policy making and private 
investment decisions by providing pertinent, reliable, and timely data, thereby 
contributing to the growth of the Russian economy.   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
This project will be a Specific Investment Loan, under the umbrella of the STATCAP 
Adaptable Program Lending to improve statistical capacity through a sector-wide 
approach, using a Statistical Master Plan (SMP) as the basis for investments.  
 
The key element of STATCAP is a commitment to the implementation of a nationally 
owned Statistical Master Plan (SMP) based on a statistical development strategy. Russia 
is developing a FTP for 2007-2011, which will form the basis for the SMP and so meets 
the eligibility criteria for STATCAP.  The Russian Government has demonstrated 
national commitment and leadership for the continuation of reforms in the national 
statistical system by agreeing to finance about 80 per cent of the total cost of the Project, 
as well as by complying with good statistical practice, as evidenced by Russia's recent 
subscription to the IMF Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS) in January, 2005.  
 
The project components are designed to support the implementation of the SMP and 
FTP, and will be implemented in a consistent and well-sequenced manner. The major 
components of the project are planned as:  
 
Component A: Modernization of statistics methodology  
 
The component will ensure the further development of the System of National Accounts 
harmonized with international standards, including the introduction of internationally 
compatible classifications; development of the institutional sectors accounts; satellite 
accounts for tourism and ecology protection; improvement of constant price estimates by 
enhancing the Consumer Price Index (CPI), the Producer Price Index (PPI), and other 
price indices and use of double-deflation methods; development of the methodological 
basis for the compilation of the basic Input-Output Tables built on the newly introduced 
classifications and the results of the Agricultural and Economic Censuses (2006 and  
2007).  
 
Component B:  Development of modern design and technology for statistical data 
collection, processing, and dissemination system  
 
This component will support ROSSTAT's strategic IT goal of improving data survey 
development, data gathering, data analysis, and data dissemination processes through the 
use of information technology. It will implement the new information and 
communication technologies (ICT) infrastructure, developed during the STASYS-1 
project and successfully tested in 15 pilot regions of Russia. The new ICT infrastructure, 
linked with integrated techniques for analytical and forecasting works, will allow 
integration of statistical resources based on the formation of distributed data warehouses, 
using the unified standards of data and metadata storage. Users will have access to data 
through the Web-channels and benefit by using Online Analytical Processing (OLAP) 
technologies.  
 
Component C:  Enhancement of social statistics  
 
This component will strengthen statistics on poverty and living standards by 
modernization of the HBS and administrative data collection. In particular it will: 
Page  3
improve labor, health, and demographic statistics by optimizing centralized (ROSSTAT) 
and non-centralized (administrative data colleted by other data-providing agencies) data 
collection and data sharing; upgrade the system of vital registration recording (ZAGS) 
and its coordination and  cooperation with regional statistical offices to ensure 
improvement of demographic data between the population censuses; improve labor 
market statistics by introducing new classifications compatible with international 
standards and compatible with the classifications in the educational sphere; and provide 
the foundation for assessment, analyses and projection of productivity at all the levels of 
the Russian economy.  
 
Component D:  Human resource development  
 
The component will establish a sustainable system of continued professional education 
for statisticians in different data-providing agencies by defining the needed skill-mix in 
modern statistical work; developing appropriate job descriptions; designing training and 
re-training programs, including distance learning for the staff at the regional offices; and 
establishment of modern training facilities to provide continuous training and re-training 
of statisticians.  Some training will also be provided to the users of statistical data.  
 
Component E:  Project Management  
 
The component will support the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), Bureau of 
Economic Analysis.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project location will be mainly Moscow, Russian Federation. There will be some 
activities in the regional offices of ROSSTAT.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer (ECAVP) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There is no safguard issue associated with this project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
N/A 
Page  5
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Misha V. Belkindas 
02/02/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Asad Alam 
 
Comments:   
