Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2050 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/03/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Russian Federation 
Project ID: P089733 
Project Name: Judicial Reform Support Project 
Task Team Leader: Amitabha Mukherjee 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 20, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 15, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSPE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Law and justice (50%);Information technology (50%) 
Theme: Access to law and justice (P);Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms 
(P);Legal institutions for a market economy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
132.70
132.70 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project aims to strengthen judicial transparency and competence as a means to a more 
efficient and accountable judiciary worthy of public trust and confidence.  Appropriate results 
indicators will be developed during project preparation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The JRSP proposes to include the following components:  
 
A.  Institutionalizing Judicial Transparency and Accountability.  This component will finance: 
(i) periodic surveys of users of judicial services on access, quality and satisfaction with judicial 
services and enforcement of judicial decisions; and public dissemination of the survey results; 
(ii) the creation, implementation and dissemination of a legal framework for transparency, 
publication, openness and accessibility of judicial decisions, processes and practices, including 
obligatory publication of judicial decisions; (iii) the creation, implementation and dissemination 
of a legal framework for using information and communication technology (ICT) for the 
“Pravosudiye” (the evolving CGJ ICT system for case management, judicial statistics, and 
convictions) and regulating, as feasible, the interface between it and other national ICT systems 
Page  2
so as to integrate the CGJ into the common information space of the RF; (iv) the creation, 
implementation and dissemination of common case management standards, guidelines and 
processes; and (v) the development and piloting of criteria, indicators and a policy to assess and 
periodically report on the effectiveness of the judicial system, and related capacity-building.  
 
B.  Harnessing ICT for Judicial Transparency and Effectiveness.  Current ICT systems are 
fragmented and deficient. They negatively impact the quality of judicial decisions, facilitate 
corruption, impede case management and prevent access to information that should be freely 
available. The objective is to harness the enabling power of ICT to leapfrog transparency and 
effectiveness constraints. This component will finance: (i) an ICT Strategy for the CGJ and an 
Action Plan for integrating CGJ informatics into mainstream ICT systems with recommended 
standardized informatics solutions, financing requirements, and implementation timeframes; (ii) 
ICT systems support for the Supreme Court, the Judicial Department, the CGJ (on a pilot basis), 
the SAC, 79 arbitration courts and, possibly, the Constitutional Court with a view to facilitate an 
eventual move to a unified judicial ICT system; (iii) a common federal judicial electronic archive 
system; and (iv) information exchange between the “Pravosudiye” system and that of the Federal 
Bailiff Service under the RF Ministry for the Interior.  
 
C.  Strengthening Human Capital. With the establishment of the Academy of Justice in 1998, 
the judiciary enhanced its human resource capability. During the last five years, about 3,000 
judges and 10,000 staff have been trained each year in new laws and other court-related topics. 
This is a major achievement upon which future programs should be built.  However, the demand 
for professional development and training outpaces supply by four to one.  This component will 
finance: (i) a judicial education and training (JET) needs assessment, policy and strategy update; 
(ii) a methodology and indicators to evaluate JET impact; and (iii) delivery of JET activities.  
 
D.  Project Governance, Change Management, Communications and M&E. This component 
will finance: (i) logistical and secretarial support for the Coordinating Council, sub-project 
management teams, and a designated Project Support and Services Unit; (ii) development and 
implementation of a change management strategy for the judiciary and a communications 
strategy aimed at the public; and (iii) development and implementation of a project results 
framework and M&E indicators.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
To Be Determined.  The Project is expected to be implemented in the Supreme Court, the 
Supreme Arbitration Court, the Constitutional Court, the Judicial Department of the Supreme 
Court and other selected courts within the territory of the Russian Federation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To Be Determined   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer (ECSSD) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
The appropriate Environmental Assessment category will be determined during preparation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
The appropriate category will be determined during preparation.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
The appropriate category will be determined during preparation.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The appropriate category will be determined during preparation.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The appropriate category will be determined during preparation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/20/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
To be determined in consultation with the Borrower. Details will be specified in the PAD-
stage ISDS.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Amitabha Mukherjee 
12/20/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
12/29/2005 
Comments:  We look forward to consulting with the team after further project preparation to ascertain 
the correct EA requirements. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Deborah L. Wetzel 
12/21/2005 
Comments:  The required level of safeguard attention still needs to be determined. This will be based 
on whether the project includes building construction or not.  If so, an Env. Action Plan will be 
developed. 
