Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/18/2006 
Report No.:  AC2547
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Russian Federation 
Project ID:  P079032 
Project Name:  Housing and Communal Services Project 
Task Team Leader:  Gevorg Sargsyan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 1, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve quality and financial viability of HCS of 
participating municipalities. The project will support the implementation of the existing 
federal government reform program for the HCS sector at sub-national levels, by shifting 
from relying overly on government provision of services to market-based mechanisms for 
service delivery.  The federal program focuses on reforming the institutional relationships 
within the whole HCS sector, from housing management and maintenance to utility 
enterprises. The HCS project will combine the implementation of a comprehensive set of 
reforms in the HCS sector, with tangible investments to rehabilitate, upgrade and 
modernize infrastructure thereby placing it on a more sustainable path where there is less 
reliance on government finance and support.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will support the Government's HCS program in ten competitively selected 
medium-sized cities via a combination of technical assistance for reforms and 
investments for infrastructure through the following four components:  
 
Component A: Support to HCS reform implementation at the federal level, including (i) 
developing the legal and regulatory framework at the federal level, (ii) setting up the 
Page  2
national HCS monitoring system, and (iii) disseminating project results to non-
participating municipalities and regions.  
 
Component B: Support to Implementation of HCS Reforms at the Subnational Level, 
including (i) specialist assistance to cities on utility reform, social protection & housing; 
(ii) evaluation of implementation of municipal reform programs; (iii) knowledge 
exchange between municipalities; (iv) public awareness campaign on HCS reforms in 
selected regions; and (v) how-to-guidance on selected reform topics.  
 
Component C: Preparation and implementation of HCS investment plans, including (i) 
preparation of municipal investment plans and feasibility studies, (iii) preparation of 
technical designs, (ii) implementation of municipal investment plans, and (iv) supervision 
of implementation of municipal investment plans.  
 
Component D: Project management and results monitoring  
 
The project will consist of two phases: a 18-month reform phase and a 42-month 
investment phase. By project effectiveness, ten medium-sized cities (and four reserve 
cities) will be competitively selected on the basis of their planned reforms for the reform 
phase. During the reform phase, these cities will implement the planned reforms. Cities 
will also prepare detailed investment plans to be financed by the project, plus design and 
tender documents. In order to be included in the investment phase of the project, 
municipalities will have to substantially implement their planned reforms and have 
completed relevant and quality investment plans. During the investment phase, targeted 
investments in HCS infrastructure will be made according to the investment plans. The 
size of the investments will depend on the population of the city (between 90K and 
600K).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Investment projects from all over the Russian Federation are eligible for financing. All 
individual projects are expected to be in established residential or industrial urban areas 
with population from 90,000 to 600,000.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Vladimir V. Tsirkunov (ECSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is specifically designed to support policy reforms in the HCS municipal 
sector. The project aims to spark off the cost efficient investments into rehabilitation and 
expansion of municipal HCS services: heating and water supply, energy supply, 
sanitation, renovation and maintenance of housing stock, waste water treatment facilities, 
solid waste management, sanitary cleaning, etc, as well as efficiency investments in the 
housing and communal infrastructures. The existing facilities consume excessive 
amounts of power, fuel and other resources per unit of production due to inefficient and 
outdated equipment, high losses of heat and water, poor design of facilities, etc. Overall, 
HCS sector is one of the leading sources of pollution in the urban centers in Russia. 
Proposed investments will lead to sustainable medium and long-term environmental 
benefits due to increased energy efficiency, reduced emissions into atmosphere and water 
bodies, etc. The project is not expected to have any significant or irreversible long-term 
negative environmental impact.  
 
However, during construction of new or repairing of old infrastructure (housing stock, 
boilers, pumping stations, wastewater treatment plants, water and heating supply network 
pipelines) and performing other project financed activities, some short-term, limited-scale 
environmental impacts and disturbances will occur. Such impacts will include permanent 
or temporary withdrawal of additional land sites, cutting vegetation, air pollution, 
wastewater discharges, polluted storm water runoff particularly during construction 
period, generation of construction wastes, negative impacts of physical factors including 
increased noise levels, potential exposure of workers to asbestos containing materials. 
Therefore, during the planning and implementation phases of specific investments,  
proper preparatory work has to be done by municipal authorities, project developers and 
environmental authorities in order to identify, and, subsequently, to avoid or mitigate the 
potentially negative impacts. In this regard, a framework Environmental Management 
Plan (EMP) has been developed and disclosed by the Borrower (see the official web-site 
of Rosstroi: http://www.gosstroy.gov.ru/m_deit11.htm)  
 
Page  4
The EMP contains all environmental requirements and procedures, suggests appropriate 
arrangements for evaluation of significant environmental impacts, and recommends 
appropriate remediation and mitigation measures. Recognizing uncertainty associated 
with the lack of specific investment proposals at this stage of the project development, 
the EMP developed a "green" and "red" list of typical investments in the housing and 
communal sector. The "green" list includes those investments which are clearly 
compliant with the Category B projects, while the "red" list shows those investments 
which would have higher environmental risks, would require full scale EA and should not 
therefore supported by the project. The draft EMP presents procedures for compliance 
monitoring and delineates responsibilities of all parties participating in the environmental 
assessment process.  
 
The project does not trigger any of the social Operational Policies. Should there be a 
need to build new heating or water supply pipelines, they would be laid on public rights 
of way. In case the new pipelines or a new boiler house/pumping stations/wastewater 
treatment plants would be proposed for construction on privately owned land, the project 
proponent would need to agree on a legally valid deal with the land owner for purchase or 
leasing the land. The staff of Rosstroi and the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be 
advised in such cases to approach the Bank for further guidance.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In order to be eligible for financing, the proposed investments would need to comply with 
the Russian Federation environmental legislation and with the World Bank safeguard 
policies. Rosstroi has all necessary knowledge of the RF legislation and has become 
familiar with the World Bank safeguards policies during the implementation of 
Municipal Heating and Municipal Water and Wastewater Projects. At the same time, 
every effort will be made to ensure that the Rosstroi staff in charge of HCS Reform 
project implementation is knowledgeable on environmental and social issues. The Project 
Implementation Unit PIU will be requested to hire a qualified environmental consultant. 
Besides, it is planned that training in the proper application of environmental and social 
safeguards will be provided to Rosstroi and the PIU staff as a part of the Component D 
activities.  
 
The Operations Manual, which is under the preparation, will contain an environmental 
chapter specifying all the steps, procedures and respective responsibilities of all parties in 
line with provisions of the EMP.  
 
Page  5
It is anticipated that most of the individual projects will be small in scale and scope and 
will have only limited short term impacts on the environment, which can be mitigated by 
adherence to the recommendations of the project EMP, good planning and construction 
practice. Therefore, it is anticipated that in the majority of investments the individual 
environmental management plans would not be needed. Rather, the requirements for 
meeting environmental safeguards will be described in the environmental chapter of each 
sub-project proposal and incorporated into bidding documents, if appropriate. When 
individual projects would include new construction eligible for investment (see the 
Annex1 of the EMP), the development of an investment specific environmental 
management plan would be required. Municipal authorities and project 
proponent/developer will be responsible for preparation of an environmental management 
plan for specific investments and its approval by relevant environmental authorities in 
line with existing regulations. The PIU will provide overall guidance for development of 
individual environmental management plans and will ensure compliance with the 
framework.  
 
Rosstroi and the PIU staff will be required to regularly monitor a compliance of 
contractors and clients in each project, and in case of noncompliance undertake the 
necessary actions to mitigate the situation. The project management team will continue to 
consult and share information with stakeholders on a regular basis during the process of 
project preparation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The primary stakeholders include Federal, Oblast and Municipal governments, HCS 
providers, private companies, and residents/households. Reforms are expected to 
positively affect all levels of government (by reducing the need for subsidies), HCS 
providers (by efficiency gains and improved revenues), private companies (by improving 
access to new lines of business in housing management and maintenance) and households 
(by improving service quality). Poorly managed HCS providers may be affected 
negatively, however, if they cannot compete with private companies.  
 
Substantial work related to poverty and social impacts of the policy program has been 
carried out as part of the overall HCS sector reform program in Russia, which has been 
going on for over a decade. Relevant PSIA activities include extensive analytical work, 
as well as regular consultations with local government, civil society, and donors, which 
have been involved in the dialogue since the early transition years. As part of project 
preparation, a summary of recent PSIA activities related to the three key reform areas 
was undertaken and is available in project files. Recent and on-going analytical work 
forms an integral part of the broader poverty dialogue with the Government of Russia.  
 
The project team will continue to consult and share information with stakeholders on a 
regular basis during the process of project preparation. Stakeholders are expected to play 
an important role in implementation of the project. During the proposed public awareness 
campaign and in community meetings, the environmental and social aspects of the 
project in general and various housing and communal investments will be discussed.   
Page  6
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/06/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/12/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/16/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gevorg Sargsyan 
10/13/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Vladimir V. Tsirkunov 
10/13/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
10/17/2006 
Comments:  The team will tighten the language around the potential voluntary land sales to further 
guard against potentially coercive sales. 
