Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2141 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/06/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Russian Federation 
Project ID: P092213 
Project Name: Special Economic Zones Project 
Task Team Leader: Gevorg Sargsyan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 10, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 25, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSPE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General industry and trade sector (70%);Central government administration 
(10%);General education sector (10%);Sub-national government administration (10%) 
Theme: Other economic management (P);Public expenditure, financial management and 
procurement (P);Tax policy and administration (S);Education for the knowledge 
economy (S);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development objective will be to assist the Russian Government in piloting 
industrial and technological special economic zones in selected Russian regions through 
introducing:  
 
o
systems of public-private partnership for provision of modern business development 
services (ICT, marketing, legal support, logistics, certification, skill/management training, etc.), 
supplier and cluster development and public-private funding of innovation start-ups and spin-
offs,  
 
o
local business development services (BDS) systems including managerial, marketing, 
skills enhancement and other business services,  
 
o
private-sector led venture capital funds and networks,  
 
o
a
scheme of partial risk guarantees to reduce policy risks to investors,  
Page  2
o
An efficient system for management of SEZs, including monitoring and evaluation 
systems.  
 
o
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Bank loan will comprise the following three components:  
 
1) 
Business development.  This would include the specific business services, services, 
cluster development, and venture funding with an emphasis on (i) provision of professional 
services, technology transfer, and skills development, (ii) development of business synergies for 
building local production clusters, and on (iii) practical assistance to SEZ start-ups in penetrating 
new, particularly international markets.  
 
2)
Developing supply chains - matching grant schemes  for developing potential local 
suppliers, in and outside of a SEZ, to enable them to meet the quality, price and technical 
specifications required by companies-residents of a SEZ.  
 
3)
Efficient management of SEZs 
–
capacity building at the federal and local (both 
municipal and SEZ) levels to ensure transparent and enabling environment for business 
development on the territory of SEZs.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
While the Government program for SEZs stretches to 6 sites, the Bank activities may take place 
initially in two innovation zones (Tomsk and Zelenograd) and two manufacturing zones (Lipetsk 
and Elabuga).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Institutional capacity of the municipalities to deal with safeguard policies is to be determinded 
during the preparation mission.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Gayane Minasyan (YPP) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
More information is needed to help determine whether the Bank component of the greater 
project can be framed and categorized as a separate project. Thus, a review will be conducted to 
report on the work already done, and currently being done, on the wider project, in order to 
ascertain whether there have been, or are, any significant environmental or social issues 
primarily associated with infrastructure investments such as new wastewater collectors, access 
roads, transmission lines, etc.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Field visits will be undertaken to ascertain whether the proposed project sites will entail land 
acquisition or resettlement.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/15/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The time frame will be decided once there is more clarity on the need and scope of studies.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gevorg Sargsyan 
03/28/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/28/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
04/06/2006 
Comments:  cleared 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
