Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/26/2006 
Report No.:  AC1650
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Russian Federation 
Project ID:  P093050 
Project Name:  Registration Project 
Task Team Leader:  Samir M. Suleymanov 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 25, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 13, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General public administration sector (50%);Law and justice (25%);Housing 
finance and real estate markets (25%) 
Theme:  Personal and property rights (P);Land administration and management (P);Rural 
services and infrastructure (S);Legal institutions for a market economy (S);Municipal 
governance and institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
51.50
51.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to simplify and improve procedures for registration 
of rights in immovable property and to improve the information flow from the registry to 
users so as to facilitate the development of real property markets, improve the quality of 
services provided, and strengthen the linkages with other organizations dealing with real 
property.  These other organizations will include the Federal Cadastre Agency, the Tax 
Authorities, municipal government, and representatives of the private sector, such as 
notaries and real estate brokers.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will be composed of four components: (1) Institutional Development of the 
Registration Service; (2) Information and Communications Systems; (3) Improvement of 
Professional Skills; and (4) Project Management.  
 
The Project will run for 6 years and will be implemented in 25 of the 77 Territorial 
Registration Offices of the Registration Service.  This represents roughly one-third 
coverage of the country as a whole.  Implementation of a unified registration information 
Page  2
system, included in the Information and Communications Systems Component, will be 
split into three phases: (1) the pilot phase, covering 4 regions; (2) the first roll-out phase 
of 10 additional regions; and (3) the second roll-out phase of an additional 11 regions.  It 
is expected that 5 years will be required to complete these three phases, keeping in mind 
the need to develop and test the unified registration software and to incorporate lessons 
from the pilot phase into the subsequent phases. Implementation of the other elements of 
the Project is not tied to this phasing.  In addition to the 25 Offices, some more FRS 
Offices will be upgraded with new mechanical archive shelves, which should improve the 
efficiency of storage systems by at least 25 per cent. In addition to these upgrades, the 
modern automated systems will be installed in 5 larger regional archives of the FRS. 
Since the existing facilities are not fit for installation of such automated equipment, these 
buildings will be remodeled based on international standards.  
 
An important criterion for the Registration Service in selecting participating regions will 
be the relative strengths and weaknesses of each of the Territorial Registration services.  
Selection of regions will need to be coordinated, however, with selection of regions for 
participation in the Cadastre Development Project.  While complete overlap of regions 
participating in both projects is not anticipated, a sufficient degree of overlap will be 
necessary.  An additional criterion for selection of regions could be the commitment of 
government administration in a given Subject of the Federation (SOF) to support the 
needed institutional and policy changes foreseen under the Project.  
 
Some elements of the Project will have impact beyond the 25 participating regions.  
This includes the legal and regulatory reform, training programs, development of service 
standards, and various elements of the improved availability of information. In addition, 
limited work on modernizing the archive systems will be carried out in all of the 
remaining 52 regions.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be implemented mainly in 25 regions of the Russian Federation and at 
the Federal level.  The Project will mainly finance consultant services and training, goods 
(primarily ICT hardware and software), and operational costs of the PIU.  
 
Minor works will be carried out under Component 1. First, internal repairs will be done 
in most of the municipal registration offices which plan to install modern mechanical 
archive systems. These would be very minor repairs, involving redesign of internal floor 
space, construction of counters, painting, etc. and will be done by regional offices even 
before the effectiveness of the Project.  
 
Second, the Component 1 will pilot the concept of uniform large archive storage centers 
in five locations. Under the project, five centers will be designed and equipped in selected 
existing facilities. Since the facilities, as they exist, are not fit for installation of such 
automated equipment, these buildings will be remodeled based on international standards.  
Thus, minor internal works in selected five facilities are expected to be co-funded by the 
Project and would include installation of elevators for delivery of documents within the 
Page  3
buildings; compact portable document storage stands; mechanical archiving systems, 
fans, air conditioners, telecommunication channels, etc. For these works, and 
Environmental Management Plan has been prepared by the Borrower, accepted by the 
Bank, and disclosed both by the Bank and the Borrower.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
As mentioned, the only safeguard issue under the Project are minor internal works in five 
of the existing storage facilities of the Registration Service under Component 1 for 
installation of uniform large archive storage that would include installation of elevators 
for delivery of documents within the buildings; compact portable document storage 
stands; mechanical archiving systems, fans, air conditioners, telecommunication 
channels, etc.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In order to minimize the adverse impact of the proposed works under the Project, it was 
agreed with the Borrower that only the existing facilities would be considered for 
installation of the subject storage capacity to avoid any construction of new facilities. In 
addition, it has been agreed that one of the selection criteria for selecting the ultimate five 
locations would be the engineering condition of the building in order to again minimize 
the amount and scope of works. Thus, works in five locations would be limited to mainly 
internal remodeling.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has prepared an Environmental Management Plan for proposed works in 
consultation with its regional offices, and with the Environmental Authority of Russian 
Federation (RosTekhNadzor) which also approved the EMP. The Borrower has disclosed 
the EMP on official websites of Ministry of Justice and Registration Service. It has also 
agreed on inclusion of the EMP in the future bidding documents and on the compliance 
supervision and monitoring arrangements with its regional offices. The Borrower 
(represented by the Project Implementing Agency, Federal Registration Service, FRS) 
has demonstrated sufficient capacity in developing and supervising the EMP.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EMP was discussed with the regional offices of the FRS, the Federal Service for 
Environmental, Technological and Nuclear Control (as evidenced by the letter from this 
agency), the regional and municipal administrations in Omsk, Samara, Saratov, Tula, 
Kaliningrad, Krasnodar, Rostov-on-Don (their endorsement of the EMP is confirmed by 
formal approval of the reconstruction activities), local environmental experts and NGOs 
in the above cities. The EMP will be made available to the public by the World Bank 
through the InfoShop and by the FRS and the Ministry of Justice through their Web sites 
and publications. It will also be available at the World Bank Moscow office.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/26/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/26/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/26/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Page  5
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Samir M. Suleymanov 
04/26/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sergei Alekseevich Vasiliev 
04/26/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria L. Amelina 
04/26/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
04/26/2006 
Comments:  Cleared. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
04/26/2006 
Comments:  Approved. 
