Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1879 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/08/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Rwanda 
Project ID: P097818 
Project Name: Rw:  Urgent Electricity Rehabilitation (GEF) 
Task Team Leader: Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 12, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Renewable energy (70%);General energy sector (30%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
12.60 
 
FOREIGN PRIVATE COMMERCIAL SOURCES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
4.25
16.85 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of Bank support to Rwanda in the energy sector is to help establish a 
competitive, efficient service delivery structure enabling the use of multiple technologies and 
business modes, with transparent governance and performance accountability.   
 
The specific development objective of the GEF interventions in the proposed Sustainable 
Energy Development Project is to establish a framework and core capacity for advancement of 
renewable energy and energy efficiency to promote sustainable and affordable national energy 
supplies.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Tentatively, the following interventions are expected to be proposed, subject to preparation 
work:  
 
Page  2
a. 
Solar-based off-grid electricity/ICT for public institutions: mainly investments in PV 
systems and associated electricity/ICT appliances (lighting, TV/video, computers, associated 
software, telecom access, copy/fax machines, specialized educational or health equipment);  
 
b. 
Renewables-based independent grids for rural income generation: mainly micro hydro;  
 
c. 
Electricity efficiency in public institutions and possibly water pumping;  
 
d.
Promotion of efficiency improvements in wood fuel based enduses; and,  
 
e. 
Associated technical assistance and capacity building activities in the public as well as 
private sectors.  
 
A
preliminary estimate of financing requirements for proposed activities over the course of four 
years is given below.  
 
GEF funds will be used mainly for technical assistance, business support for private 
entrepreneurs, capacity building, and initial program design and administrative activities with a 
view to mainstream programmatic expenditures in respective government ministry budgets as 
market volume grows and capacity is built. In addition, GEF funds may be used for carefully 
designed smart subsidies for PV and mini-grid applications.  This reflects a key strategic choice 
that for a small, HIPC, post-conflict economy such as Rwanda, where private investments are 
limited and the competing demands on public budget are severe, the scope of GEF-eligible 
interventions needs to be chosen in such a way as to match the demands on the scarce human and 
institutional capacity with appropriate country domestic benefits rather than strictly global 
benefits.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be national in scope. Most renewable energy investments are expected to be in 
rural areas.  Energy efficiency investments are likely to be in urban areas, or in connection with 
institutional or industrial facilities.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The overall responsibility for management of the bio-physical environment throughout Rwanda 
lies with the Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA), which was legally 
established in November 2003.  
 
The overall responsibility for management of the bio-physical environment throughout Rwanda 
lies with the Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA), which was legally 
established in November 2003.  
 
The functions of REMA are:  
 
-
To implement Government environmental policy and decisions of the Board of Directors.  
 
-
To advise the Government on legislative and other measures for the management of the 
environment or the implementation of relevant international conventions, treaties and agreements 
in the field of environment, as the case may deem necessary.  
 
-
To take stock and conduct comprehensive environmental audits and investigations, to 
prepare and publish biannual reports on the state of natural resources in Rwanda.  
Page  3
-
To review and approve environmental impact assessment reports of any field of socio-
economic activities undertaken by any agency.   
 
-
To ensure monitoring and evaluation of development programs in order to control 
observance of proper safeguards in the planning and execution of all development projects, 
including those already in existence, that have or are likely to have significant impact on the 
environment.  
 
-
To participate in the set up of procedures and safeguards for the prevention of accidents 
and phenomena which may cause environmental degradation and propose remedial measures 
where accidents and those phenomena occur.  
 
-
To render advice and technical support, where possible, to entities engaged in natural 
resource management and environmental protection.  
 
-
To provide awards and grants aimed at facilitating research and capacity-building in 
matters of environmental protection.  
 
-
To publish and disseminate manuals, codes or guidelines relating to environmental 
management and prevention or abatement of environmental degradation.  
 
The powers of the Authority are;  
 
-
The authority is the principal corporate agency in Rwanda for the control, monitoring and 
evaluation of the integration of environmental concerns in all development projects or activities.  
 
-
The authority may order, temporary or permanently, the suspension of any activity 
suspected to be in contradiction with this law or any other law related to environmental 
protection.  
 
-
The authority holds the following powers necessary for the proper performance of its 
functions under this law, such as (i) have access, without any prior permission request, to any 
industrial, project or business premise where activities harmful to the environment are suspected, 
in order to conduct environmental investigations, (ii) to require from any lead agency reports on 
the state of the environment in connection with the sector under its responsibilities.  
 
REMA is a relatively new organization, and as such is in the process of building capacity to 
discharge its mandate.  Recognizing this, under the Urgent Electricity Rehabilitation project, the 
Project Coordination Unit (PCU) is recruiting a safeguards advisor to ensure that project 
activities comply with the ESMF and RPF which have been adopted.  The proposed GEF 
operation will be implemented with this same PCU, will comply with the ESMF and RPF, and 
will be included in the mandate for the Safeguards Advisor.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTS1) 
Mr Gordon Appleby (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Project investments are expected to be small-scale, and to have only minimal environmental 
impact.  Even so, they will be subject to the requirements of the ESMF.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Project investments are expected to have involve some land taking.  For example, micro-
hydro facilities which would be designed as run-of-river plants, would require space for power 
house and associated facilities.  While these will be small, any land taking will be subject to the 
provisions of the RPF.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/15/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
This project will adopt the ESMF and RPF which have already been approved for the Urgent 
Electricity Rehabilitation Project, which will be reviewed to ensure applicability for this 
project, approved, publicly consulted and redisclosed prior to Appraisal.  The SMU has 
agreed to accept transfer of safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies 
01/08/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
01/08/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
01/08/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
