Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/03/2007 
Report No.:  AC2295
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Rwanda 
Project ID:  P079414 
Project Name:  Transport Sector Development 
Task Team Leader:  Kingson Khan Apara 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 24, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 17, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme:  Trade facilitation and market access (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(S);Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (S);Decentralization 
(S);Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
11.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.00 
 
Africa Catalytic Growth Fund (ACGF) 
38.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
58.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to contribute to the implementation of the Government's 
sector strategy by improving the quality of 25% of its paved road network,building 
analytical and management capacity in sector institutions, and generating local 
employment in rural areas through road works.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Paved Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance - US$ 62.4 million  
 
(a) Kigali-Ruhengeri Rehabilitation ? US$ 38 million (funded by ACGF)  
 
(i) Rehabilitation of approximately 83-kilometers of the Kigali-Ruhengeri section of 
Kigali-Ruhengeri-Gisenyi road.  
 
(ii)Provision of technical assistance in support of supervision of said rehabilitation.  
 
(b)Paved Road Maintenance ? US$ 24.4 million (20 million funded by the Government 
through the RMF and 4.4 million by IDA)  
 
(i) Routine and periodic maintenance of approximately 1,000 kilometers of paved trunk 
roads from classified network, including 430-kilometer Gatuna-Bugarama, 75-kilometer 
Page  2
Gitarama-Kibuye, and 306-kilometer Rusumo-Gisenyi roads, and supervision of said 
maintenance  
 
(ii)Provision of technical assistance in support of supervision of said maintenance.  
 
Component 2:Sector Governance and Policy Support-US$ 2.6 million  
 
(a) 
Sector Governance Improvement  
 
Provision of technical assistance to the road agency following its establishment, the 
Road Maintenance Fund, the Vehicle Technical Inspection Center, the Rwanda Civil 
Aviation Authority, and the National Public Transport Agency, in support of preparation 
and implementation oversight of long-term performance agreements.  
 
(b)Transport Policy Implementation Support  
 
(i)Stakeholder workshops and seminars relating to transport policy implementation and 
regional transport cooperation.  
 
(ii)Provision of technical assistance to Ministry of Infrastructure in support of program 
development and carrying out of strategic studies for transport policy implementation.  
 
(iii)Provision of technical assistance in support of development and implementation of 
road safety action plan, including restructuring of Vehicle Technical Inspection Center, 
and improvement of data collection and establishment of accident database in Planning, 
Policies, and Capacity Building Unit.  
 
(iv)Development and implementation of transport sector HIV/AIDS prevention strategy.  
 
(v)Provision of technical assistance in support of establishment and training of local 
community associations of roadside dwellers in labor-intensive road maintenance  
 
Component 3:  Sector Analysis and Planning Support ? US$ 2.2million  
 
(a) 
Transport Planning and Monitoring Systems  
 
(i) 
Provision of technical assistance to Planning, Policies and Capacity Building Unit 
in support of establishment of transport database and monitoring and evaluation systems 
relating to Project and Program performance, transport costs, transport industry 
standards, and other transport performance indicators.  
 
(ii) 
Transport data collection for planning and monitoring systems  
 
(iii) Training of Planning, Policies and Capacity Building Unit staff in the use of 
transport planning and monitoring systems.  
 
(iv) 
Acquisition of information technology equipment and materials for monitoring 
and evaluation systems established under Component 3 (a) (i) above.  
 
(b) Capacity 
Building 
 
 
Long-term in-country training of approximately 100 of the Recipient?s transport sector 
staff and local entrepreneurs and unemployed graduates by an international and a local 
university toward master?s degrees in road engineering and management and transport 
economics and planning.  
 
Component 4:  Project and Program Management Support ? US$ 1.2 million  
 
(a) 
Acquisition of information technology equipment and materials for and financing 
of Operating Costs of Planning, Policies and Capacity Building Unit, Transport Projects 
Management Unit, road agency following its establishment, and Road Maintenance Fund.  
 
(b) 
Provision of technical assistance to Infrastructure Planning, Policies and Capacity 
Building Unit, Transport Projects Management Unit, road agency following its 
establishment, and Road Maintenance Fund in support of Project and Program technical 
and financial audits.  
Page  3
(c) 
Training of Project and Program management staff in accounting and financial 
management, procurement and contract management, and budget preparation and 
disbursement.  
 
The above component costs exclude US$ 600,000 of an IDA-funded PPF.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Kigali-Ruhengeri road, whose rehabilitation makes up this component, starts at the 
Western end of Kigali town as a right-hand junction to Ruhengeri (PK 0+000, h=1.375m) 
from the international trunk road to Gitarama and Bujumbura/Burundi. After a steep 
mountainous section of 5,2km with predominantly open woodland and forests, the road 
follows generally the hill ridges, climbing from h=1740m up to 1.760m at PK 16+000. 
The road passes mainly through agricultural fields and banana plantations, arriving at the 
village of Shyorongi.  
 
The following section up to PK 25+500 (h=2.130m) is characterized by a small 
longitudinal road slope and steep descending hillside slopes on both sides of the road, 
which are mainly covered by trees and open forests. The descending mountainous road 
section leads down to the valley of Kwisumo River (PK 30+000, h=1.820m). Following 
the left bank of the river, numerous creeks, water courses, and gullies arrive at the 
roadside, draining a hilly zone, which is purely under agricultural use. Over exploitation 
and not appropriate agricultural production systems lead to intensive erosion processes. 
At PK 44+000 (h=1.930m), the road crosses with two bridges permanent rivers (Bahimba 
River and Base River). The road follows the Base River valley, crossing the river at 
around PK 51+500 (h=1.750m). The road passes through Gakenke Village at PK 56+200 
(h=1.670m). Gakenke is the major centre for market, transport, education, and health 
facilities for an extended region. An earth road branches out from here reaching the 
hospital and several school centres after 1.2 km (h=1.690m). The earth road is not part of 
the project, although it was included in the design study. The mountainous and ascending 
road section culminates at PK 67+500 (h=2.110m). The valley of Mukungwa River is 
reached at PK 72+000 (h=1.680m). The road follows the river course on its left bank up 
to the bridge over the Mukungwa River at PK 83+003 (h=1.647m). The bridge marks the 
end of the road under study, and the beginning of the section to Gisenyi, on the DRC 
border, to be rehabilitated concurrently under financing by the European Union.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTS3) 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTTR) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The safeguards impacts identified are not expected to have any long term or cumulative 
impacts. The potential negative impacts of project implementation include: soil erosion, 
temporary loss of strips of farmland along the road alignment, disturbances in the water 
quality, adverse physical environmental impacts resulting from noise and dust during 
road construction work.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No negative long term impacts are foreseen with regard to this project. The proposed 
activities are on road rehabilitation and maintenance. The project will neither finance the 
construction of new roads nor upgrade existing roads. Impact on soil erosion will be 
negligible, likewise, impact on stability of slopes or on sedimentation/siltation of rivers. 
Instead, the rehabilitation of the roads will decrease the erosion rates along the roads, 
compared to existing conditions.  
 
Rehabilitation/Maintenance works will not adversely effect water resources and water 
quality along the road routes. In addition, the project roads cross a few perennial rivers 
only, and which are far apart.  
 
Adverse impacts on natural vegetation which, normally are associated with the 
operation of quarries, borrow areas and the construction of detours and access roads, will 
be very limited as only existing borrow/quarry sites, will be used; and EMPs will be 
prepared.  
 
Wildlife and wildlife habitat are reported in the project areas, but, project operations 
will not impact any ecologically sensitive areas, parks and nature reserves; such as, the 
national park at Nyungwe (along Butare-Cyangugu road) and Volcanoes national park at 
Ruhengeri.  
 
Page  5
The potentially adverse impacts of project operations upon cultural, religious and 
historical sites were assessed in the ESIA. There are no sites to be negatively impacted by 
road rehabilitation and/or maintenance works.  
 
Field visits carried out in the ESIA revealed that landslides/rockslides from the top of 
the hills will remain a potential problem as a result of the geo-technical nature of the 
areas through which the roads pass. Emphasis should be on timely post-project 
maintenance activities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An environmental specialist will be recruited within MININFRA before project 
effectiveness, as part of the staffing of the CGPT, which has the responsibility for 
transport program management. The specialist, who will be recruited prior to project 
effectiveness, will monitor environmental and social safeguards compliance for all road 
investment operations in the sector. He/she will receive targeted training early enough to 
meet the first project demands. Initial training needs, notably in the management of the 
ESMP, will be financed by a PPF advance. In addition to overseeing the implementation 
of the ESMP for the project, the specialist?s key role would be coordinating cross-
sectoral environmental and social issues and ensuring their incorporation in the 
environmental assessment process.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The local populations along the project roads are the key stakeholders consulted  in the 
course of the environmental and social assessment studies. They will further be consulted 
at the commencement of works. The project also includes provision for consultations 
with local populations in the context of the road maintenance component. The objective 
of these consultations, which will be conducted in the local language by NGOs, is to 
establish strategic partnerships with local communities in order to ensure maintenance 
and ownership of the rehabilitated roads at the local community level. Also, the project 
will provide income generating opportunities under the fee for service maintenance 
contracts with local communities. The safeguards document prepared (ESIA), was 
disclosed in-country in English with a summary in French.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/09/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/15/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/14/2006 
 
Page  6
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not Applicable   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Kingson Khan Apara 
04/30/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
04/30/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Antoine V. Lema 
04/30/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Nina Chee 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
03/06/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
04/30/2007 
Comments:   
