Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2287 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/14/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Rwanda 
Project ID: P096672 
Project Name: Rw: Lake Kivu Methane-to-Power (Guarantee) 
Task Team Leader: Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  
Sector: Renewable energy (50%);Power (50%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Climate change (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
9.40 
 IDA 
GUARANTEE 
15.60 
 INTERNATIONAL 
FINANCE 
CORPORATION 
15.60 
 
FOREIGN PRIVATE COMMERCIAL SOURCES (IDENTIFIED) 
47.20
87.80 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The primary objective of the project is to provide approximately 35 MW of gas-based power 
generation to displace the current diesel supply.  The project also seeks to demonstrate a public-
private partnership approach to meeting Rwanda???s electricity needs in an economically and 
environmentally sustainable manner.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project entails the construction, commissioning, and operation of a 34.9 MW power station 
as well as an associated plant to extract 60 million cubic meters (m3) of fuel methane gas from 
the depths of Lake Kivu.  The project sponsor, Dane Associates Ltd. will operate the plant 
through a subsidiary, Kibuye Stage 1 Power Limited (KP1), which will be jointly owned with the 
Government of Rwanda (GOR).   On March 7, 2005, the GOR signed a Gas Concession 
Agreement (GCA) with Dane Associates, which includes a license for Dane to operate power 
plants with a combined installed capacity of up to 200 MW in several stages (the proposed 34.9 
MW project being the first).  A Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) for 34.9MW between 
Electrogaz and KP1 was also signed at the same time.  The project is divided into three 
Page  2
components: the gas extraction plant, the power plant, and a pilot plant as described below.  The 
14km transmission line from the power plant will be built and operated by Electrogaz.  
 
Component 1: Gas Extraction Plant - The project is based on extraction of methane gas 
dissolved in the deep waters of Lake Kivu which is located on a shared border between Rwanda 
and DRC.  Gas concentrations in the lake accumulate as a result of bacterial reduction of 
magmatic CO2, introduced from groundwater entering the lake, and also from bacterial 
fermentation of lake sediments. The lake is about 500 meters deep.  A high density gradient in 
the water at about 250 meters acts as a ???cap??? so that the gas-rich water remains at depth.  As 
a
result, the gas concentrations have increased over time leading to the significant volumes now 
available. The overall gas reserves in the lake are estimated at 55 billion m3 (STP) of methane, 
250 billion m3 of carbon dioxide and 5 billion m3 of nitrogen and traces of many other gases.  
 
The principle of gas extraction is based on the ???auto-lift??? process: Water from the methane 
rich zone (approx. -320m) is brought to the surface through large pipes and, as the water rises, 
the pressure decreases causing progressive liberation of the gas in solution in the water.  The 
increasing proportions of free gas bubbles as the water nears the surface in the pipe induce a 
process of ???gas-lift??? giving rise to a naturally continuous production of water from the 
deeper parts of the lake to the surface.  Extensive scientific study of the lake indicates that two-
thirds of the total methane volume, representing 40 billion m3, is economically exploitable.  This 
quantity represents about 32 million tons oil equivalent (TOE)  
 
Methane has been extracted from the lake since 1963 at a pilot plant in Cape Rubona, Rwanda, 
and used for thermal applications in the nearby local Bralirwa brewery.  This plant uses 300 mm 
diameter pipes to extract the methane-rich water from about 300 meter depths, and produces 
about 1.5 million m3 of methane annually (roughly equivalent to 600 kW of power).  
 
The conceptual design of the gas extraction facility provides for three floating platforms located 
closely together about 9 km from shore.  They would deliver about 60 million m3 per year of 
production-ready gas to the shore-based power plant, described below, via a pipeline submerged 
about 10m below the lake surface.  The gas extraction platforms would feature vertical 1000 mm 
diameter extraction pipes of about 350 meter length.  The extraction facilities will include gas 
separation and polishing, with most of the scrubbed gases reinjected with the discharge water at a 
depth of about 90 meters.  
 
The Kivu gas deposits bear similarities to the gas (largely CO2) dissolved in Lake Nyos in 
Cameroon, which discharged spontaneously in August 1986, resulting in the asphyxiation of 
1800 people.  Consequently, the World Bank Group commissioned an Expert Committee (EC) to 
advise on lake stability issues associated with the project.  The EC concluded (April 2006) that 
gas accumulation in the lake may cause a similar eruption in 100 to 200 years without human 
intervention, and that gas extraction from the lake, properly regulated and monitored, would 
reduce the risk of eruption.  
 
Component 2: Power Plant ??? The proposed power plant would provide 34.9 MW 
grosscapacity from four spark-ignition gas-fueled engine generating sets.  These would be 
housed in power house to be built on a 10ha unoccupied segment of the Kivu shoreline about 
Page  3
3km WSW of Kibuye, Rwanda.  The PPA provides detailed environmental, health, and safety 
requirements with which the power plant must comply.A 14 km 110 kVa transmission line will 
be needed to evacuate power to the main Electrogaz grid.  An access road and water supply will 
also be required.  
 
Component 3: Pilot Plant - A pilot gas extraction plant will be installed offshore near Gisenyi to 
test the planned extraction technology before finalizing project designs.  It will be run for several 
months, and vent the extracted gas to the atmosphere. Consideration is being given to subsequent 
conversion of the pilot into a gas production plant with the gas piped to shore to power a 4.5MW 
(approx.) power plant.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
As described above, the gas extraction platforms will be located about 9 km offshore of Kibuye, 
and the power plant will be shore-based on the tip of a peninsula WSW of Kibuye.  A pipeline 
about 10m below the lake surface will connect the two. The pilot plant will be about 1km 
offshore of Gisenyi.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Rwandan National Environment Policy (October 2003) sets out overall and specific 
objective as well as fundamental principles for improved management of the environment, both 
at the central and local levels, in accordance with the current policy of decentralization and good 
governance in Rwanda.  The policy sets out institutional and legal reforms with a view to 
providing the country with a coherent and harmonious framework for coordination of sectoral 
and cross-cutting policies.  It called for the establishment of the Rwanda Environment 
Management Authority (REMA) and the provincial, district and lower level committees 
responsible for environmental protection.  The policy recognizes that Environment as a sector is 
a
new concept in Rwanda requiring true awareness and coordination of actions at all levels.  
 
The main institutions with responsibility for the environment are the Ministry of Lands, 
Environment, Forestry, Water and Natural Resources (MINITERRE) and the Rwanda 
Environmental Management Authority (REMA), the latter of which has recently been 
established. Within the MINITERRE is the Directorate of Environment which is broadly 
responsible for policy issues, the budget and for monitoring policy implementation, whereas 
REMA is the technical arm of the MINTERRE responsible for implementing the environment 
policy.  Umbrella environmental management legislation (Organic Law Determining the 
Modalities of Protection, Conservation and Promotion of Environment in Rwanda) was passed in 
May 2005 which, inter alia, mandated REMA-approved environmental impact assessment before 
projects are authorized.  Overall, borrower capacities for implementing safeguards 
responsibilities per the Bank???s operational policies are weak, and would need to be reinforced 
through project-specific mechanisms.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTS1) 
Mr Gordon Appleby (AFTS1) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP4.01 applies because the proposed project will finance investments in power generation on 
and around Lake Kivu, and involves novel technology that may upset the stability and ecology of 
the lake.  The environmental assessment will cover issues relating to the lake, the power plant 
(including access road), the transmission line, and the pilot plant.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The proposed site for the power plant is uninhabited but recently cultivated.  The EA will 
address land use issues if any, for the plant and transmission line, and a RAP will be prepared if 
involuntary resettlement is involved.  The EA and RAP will also address similar issues for the 
pilot plant, including its anticipated conversion into a production plant with shore-based power 
generation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The project utilizes methane gas from Lake Kivu, which comprises part of the border 
between Rwanda and DRC.  Therefore, this policy applies.  The borrower has notified DRC of 
the project, and has agreed to provide more detailed documentation, in particular, the EIA, when 
available.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/19/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The draft EA has already been submitted to the WBG and initial comments provided to the 
project sponsor.  
 
Submission of Final EA and RAP is expected in March 2007.  
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
Disclosure in-country and infoshop of EA and RAP will follow WBG clearance.  
 
As the lead WBG institution for this project, safeguards matters are being lead by the IFC.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies 
12/14/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
12/14/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
12/14/2006 
Comments:   
