Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3077 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/08/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Rwanda 
Project ID: P105176 
Project Name: Rwanda Second Rural Sector Support Project 
Task Team Leader: Michael Morris 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 1, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 10, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTAR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Irrigation and drainage 
(30%);Agricultural marketing and trade (20%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other rural development (P);Water resource 
management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase agricultural productivity and 
production in marshlands and hillsides targeted for development under the Project by assisting 
rural households to expand and intensify sustainable agricultural production systems and by 
accelerating development of market-oriented agriculture.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project will have four components (three technical components and one project 
implementation component). The three technical components, which are fully aligned with the 
Government’s national agricultural development strategy as articulated in the Plan Stratégique 
pour la Transformation Agricole (PSTA), all include capacity building and institutional 
development activities. Since the Project will be the second phase of a planned three-phase APL, 
many of the proposed activities are designed to extend the reach and/or scale up the intensity of 
activities currently being implemented successfully under the ongoing first phase of the APL. At 
the same time, several new activities will be added based on lessons learned during the first 
Page  2
phase, particularly activities related to building the knowledge base for sustainable 
intensification of hillside production systems.  
 
Component 1: Marshlands and hillsides rehabilitation, development, and protection  
 
The Project will provide financing for (i) technical studies relating to the development or 
rehabilitation of irrigated marshlands and surrounding hillsides; (ii) construction of drainage and 
irrigation infrastructure for marshlands and hillsides farming; and (iii) rehabilitation and 
protection of natural resources in marshlands and surrounding hillsides. As is currently the case 
under RSSP1, these activities will be 100% financed through the Project. Since RSSP is the 
primary vehicle for implementing the Government’s strategy for sustainably developing 
marshlands and hillsides, many of the intensification and capacity building activities supported 
by the Project will be oriented around this core component.  
 
Component 2: Sustainable intensification of marshlands and hillsides production systems  
 
The Project will provide financing to support increased productivity and production through 
intensification of agricultural production systems in developed and rehabilitated marshlands and 
surrounding hillsides. Activities to be supported under the Project include: (i) adaptive farmer-
participatory research to identify improved production technologies that can be transferred to 
producers using extension strategies that have been successfully piloted under RSSP1; (ii) 
strengthening of input distribution systems, especially for improved seed, fertilizer, and crop 
chemicals; and (iii) capacity building among project beneficiaries and partner organizations to 
acquire inputs, manage soil and water resources more efficiently, and access markets more 
effectively. An important new knowledge-generation activity to be introduced during RSSP2 will 
be a subcomponent under which promising technologies will be piloted for the sustainable 
intensification of hillsides through different terracing methods (e.g., progressing terracing, 
radical terracing).  
 
Component 3: Development of market-oriented smallholder agriculture and agribusiness  
 
The Project will provide support to local communities, farmers’ organizations, and rural 
commercial associations to engage in value-adding rural enterprises. Activities to be supported 
under this component will include: (i) construction of small-scale rural infrastructure (e.g., rural 
access roads, drying floors, storage facilities, physical markets); (ii) facilitating access to 
technical advisory services as well as institutional and financial assistance to support the 
planning and implementation of post-harvest value-adding activities (e.g., food crops 
preservation, oil extraction, juice production); and (iii) supporting development by farmer groups 
and local private operators of commercial enterprises, especially post-harvest value-adding 
enterprises. These activities will be supported in part through the Rural Investment Facility 
(RIF), managed by the Banque Nationale du Rwanda (BNR), which channels funds to rural 
financial institutions to provide matching grants to organizations and individuals for investments 
in productive assets.  
 
Component 4: Project management  
 
Page  3
This component will support the PSCU to ensure: (i) efficient execution of administrative, 
financial management, and procurement functions; (ii) coordination of Project activities among 
the various stakeholders; (iii) timely implementation and monitoring of environmental and land-
use management frameworks mandated by World Bank safeguards policies; and (iv) 
establishment and operation of an effective monitoring and evaluation system.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will work in selected marshlands and hillsides throughout the national territory.   
 
E.  Bor
rower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Through Phase 1 of RSSP, the PSCU has trained environmental and social specialists to address 
safeguards requirements.  The PSCU works in close collaboration with the Rwanda 
Environmental Management Authority to ensure meeting Bank requirements also satisfies 
national requirements.  PSCU knowledge of social safeguards requirements is a bit weak and 
will be strengthened in preparation of Phase 2, and during project implementation. As the project 
preparation advances, the training needs of key project partners in the area of social and 
environmental safeguards will be assessed and a training program developed.  
 
To strengthen environmental stewardship activities under RSSP2, operational linkages will be 
expanded with the parallel GEF-funded Integrated Management of Critical Ecosystems (IMCE) 
project, which is being managed by the Ministry of Lands, Environment, Water, Forestry, and 
Mines (MINITERE). The same steering committee oversees both projects.  Given the strong 
emphasis in RSSP2 on identifying and introducing improved land husbandry practices, RSSP2 
will benefit from collaboration with IMCE in the following areas: (i) developing an enabling 
environment for sustainable resource use (policy framework, regulations, institutional support), 
(ii) preparing management plans to provide for sustainable land use in marshlands and hillsides, 
(iii) preparing, introducing, disseminating, and enforcing guidelines for sound environmental 
management of marshland and hillsides production systems, and (iv) developing and enforcing 
environmental standards and an environmental code of conduct to be followed by contractors 
implementing projects and sub-projects. Conversely, IMCE will benefit from lessons learnt 
during RSSP marshland development and hillsides protection activities.  Thus, while RSSP will 
be able to satisfy safeguards requirements on its own, RSSP/IMCE collaboration will support a 
more strategic approach to marshland protection and development in Rwanda.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTEN) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Marshland development creates the risk of loss of habitats and ecosystem services, as well as 
water quality and environmental health consequences from enhanced or expanded irrigated 
agriculture.  Consequently, to enhance environmental planning of marshland developments in 
Phase 1, Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) are being prepared for all RSSP marshland 
subprojects already undertaken.  An Environmental Assessment (EA) is being prepared for all 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
similar subprojects proposed for Phase 2, including EMPs of each.  The EA/EMPs will pay 
specific attention to ways and means for avoiding development of important marshlands, and 
minimizing marshland reductions and the ecological services they provide.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Marshland habitats may be affected by the development of irrigated agriculture.  This issue is 
central to the EA/EMP work discussed under OP4.01 above.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Enhanced or expanded irrigated marshland agriculture may well involve increased use of 
pesticides.  An Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) is nearing completion for use on all 
RSSP subprojects.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Marshland developments involve land acquisition for small dams and reservoirs, borrow 
areas, roads, canals, etc.  Because at this stage of project preparation, the sites of future sub-
projects is not known because of the demand driven nature of the project, a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) is being prepared to govern situations where land acquisition is involuntary 
during Phase 2. During implementation, for each sub-project, a land Acquisition Assessment 
(LAA) will be conducted for each sub-project to assess whether land will need to be acquired 
and whether people will be displacement on an involuntary basis.  Where and if needed, a 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared and implemented before the start of the 
concerned sub-project.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/26/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
As discussed above, an EA is being prepared for Phase 2, and EMPs are being completed for 
Phase 1. An RPF is being prepared, as is an IPMP. All will be completed, cleared by the 
Bank and disclosed prior to appraisal.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael Morris 
08/08/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
08/08/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
08/08/2007 
Comments:   
