                                                                                                39487


                             INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATA SHEET
                                           APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                                                Report No.:



Date: April 2,2007

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

   Country: Samoa                                     IProject ID: : PO91025
                                                      (Additional Project ID (ifany):
   Project Name: Second Infrastructure Asset Management Project (SIAM-2) - Additional Financing
   Task Team Leader: Thakoor Persaud
   Appraisal Date: November 28,2006                    Estimated Board Date: June 19,2007
   Managing Unit: EASTR                                Lending Instrument: Credit and Grant
  ISector: Roads and Highways-74%; Law, Justice and Public Administration-18%;Flood Protection-8%
   Theme: Roads and Highways
   IDA Amount (US$m.): 8.27
   Other financing amounts by source (US$m):
       BorrowerIRecipient: 4.45



   Environmental Category: B (Partial Assessment)
   Simplified Processing                  Simple [ ]               Repeater [ ]
   Is this a transferred project          Yes [ 1                   No [ XI


B. Project Objectives:
The Development Objectives and outcomes of the Second Infrastructure Asset Management Project
(SIAM-2) Additional Finance are to: (i) enhance the economic, environmental and social sustainability of
transport and coastal infrastructure assets; and (ii) manage those assets and natural resources and respond
to national emergencies, through an effective partnership with private sector stakeholders.

C. Project Description:
The primary objectives of the Government's request for the additional financing is to: (a) assist in fully
achieving the objectives of SIAM-2 through funding the remaining works originally identified under the
project as well as the repackaged activities (i.e. gap-financing, approximately 79% of the additional
finance amount); (b) assist in funding the furthering of institutional and technological improvements and
needs identified in the current project for Disaster Management and Land Registration Systems (i.e. scale-
uplextend to new sub-projects, about 21%); and (c) assist continuation of the reform of the MWTI
through a transitional period to bring these changes into effect. These works are still economically and
socially justified and they are aimed at deepening the impact of the original credit funded activities. The
project objectives are to be achieved through the following five components and activities as funded
under the Additional Financing:

    A: Airportinfrastructure: Implementing a computerized asset management system for the Samoa
    Airport Authority after reviewing available options.

    B: Road and Other Infrastructure:Construction of the Togafuafua two lane bridge and upgrading
    the Vaimoso-Uta ford, improving the drainage system along the West Coast Road and undertaking
    widening and associated works on Vaitele Street.

    C. Sustainable Management of Infrastructure,Natural Resourcesand Risks: Strengthen the
    capacity of the Ministry of Natural Resources, Environmental and Meteorology (MNREM) and
    stakeholders in environmental management, natural risk management and emergency management
    through scoping of early warning systems for coastal villages and holding early warnings national
    awareness workshops for villagers, national earthquake risk assessment and raising awareness,
    implementing a Schools Education Program for disaster preparedness, review of CIM Plan
    Sustainability, carrying out vertical control of the geodetic survey and refresher training and
    supervision of conversion of the new Land Registration system, and procurement of a vehicle to
    support PUMA enforcement of environmental regulations.

    D. Institutional Developmentin Transport and Infrastructure: Institutional development in
    Transport and Infrastructure stakeholders, primarily the Ministry of Transport, Works and
    Infrastructure (MWTI), through extensions of the Contracts Engineer and Assets Engineer contracts
    and the establishment of the Land Transport Authority (LTA), and of MNREM through procurement
    of computers and software for EIA Regulations enforcement and monitoring.

    E. ProjectManagement:Strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Finance (MoF), MWTI and
    MNREM to implement the project and its components through ongoing support of the Project
     Support Team.



D. Projectlocationand salient physicalcharacteristics relevantto the safeguard analysis (if
known):
All works under the Additional Finance are aimed at improving traffic flow and safety and easing
congestion within the original project area.

Vaitele Street is a major collector road through the Apia town center. In order to ease traffic congestion
and improve vehicular and pedestrian safety, the street is to be widened and a number of junctions
improved. The proposed works affect the property boundaries of 158 properties along its length. The
Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework (LARF) was updated in November 2003 (Annex 11of the
PAD) and a Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plan (LARAP) for road widening works along Vaitele
Street (deferred at the time due to the costs and now to be financed under the Additional Financing) was
prepared by MWTI and endorsed by MNREM in November 2003. In compliance with the IDA-approved
LARAP, the Government, through its "Taking of Lands Act" (1964) initiated, on September 1,2006a
consultative process to acquire the small parcels of land required for rights-of-way for Vaitele Street
widening and intersection works which partially affect the boundaries of a total 158plots. This has been
the largest exercise of its type in the country so far and, understandably, it has taken time to review and
address the issues that have arisen. However, significant progress has been made. The Cabinet has
approved the total compensation payment amount (of ST5.57 million), based on land valuations carried
out by independent valuation consultants (consistent with the LDA-approvedLARAP) and the
Government has made 31% of payments to date. Trying to sort out several ownership and related issues
is a cumbersome process'. It has made progress and resolving some of these issues. To facilitate the


1These include: Customary Land where ownership yet to be confirmed by the Land and Titles Court (15); Freehold
Land that is the subject of deceased estates in the process of being finalized (43); owners thought to reside outside of
the country (13); lands with mortgage where commercial banks have not yet decided if payment is to go to owner or
banks (1I); owner challenging compensation in court (1); owners negotiating equal exchange of lands (2) and
ownersstill undecided on the form of compensation (8).

payment process, it has opened a dedicated escrow-account in the MOF to hold and release the
compensation funds as individual cases are resolved (in accordance with the LARAP).

The West Coast Road is a main arterial rural highway linking the town of Apia with the international
Faleolo Airport. Existing drainage on the rehabilitated road is inadequate and the road suffered damage
during the unusually heavy rainfalls that occurred throughout Apia in January 2006. The government
undertook emergency mitigation measures to install drainage channels along the side of the affected
lengths of the road to accommodate road surface flow. However, further drainage improvements along
the length of the existing road are required and are to be undertaken under the Additional Finance. Where
public drains (to lead the runoff away from the road) are constructed through customary or private lands
for controlled drainage of surface flow, the owners have agreed to facilitate access (through drain
easements and servitudesfrights) to such works since their homes and other assets are also damaged by the
floods.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for SafeguardPolicies:
The Samoa MNREM is a well-established entity with adequate professional staff and systems in place to
manage land and environmental issues. The MNREM and its Planning and Urban Management Agency
(PUMA) have incorporated several of the elements used under the SIAM-1 as well as the ongoing SIAM-
2 projects into their normal sector operations, building on these in several ways. In the ongoing works
done so far, all major works of the MWTI have undergone a Preliminary Environment Assessment Report
(PEAR) while general maintenance and small works are following the National Codes of Environment
Practice. In the preparation of Designs as prescribed in the RFPs for all works, an environmental
assessment either in the form of a PEAR or full EIA (whichever is applicable) is required and this is
integrated in the design. An Environment Management Plan (EMP) is also prepared as the main
documentation to be attached to the Development Consent (DC) Application from MWTI to the PLMA
of MNREM. MNREM also seeks DC from the Planning and Urban Management Agency for works
implemented as part of the former's Small Grants Scheme.

The PUMA evaluates DC applications for construction works through the consideration of findings of the
required PEAR or full EIA (whichever is applicable). Since the Vaitele Street works were assessed under
the original Credit, its Safeguards requirements remain the same as those originally stipulated under the
existing Environment Management Plan which sets out the approaches proposed by the selected design
and supervision consultants on behalf of the MWTI, to mitigate or avoid adverse environment impacts.
Among other things, design and supervision tenders as well as contractors are required to clearly indicate
how they will complete fulfill their respective obligations. An appropriate Development Consent (DC) is
then issued by PUMA.

During construction, the PUMA officers conduct at least two monitoring evaluations to ensure that the
Development Consent requirements (and any conditions that have been attached) are strictly adhered to.
PUMA has the powers under its Act to stop the construction at any time where DC conditions are not
being met by the Contractor and it has invoked this twice in order to achieve contractor compliance. The
construction supervisors are also required to follow the EMP requirements and DC conditions during the
monitoring of specific project activities. For the Samoan Airport Authority, MWTI and MNREM, their
compliance history in relation to these environmental requirements is highly satisfactory, with all project
activities going through the Development Consent process.

F. Environmental and Social SafeguardsSpecialists:
    Bruce M. Harris
    James Orehrnie Monday

11. SAFEGUARDPOLICIESTHAT MIGHT APPLY

SafeguardPolicies Triggered(please explain why)                          Yes            No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                     X
No new environment issues will be triggered by the works as they involve widening or improved drainage
of existing stretches of roads and bridges which were originally evaluated(under the ongoing Credit) and
an environmental assessment is being conducted and integrated in the design of all the major works.

Most of the Additional Financing tasks were assessed under the existing safeguards arrangements and
these will continue to be applied here. The original project also has provisions for extensive consultation,
monitoring and evaluation procedures. The Samoa Ministry of Natural Resources, Environmental and
Meteorology (MNREM) is a well-established entity with adequate professional staff and systems in place
to manage land and environmental issues. The MNREM and the Planning and Urban Management
Agency (PUMA) have incorporated several of the elements used under the SUM-1 as well as the
ongoing SUM-2 projects into their normal sector operations, building on these in several ways. In the
ongoing works done so far, all major works of the MWTI have undergone a Preliminary Environment
Assessment Report (PEAR) while general maintenance and small works are following the National Codes
of Environment Practice.

Notwithstanding, the environmental issues being monitored under the project include: (a) adequate storm
water and run-off disposal and management along the alignment; (b) public road safety; and (c) traffic
noise and control. Construction impact includes: (a) quarrying and sand mining, material preparation and
storage, equipment maintenance and disposal sites; (b) transport, soil erosion, and sedimentation control
and management of impact on water quality of surface watercourses, (c) dust and noise control during
construction period, (d) soil disposal and management; and (e) waste management, for both solid waste
and hazardous liquid waste and used lubricants. Since most of the construction works are relatively small
and the system in place for monitoring compliance is working well, there have been very few problems so
far and this is expected to continue.

In the preparation of Designs for all works under the project, an environmental assessment either in the
form of a PEAR or full E U (whichever is applicable) is conducted and integrated in the design. An
Environment Management Plan (EMP) is also prepared and attached to the Development Consent (DC)
Application from MWTI to the PUMA. MNREM also seeks DC from PUMA for works implemented as
part of the former's small Grants scheme. After thorough review, a Development Consent is then issued
by PUMA. PUMA has the powers under its Act to stop the construction at any time where they see that a
condition of the DC is not being met by the Contractor. During construction, the PUMA officers conduct
at least two monitoring evaluations to ensure that the Development Consent requirements (and any
conditions that have been attached) are strictly adhered to.




Natural Habitats(OP/BP 4.04)                                                            X

Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                    X

Pest Management (OP4.09)                                                                X

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                X

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP4.10)                                                          X

~ a f e ~ u a r f i o l ~~ireis~ ~ e(please explain why)
                                         r e d                                           Yes               No              TBD
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                                      X
 The Vaitele Street widening works are part of the original project design. A Framework for Land
 Acquisition and Resettlement (LARAF) was prepared during appraisal and sent to the Bank's Infoshop in
 February, 2003. A Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plan (LARAP) for the Vaitele Street works was
 prepared and approved by IDA in April 2005. It includes details on Government's land acquisition
1procedures, community consultation, compensation rates, and processes for resolving grievances, all of
1which have been assessed as satisfactory and in accordance with Bank policy. It is currently being
 implemented by the Government but it is taking some time to sort out several complex issues. No other
 land acquisition is expected but if there are other cases, the existing safeguards will apply.
 Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                X

 Projectson International Waterways (OP/BP7.50)                                                             X

'Projectsin Disputed Areas (OPBP 7.60)                                                                      X




 111. SAFEGUARDPREPARATIONPLAN

 A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would
      be prepared:       N/A

 B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
      03/19/2007

 C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
      The specific studies and their timing2should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: The safeguards
      related studies have been completed as part of the existing SIAM-2. Since most of the works are for
      gap financing, no new studies are required as a result of this Additional Financing. A review of the
      effectiveness of a sample of Coastal Management Improvement Plans prepared under the project to
      date is proposed to be undertaken in 2008.



 IV. APPROVALS

  I Signed and submitted bv:                     I                                        /?                 I                       I




 2 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-relateddocuments be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

 InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
 persons.

