Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2434 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/03/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Senegal 
Project ID: P092062 
Project Name: Sustainable Management of Fish Resources 
Task Team Leader: John Virdin 
GEF Focal Area: International waters 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 15, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 8, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTS4 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
EC: EUROPEAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (EDF) 
7.50 
 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - ASSOCIATED IDA FUND 
8.00 
 
SWITZERLAND: SWISS AGENCY FOR DEV. & COOP. (SDC)0.50
16.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective for the proposed GEF supplemental grant is to empower small-scale 
fishers to sustainably co-manage the coastal fisheries resources upon which they depend for their 
livelihoods and upon which the country depends for a large percentage of its exports, while at the 
same time conserving the key habitats that support these resources.  This will be accomplished 
by (i) extending the partnerships formed between fishing communities and the Government in 
the GIRMaC project to small-scale fishers through the countries, (ii) working with fishers and 
the Government to implement the President's Directive to establish a national network of marine 
protected areas, (iii) improving the management of the industrial fisheries that often compete 
with small-scale fishers for the coastal resources, and (iv) establishing a long-term financing 
mechanism to support the resource management investments necessary to rehabilitate the coastal 
fisheries resources and ensure they remain healthy enough to support a large number of coastal 
livelihoods and contribute to the national economy far into the future.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The following project components and activities are proposed for support through the GEF 
supplemental grant:  
 
Component 1.  Sustainable management of small-scale fisheries  
 
This component would seek to implement a sustainable management system for small-scale 
fisheries in Senegal, based on the experience gained through the GIRMaC program. This 
component would likely include the following activities:  
 
(i) 
Replicate, in other small-scale coastal fishing communities, the local co-management 
schemes, such as the Local Small-Scale Fishery Committees (CLPA), tested in GIRMaC's three 
pilot areas;  
 
(ii) 
Continue and expand the support provided by the Swiss Government and GIRMaC for 
the pirogue registration scheme; and  
 
(iii) 
Step up Government and coastal community participation in the co-management of 
coastal demersal stocks and the small-scale fisheries that exploit them in the Canary Current 
Large Marine Ecosystem to ensure that efforts are based on Large Marine Ecosystem 
management principles and to promote bilateral agreements with neighbouring countries on 
fisheries and shared stock management measures.  
 
Component 2.  National Marine Protected Area Network (MPA)  
 
In the wake of recent directives issued by the President of the Republic, this component would 
seek to establish a national marine protected area network to protect essential habitats, such as 
the breeding and rearing areas of coastal demersal species, as part of the national fisheries 
management system. This component would likely include the following activities:  
 
(i) 
Support the establishment of a MPA network in Senegal in an effort to protect and restore 
coastal demersal fisheries, and would include the establishment and delimitation of the areas 
using a participatory approach involving the fishing communities.  
 
(ii) 
Include the MPAs in the fisheries management plans for neighbouring production areas 
(i.e. areas where fishing is allowed) in conjunction with the CLPAs.  
 
(iii) 
Where appropriate, support the construction of man-made reefs, based on good practices.  
 
Component 3.  Industrial fisheries management  
 
Because industrial fishing activities in Senegal have a major impact on small-scale fisheries and 
coastal demersal fish stocks, this component would seek to strengthen the links between 
industrial and small-scale fisheries, and ensure that industrial fisheries do not damage the 
habitats and stocks targeted by the small-scale sector. This component would likely include the 
following activities:  
 
(i) 
Develop and implement, in conjunction with the players concerned, a responsible code of 
conduct for industrial fishing.  
 
(ii) 
Promote and disseminate sustainable catch methodologies and technologies, such as 
those that help reduce by-catches, and the use of traditional catch techniques.  
 
(iii) 
Establish an information system to monitor the landings of the coastal demersal industrial 
fleets.  
Page  3
Component 4.  Sustainable funding for fisheries management  
 
This component would seek to ensure that the results achieved by GIRMaC and the GEF 
supplemental grant (including the co-financing and parallel investments by other donors) would 
be sustainable in the long term through the use of a sustainable funding mechanism for the co-
management of small-scale fisheries and the protection of essential habitats. This component 
would likely include the following activities:  
 
(i) 
Establish a sustainable fisheries management support fund in order to provide support for 
the costs of the public sector, fishers and communities in managing the resources (terms of 
reference for a feasibility study and consultations to be drafted during preparation).  
 
(ii) 
Put in place an environmentally-friendly labelling system for sustainable products, 
including the promotion of good practices and support for cost-effective product management 
and promotion, in order to facilitate the support of the private sector in managing the resources.  
This activity would also include a feasibility study into a system to encourage the adoption and 
promotion of sustainable practices, including technologies that would protect the marine 
environment and biodiversity.  
 
(iii) 
Monitor and evaluate each of the prior three components' progress towards achieving the 
results indicators prepared for the proposed project, noting particularly the sustainability of these 
results, linked to the above activities of this component.  This activity would also be linked 
closely with the monitoring and evaluation activities and capacity of the GIRMaC project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The GIRMaC is currently being implemented within 3 pilot areas: the Saloum River Delta, Cap 
Vert, and the Senegal River Delta. This Supplemental Grant is likely to build on these activities 
to be concentrated in the locations where the need is greatest and the chance for successful 
implementation the highest.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Satisfactory. The Supplemental Grant will utilize the capacity of the already-established Project 
Coordination Unit (PCU) for the GIRMaC, which includes environmental specialists and 
monitoring and evaluation specialists with training in monitoring for compliance with 
safeguards. As part of the preparation for the GIRMaC, the PCU commissioned the preparation 
of a full Environmental and Social Assessment for GIRMaC-funded activities, which are similar 
to those that would be financed using this supplemental GEF Grant. An Environmental 
Management Plan was also prepared, which included safeguards training of key staff who will be 
involved in the implementation of this supplemental GEF Grant.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTS1) 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Environmental Assessment for the supplemental GEF Grant to the GIRMaC wo
uld be 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
based largely on the EA already completed for the GIRMaC, as the activities are similar.  There 
are not any significant changes to the safeguards instruments from the GIRMaC that are expected 
under the supplemental GEF Grant.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Like the GIRMaC, one of the main objectives of the supplemental GEF Grant is to conserve 
and protect natural habitats.  However, this safeguard is triggered here based on the assessment 
for the GIRMaC.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
This safeguard is potentially triggered based on the EA, as well as the Process Framework, 
prepared for the GIRMaC.  The EA identified restriction of access to the fisheries resources as 
the main safeguard issue, and this is expected to remain the same for the supplemental GEF 
Grant.  The supplemental GEF Grant would build upon the Process Framework already written 
for the GIRMaC.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/01/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Necessary social assessments for stakeholders, as well as any revisions or updated version of 
the Process Framework for the GIRMaC will be completed and redisclosed in country as well 
as Infoshop by February 1, 2007.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John Virdin 
07/05/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
08/03/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mary A. Barton-Dock 
08/03/2006 
Comments:   
