Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/16/2006 
Report No.:  AC2023
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Senegal 
Project ID:  P088656 
Project Name:  SN-Participatory Local Development Program 
Task Team Leader:  Moctar Thiam 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 17, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: April 27, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (50%);Agricultural extension and research (25%);Water 
supply (25%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective over the three coming years is to assist the 
Government of Senegal in setting up an effective framework for participatory local 
development, decentralization, resources mobilization and transfer to local governments 
and communities, to deliver efficiently services in rural areas and targeted poorest cities. 
The pr
oject will the country’s comprehensive National Local Development Program by: 
(i) supporting the GoS and its agencies in developing and implementing appropriate 
policies, strategies and arrangements for efficient decentralization; (ii) updating and 
improving of the regulatory and fiscal framework necessary for efficient decentralization; 
(iii)  strengthening capacity of local stakeholders (local governments, communities, 
regional development agencies, NGOs and the private sector) for efficient participatory 
local development; and (iv) mainstreaming the public transfer system from the central 
government to local governments.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Local Participatory Development Project would be implemented through four (4) 
operational components:  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Support for decentralization, devolution, and participatory local 
development policies. This component supports the Government’s efforts through PNDL 
to update and develop the legal, fiscal, regulatory and organizational environment for 
CDD implementation by key players: central government, local governments, 
communities and the private sector.  
 
Component 2: Financing of Local Development.  
 
The component will support the PNDL by setting up the mechanisms for Local 
Investment Financing (LIF) which is designed to promote CDD-oriented funding 
mechanism to local governments, so that they will be able to finance and implement the 
social and economic development of their communities within their territory on the CDD-
based approach. The objective is two-folds: to provide funds du LGs to allow them to 
practice the full participatory local development, i.e. (i) organizing the distribution of 
implementation responsibilities for basic service delivery in order to tap the 
implementing capacity of individual communities for small scale projects, and to focus 
their own implementing capacity to implement large scale projects that interest multiple 
communities, and (ii) supporting communities to build their own capacity to improve 
their economic activities.  
 
Component 3: Capacity-building for decentralization and participatory local 
development.  
 
The component will provide capacity-building support to line ministries, local 
governments, CBOs, MFIs and the private sector in order to ensure efficient delivery of 
quality services to the poor. The component aims at: (i) assisting the line ministries to 
realign their sector policies with the country’s decentralization laws and participatory 
local development; (ii) strengthening local governments to make them able to more 
efficiently manage resources for service delivery the poor through partnerships with their 
communities according to the CDD approach; (iii) empowering local communities to 
allow them to be efficient partners to their LGs to efficiently deliver basic services; (iv) 
developing the microfinance sector’s capacity to better reach the targeted poor clientele, 
and (v) developing the private sector’s capacities to better deliver their technical services 
to LGs and communities . The component is organized in five sub-components according 
to the specific players.  
 
Component 4: Project Coordination, Communication, Monitoring and Evaluation and 
Environmental management.  
 
The component will support the following activities under the coordination component: 
(i) coordination of the implementation of project activities (ii) ensuring resource 
availability and transfer of resources to local governments ; (iii) supporting the 
development and implementation of a national CDD communication strategy targeting 
audiences at various levels in order to facilitate communication and information sharing 
between the various actors both internal and external; (iv) Monitoring and evaluation 
project results on a timely basis; and (v) Environmental and social management.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will support all local governments and local communities across the country 
in the context of the Bank's support of decentralization reforms in Senegal.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
Mr Demba Balde (AFTS4) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will support micro-projects such as the construction and rehabilitation of 
schools, health posts, agro-processing facilities, water supply facilities, access roads, 
vaccination facilities for livestock, fish drying facilities, and the management of fish 
ponds. Based on experience with similar micro-projects, potential negative environmental 
and social impacts are likely to include soil and water pollution, soil erosion, loss of 
vegetation, air pollution, noise, traffic accidents, an increase in malaria due to an increase 
in water use for agricultural activities and standing water in quarries, and the spread of 
HIV/AIDS due to unsafe medical waste management.These impacts can be easily 
mitigated, and hence, there will be no large-scale and/or irreversible impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
If left unattended, potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to future micro-project 
activities could include water and soil pollution, soil erosion and an increase in malaria. 
However, the project has adopted measures that will ensure that there will be no indirect 
and/or long-term impacts.   
 
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives would be discussed during the planning stage of micro-projects, and 
appropriate mitigation measures would be determined at that time, including possible 
design changes in the micro-projects.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To address the potential negative environmental and social impacts of micro-projects, the 
Borrower has prepared (a) an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) which includes (i) a copy of the National Medical Waste Management Plan; (ii) 
guidance for pest management under micro-projects; (iii) recommendations for safe 
management of small dams;( iv) an Environmental Management Plan (EMP); and (v) 
provisions for the appointment of qualified personnel as well as environmental training 
and public awareness campaigns to ensure effective implementation of the ESMF; and 
(b) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The draft ESMF and final RPF were 
disclosed in Senegal on August 10, 2005, and at the Bank's Infoshop on August 11, 2005. 
The final ESMF was disclosed in Senegal on November 17, 2005, and at the Bank's 
Infoshop on December 21, 2005.  
 
Furthermore, the Borrower has informed the OMVS and OMVG on November 29, 
2005, about the activities of the proposed project and requested that the respective 
riparians be notified.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The ESMF and RPF were prepared in consultation with potentially affected persons 
living in the areas covered by the First Social Fund and the National Rural Infrastructure 
Projects as well as representatives of the various ministries and agencies involved in the 
proposed project. The environmental and social screening process as outlined in the 
ESMF includes requirements for consultations with potentially affected persons at the 
planning stage of the micro-project and the disclosure of the results of the environmental 
and social screening process and/or the environmental impact studies that might be 
carried out.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/04/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/10/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/11/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/04/2005 
 
Page  5
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/10/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/11/2005 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
N/A 
Page  6
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Moctar Thiam 
02/15/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
02/15/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Demba Balde 
02/15/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
02/15/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Anil S. Bhandari 
02/15/2006 
Comments:   
