Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1720 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/19/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Senegal 
Project ID: P089254 
Project Name: Quality Education for All Project - Phase 2 
Task Team Leader: Meskerem Mulatu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 5, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: August 28, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTH2 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (90%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Education for the knowledge economy (P);Gender 
(P);Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (S);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
55.00
55.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed objectives of the project are: 
 
ACCESS:   
 
?
To reach universal elementary enrollment by 2015, with parity between boys and girls 
maintained throughout the elementary cycle.  
 
?
To improve transition into middle schools from 49 percent in 2004 to 53 percent (to be 
confirmed based on updated simulation figures) 
 
?
To expand access to literacy to 50,000 learners per year for a total of 150,000 learners  
 
QUALITY:   
 
?
To improve learning achievements across all cycles, with priority given to improved 
learning in elementary. 
 
?
To maintain a minimum level of funding for non-salary quality inputs in the Government 
budget 
 
?
To tackle challenges in developing and implementing workable TVET strategy. 
Page  2
MANAGEMENT  
 
?
To retool the ministry at central and deconcentrated levels to better respond to 
requirements to meet objectives, and to continue work on institution strengthening, based on 
ongoing institutional analysis 
 
?
To further expand deconcentration of responsibilities and resources to lower levels of the 
education system (regions and departments)   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Expanding access and improving retention  
 
Construction and rehabilitation of classrooms and sanitary blocs after completion of school 
mapping exercise to be completed by early 2006; completion of schools outside minimal 
infrastructure norms  
 
Demand-side strategies in lagging communities, possibly including Franco-Arabic schools, 
outreach to religious communities, school canteens, etc.  
 
Incentive strategies to stabilize teaching corps in under-served and remote areas  
 
Focus on increased enrollment and completion rates, especially for girls, with both resources 
and accountability ?contracting? measures developed at school and deconcentrated levels  
 
Attention to children with special needs, including children with disabilities, gifted children, 
and nomadic populations  
 
Increase middle-school classroom places, building on ongoing experience with USAID project  
 
Continue non-formal education activities, reaching 50,000 learners (75% of them women)  
 
Continue support for training of Early Childhood Development monitors, with particular focus 
on community-based models  
 
Improving quality  
 
Launch initiatives for reading improvements in early elementary, building on gains from French 
Cooperation projects  
 
Continue block grant support for quality improvement plans at both deconcentrated and school 
levels  
 
Build on gains from local language instruction and support improvements in its implementation  
 
Rigorously measure the value-added of literacy activities, and the long-term impact on literacy  
 
Identify a minimum package of quality inputs at the classroom level, and translate that into per 
capita funding coefficients to ensure minimum level of quality inputs are included in the budget  
 
Finance coherent plan for training of teachers, inspectors, school directors and mentor teachers, 
with specific attention to the training of trainers  
 
Strengthening management throughout the system  
 
Building on ongoing institutional assessment, assist the Ministry in establishing a new 
organigram with clear roles and responsibilities  
 
Establishing results matrix for key central and deconcentrated units in the Ministry, and linking 
this to both accountability and to access to resources  
 
Strengthening the monitoring and evaluation system building on strong data collection system; 
ensuring access to information across all actors in the system, and building capacity for using 
data for policy development  
Page  3
Strengthening management of human resources, building on recent successes within the 
Department of Human Resources  
 
Focus capacity building efforts on those local authorities where such is needed, and where their 
contributions in primary school construction are expected to be significant.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will focus on elementary and middle school education structures.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Government of Senegal is familiar with the Bank?s Safeguard Policies, based on experience  
 
with other bank-funded projects, in which the Government successfully met the safeguard  
 
requirements. Examples of recent projects in different sectors are: the first phase of Quality 
Education for All, APL2, the National Rural Infrastructure Project, The Energy Sector 
Investment Project and the Agricultural Export Promotion Project, to list a few.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)  
 
A
ESMF will be prepared under the project, school classrooms and latrines will be built   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
RFP will be prepared. Land acquisition and/or take is a possibility.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/01/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESMF and RPF have been prepared and will be cleared and disclosed prior to appraisal. 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Meskerem Mulatu 
06/19/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/19/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr William Experton 
06/19/2006 
Comments:  Acting Sector Manager 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
