Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/12/2006 
Report No.:  AC2354
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Senegal 
Project ID:  P097181 
Project Name:  SN-Nutrition Enhance Phase 2 APL (FY07) 
Task Team Leader:  Menno Mulder-Sibanda 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 12, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 3, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTH2 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (80%);Health (20%) 
Theme:  Nutrition and food security (P);Child health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
30.00
35.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The second phase objective is (i) to improve the nutritional status of the population, in 
particular the growth of children under the age of two residing in poor urban and rural 
areas, and (ii) to strengthen the institutional and organizational capacity in-country to 
implement, monitor and evaluate the National Policy on Nutrition and Development.   
 
3. Project Description 
The second phase of the Nutrition Enhancement Program is composed of three 
components;  
 
I. 
Community-Based Nutrition:  
 
This component represents the core of the program.  Activities include monthly 
evaluation of growth of children under two with counseling feedback to mothers, home 
visits to children requiring special attention, and cooking demonstrations.  The behavior 
change communication strategy will particularly focus on infant and young feeding 
practices as recommended by WHO and UNICEF , disease preventive measures, home-
based care, recognition of danger signs, and care seeking for sick children.  A particular 
emphasis will be put on the prevention of malaria as a major cause of child morbidity and 
Page  2
mortality through the distribution of impregnated bed nets and the promotion of its use by 
children and pregnant women.  The thee main strategies for reducing micronutrient 
malnutrition are dietary diversification, supplementation, and food fortification.  The 
community level communication activities will disseminate messages on dietary 
diversification and create demand for vitamin A and iron supplements and fortified foods, 
notably iodized salt.  The community workers will take part in national distribution days 
for vitamin A supplements and deworming medication, and refer children at risk for 
vitamin A deficiency to health centers to receive a curative dose under the supervision of 
health workers.  The program will support the national health policy that women take 
iron supplements during the nine months of pregnancy and the two months post-partum, 
impregnated bed nets are distributed and its appropriate use by children and pregnant 
women is promoted.  The program will continue the small grant facility to communities 
to finance micro projects that address specific problems affecting child growth.  Problems 
will be identified through a participatory community analysis with particular attention to 
women???s needs.  These micro projects will bedeveloped in synergy with other 
community development programs such as the Local Development Program and the 
Agricultural Services and Producers' OrganizationsProgram and used for activities that 
will receive no other financing.  
 
II. 
Sectoral Support for Nutrition:  
 
This component continues the work started during the first phase by involving line 
ministries in a more formal and systematic manner.  On the basis of their strategic work 
plans, areas of collaboration will be identified, with a particular emphasis on 
strengthening their planning capacity.  Activities considered for financing will mainly be 
in the health and education sectors as the two with most immediate implementation 
responsibilities, and for priority activities that for the time being cannot be assured by the 
respective two sectors.  Collaboration with other line ministries, such as agriculture, with 
important roles in creating the right conditions for child growth and development, would 
aim at identifying and elaborating micro projects under community initiatives. These 
micro projects are often specific to one ministerial sector.  
 
III. 
Support to Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation of the National Policy  
 
The CLM's main function is to ensure that nutrition remains high on the national 
development agenda and to keep oversight of the implementation of the National Policy 
on Nutrition and Development.The program would continue to strengthen the 
performance of the CLM and its decentralized representations at regional level by 
enhancing the discussions on nutrition-relevant issues as well as promoting the 
participation of stake holders, including Local Government representatives who will play 
a
more important role in the second phase of the program.  
 
The monitoring system for community nutrition activities will be updated in the light of 
the new orientations of the second phase, notably the formal implication of Local 
Governments, and the enhanced and formalized role of line ministries.The decision-
making process will be strengthened by enhancing the analytical capacity and 
Page  3
accountability at local, district and central levels.  This entails efficient communication of 
results and actions to all directions.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will take place in all 11 regions of Senegal, with particular focus on poorly 
served rural communities.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Menno Mulder-Sibanda 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr William Experton 
 
Comments:   
