Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/26/2006 
Report No.:  AC2018
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Senegal 
Project ID:  P093622 
Project Name:  Agricultural Services & Producer Organizations Project 2 
Task Team Leader:  Renato Nardello 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 30, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: April 25, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTS4 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural extension and research (60%);Sub-national government 
administration (25%);Agricultural marketing and trade (15%) 
Theme:  Rural policies and institutions (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Decentralization (S);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
11.50 
 
INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT 
10.00 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
0.00 
 LOCAL 
FARMER 
ORGANIZATIONS 
0.70 
 Financing 
Gap 
5.00
27.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective 
of
the Agricultural Services and Producers’ Organizations 
Program (PSAOP) is the sustainable increase of smallholder productivity, production and 
income through technological change. Its long-term vision is characterized by: (i) strong 
and effective producers organizations capable of co-managing the nature and quality of 
the services they receive and pay for, as well as influencing the policy dialogue in the 
sector; (ii) efficient and deconcentrated sectoral ministries focusing on their essential 
functions of policy formulation, planning, monitoring and evaluation, as well as in the 
definition of the regulatory framework; and (iii) financially sustainable agricultural 
services, accountable to producers, relevant to their needs and evolving in a competitive 
environment, responsible for the generation and dissemination of technologies on a 
contractual basis.   
 
Page  2
The objective of the second phase (this project) is to increase access of smallholder 
producers to sustainable and diversified agricultural services and innovations, in order to 
increase agricultural productivity.  
 
To reach this objective, the project will strengthen the institutional framework set-up 
during the first phase, extend the coverage of agricultural advisory services to the 
national level, strengthen research capacity and focus, and further empower producer 
organizations.  The cost of the second phase is estimated at US$42.2 million, including a 
government request of US$20 million to IDA.  
 
The following triggers will condition the passage to the third phase:  
 
•
The National Rural Development Fund (FNDASP), effectively covers the operational 
costs of basic rural advisory services;  
 
•
The FNRAA is funded by the government and by other donors;  
 
•
The Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Livestock have each defined and 
started to implement a Medium-Term Expenditure Framework for the agriculture and 
livestock sub-sectors, translating the LOASP into coherent programs;  
 
•
Advisory services, the network of CLCOP, and the FSRRD are established in all the 
320 rural councils areas;  
 
•
At least 5 economic operations at the national level, and 10 at the regionallevel, have 
been successfully implemented by POs, on the basis of contractual arrangements with 
research institutes and private providers of advisory services, as well as with credit 
institutions and commercial operators.  
 
The project is fully aligned with the country's sector strategies and the PRSP. It 
contributes to the Borrower’s objective of poverty reduction and economic growth in 
rural areas through the increase of agricultural productivity, production and income of 
small-holder farmers. The project is central to the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for 
FY03-05. The issues covered by the project (agricultural productivity and diversification, 
agricultural services, rural development policy, support to producer organizations) are at 
the core of the PRSP and of the forthcoming PRSP2, and will be reflected in the next 
CAS.  By promoting increased agricultural productivity and production the project will 
improve rural incomes and food security, thus, contributing to the Millennium 
Development Goals of eradicating extreme poverty and hunger.  Finally, PSAOP2 fits 
well into the World Bank Africa Action Plan (AAP). In fact, the project is relevant to the 
AAP action “Drivers of Growth: Strengthening Agriculture”, in that it supports 
agricultural research and innovation, improvements in farming methods, increased 
productivity, and connecting the poor to markets. Being co-financed with IFAD, 
PSAOP2 is also relevant to the AAP action “Strengthening the impact of partnerships”, in 
that it will improve donor alignment and harmonization of procedures and practices.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project is the four-year second phase of an Adaptable Program Lending 
(APL), originally consisting of three phases, two of three years and the third of four 
years. The implementation of the first phase, and lessons from other projects in Africa, 
Page  3
confirmed that the programmatic approach of the APL was to be preferred to a Specific 
Investment Lending, particularly because institutional reforms take time to be adopted 
and need support once implemented. Other lessons clearly indicate that three years are 
not enough to achieve the PDO of most projects in Africa (in fact PSAOP1 was 
implemented over more than five years). For this reason the proposed duration of 
PSAOP2 has been brought to four years, instead of three as originally planned.  
 
To reach its objective, the project will strengthen the institutional framework set-up 
during the first phase, extend the coverage of agricultural advisory services to the 
national level, strengthen research capacity and focus, and further empower producer’s 
organizations.  The cost of the second phase is estimated atUS$42.2 million, including a 
government request of US$20 million to IDA.    
 
The objective of the third phase of the program will be to further increase agricultural 
productivity and rural incomes in all rural areas of Senegal, and to assure the 
sustainability of the reforms. The duration of the third phase will be four year and the 
estimated cost is US$50 million, including a Government’s request of US$22 million to 
IDA.  
 
The total cost of the program (see Table 1 below) will be US$133.3 million, of which 
US$69.8 million is funded by IDA.  
 
Table 1: PSAOP phases and cost (US$Million) 
 
Phase I 
 
Govern 
 Benef   IDA    IFAD   Oth.Donors 
Total  
 
13.5
0.2 
  27.4     0 
    
0 
41.1  
 
Phase II   
 
Govern 
 Benef   IDA    IFAD   Oth.Donors 
Total  
 
11.5
0.7 
  20.0     5.0 
        5.0     42.2  
 
Phase III  
 
Govern 
 Benef   IDA    IFAD   Oth. Donors  Total  
 
11.9
0.7 
  22.4    10.0          5.0     50  
 
Total Program Cost  
 
Govern 
 Benef   IDA    IFAD   Oth.Donors 
Total  
 
36.9
1.6       69.8    15.0        10.0       133.3  
 
Project components  
 
Component A: Support to the Agricultural Research System (US$11.0 million, IDA 
US$5.0 million).  This component will increase the capacity, as well as the relevance, 
efficiency, and sustainability of the National Agricultural Research System (NARS) by: 
(i) improving the policy and scientific guidance of the NARS Steering Committee; (ii) 
Page  4
strengthening the capacity of the main research institutions (ISRA and ITA); (iii) 
supporting the evolution of FNRAA as the main national mechanism to fund strategic 
and applied agricultural research programs, as well as research and development 
subprojects; and (iv) strengthening linkages with other research systems through regional 
and international partnerships, including via the forthcoming West African Agricultural 
Productivity Program (WAAPP, FY07). The component comprises three sub-
components.  
 
A1: Strengthening FNRAA and the strategic management of the NARS (US$7.0million, 
IDA US$3.0 million).  This sub-
component will strengthen NARS Steering Committee’s 
capacity to guide the research system in terms of orientations, priorities and allocation of 
resources (through the FNRAA: Fonds National de Recherche Agricole et Agro-
Alimentaire). The sub-component will also reinforce FNRAA, created during the first 
phase, as the main mechanism for funding agricultural research projects relevant to the 
strategic plans of the NARS and to regional priority themes. To this end, the sub-
component will support the evolution of FNRAA towards a two-window funding 
mechanism. The first window will finance priority strategic and applied agricultural 
research programs identified in areas advised by the NARS Steering Committee. The 
second window will finance demand-driven agricultural research and development sub-
projects submitted by beneficiaries, and focusing on resolving constraints to smallholder 
productivity and income generation. The sub-component will finance the research fund; 
operating costs –including salaries– of FNRAA (up to a maximum of five percent of the 
fund endowment for research activities); vehicles, equipment, training, study tours. 
Funding of FNRAA will be digressive, as it is expected that the government and other 
donors (including the private sector) will progressively contribute to the fund and 
operating costs of FNRAA.  
 
A2: Upgrading and maintaining the scientific capacity of NARS actors (US$4.0million, 
IDA US$2.0 million). This sub-component will further strengthen the capacities of 
Senegal main agricultural research institutions (ISRA - Institut Senegalais de Recherche 
Agricole - and ITA – Institut de Technologie Alimentaire). The project will finance the 
rehabilitation of physical infrastructure; vehicles, equipment and materials for the 
research teams; technical assistance, studies, training; information system, management 
of research results, publications and documentation, participation in national, regional 
and international research networks and workshops. Regional partnership for capacity 
building in biotechnology would be encouraged under this sub-component, including 
with WAAPP.  
 
Component B: Agricultural advisory services (US$11.7 million, IDA US$5.0 million).  
PSAOP1 supported the creation of ANCAR (National Rural and Agricultural Advisory 
Agency) and its deployment in 142 of the 320 Rural Councils.  The second phase will 
align ANCAR on the primary mission of oversight and regulation of the national 
agricultural advisory system based on demand-driven services. The component will 
support the extension of the advisory system to all 320 rural communities, the definition 
of methodological and technical supports and manuals, the implementation of an 
Integrated Information System on agricultural and rural technologies (SITAR).  The 
Page  5
component will support the emergence of a pluralistic network of agricultural advisors 
for the provision of specialized services (high added-value activities for which the 
producers are willing and able to pay). ANCAR will redeploy its staff to establish a 
network of rural advisors for the provision of basic (as opposed to specialized) advisory 
services and the preparation of advisory program at the rural council level.  Specialized 
advisory services (high-value services) will be provided by private or semi-private 
providers. Contracts will be entered between the service providers and the producer client 
and will be assigned on a competitive basis. ANCAR will provide quality control of the 
selection process. Salaries and operating costs of ANCAR will be financed by the 
Government through a framework contract. The component would finance technical 
assistance, studies, equipment, vehicles, minor civil services rehabilitation works, and a 
decreasing share of the cost of the basic advisory programs. These will be completely 
funded by the FNDASP by the end of the phase at the latest.  
 
Component C: Support to producer organizations (US$14.50 million, IDA US$6.0 
million). The component will strengthen POs’ capacity to seize the economic 
opportunities of agricultural production by improving their access to capacity building 
services at the local and regional levels;  empowering POs role in the rural development 
policy dialogue as well as in the definition and implementation of research and 
development programs.  The component comprises three sub-components.  
 
C1: Strengthen producers’ participation to policy formulation (US$4.0million, IDA 
US$1.5 million). The sub-component will strengthen participation of POs in the 
formulation, monitoring and evaluation of agricultural and rural development policies, 
specifically in the perspective of the implementation of the LOASP. The component will: 
(i) strengthen OP leaders strategic capacities through training in national and 
international policy issues; (ii) facilitate the flow of information and the communication 
with farmers (through rural radios, journal and technical bulletins dissemination, etc.); 
(iii) strengthen farmers’ representation at the regional level, through the development of 
CLCOPs and CRCRs; and, (iv) strengthen national specialized federation of POs to 
increase their participation in the development of their respective sector or supply chains.  
 
C2: Support PO technical and economic capacity (US$11.0 million, IDA US$4.5 
million). This subcomponent will have two main focuses: a) to strengthen technical 
capacities of producers by providing  access to capacity building and advisory services, in 
order to intensify and diversify farming system and help producers answer market 
requirements; and b) to help producers initiate and lead market-oriented operations that 
will contribute to increase and diversify their production and incomes.  
 
The subcomponent will: a) extend the demand-driven rural services fund (FSRRD), 
established in PSAOP1, from 154 CLCOPs to the whole country (320 rural council 
areas); b) test innovative approaches of extension and advisory services; c) help POs 
elaborate and implement economic productive operations that could target access to 
agricultural inputs, production of certified seeds, quality management or produce 
marketing; d) facilitate access to financing by supporting PO-led analysis of the credit 
Page  6
sector (micro-finance and commercial banks) and by providing technical assistance to 
test innovative financial products (liaise with LPDP).  
 
The sub-component will be implemented by ASPRODEB, which will delegate 
implementation of specific activities to private providers, in order to get the required 
specialized expertise and to ensure sustainability of service delivery.  
 
Component D: Support to the sectoral coordination (US$ 10.0 million, IDA US$4.0 
million). This component will comprise two sub-components:  
 
D1: Strengthening the strategic focus of sectoral ministries (US$8.0 million, IDA 
US$3.0 million). The sub-component will strengthen the capacity of sectoral ministries 
(Agriculture and Livestock) on issues and activities concerning policy formulation, 
planning, coordination, monitoring and evaluation of public investments in the sector, as 
defined in the framework of the LOASP. To this end, the component will support: (a) the 
completion of the deconcentration of personnel toward regional offices, and the staffing 
of key central directorates with qualified specialists; (b) the establishment, 
implementation, and monitoring of a Medium-Term Expenditure Framework for the 
sector; (c) the implementation of the national agricultural and rural training strategy; (d) 
the establishment of a national monitoring and evaluation system for the sectoral 
programs and projects, to be implemented by at the central and decentralized levels; (e) 
strengthening the capacities of the network of regional veterinary inspection services 
(IRSV) and of the regional directorates for agriculture (DRDR). The project will also 
contribute to the efforts of the Ministry of Agriculture towards building a new 
headquarters, which would allow to reunite several different directorates currently 
dispersed in Dakar.  
 
D2: Project technical and fiduciary coordination unit (USD2.0 million, IDA US$1.0 
million). Drawing on lessons from phase 1, the project will establish a coordination unit 
comprising: the technical coordination, responsible for the flow of information between 
components and with the Bank; a monitoring unit, responsible for monitoring the overall 
implementation of the project; a fiduciary unit, responsible for oversight and quality 
control of procurement and financial management. The subcomponent will finance 
operating costs of the TFCU (including salaries), vehicles, equipment, technical 
assistance, training, studies, etc.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
National coverage, rural areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
Mr Demba Balde (AFTS4) 
 
Page  7
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
While the project will not have significant and/or irreversible impacts, it is likely to incur 
impacts such as soil and water pollution, pesticide poisoning, silting, soil erosion, and an 
increase in malaria and bilharzias as a result of future sub-project activities. Future sub-
projects are likely to include the construction/rehabilitation of buildings, the construction 
of water management structures, including small dams, storage and processing facilities 
and veterinary parks as needed to increase and diversify agricultural production.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will not incur potential indirect and/or long term impacts, because 
appropriate mitigation measures for sub-projects have been developed and will be 
implemented under the project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
This project is the second phase of an agricultural program, and any potential impacts 
will be mitigated in this context.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Since the locations and potential localized impacts of future sub-projects could not be 
identified prior to appraisal, and to assist sub-project implementers in identifying and 
mitigating potential impacts, the Borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The 
ESMF outlines an environmental and social screening process for sub-projects and 
includes annexes (pest management plan, national medical waste management plan, 
environmental guidelines for contractors, quality standards for export crops, 
environmental standards for new irrigation sub-projects, a summary of the Bank's 
safeguard policies, and an Environmental Management Plan) to serve as guidance for 
Page  8
sub-project implementers. To ensure effective implementation of the ESMF, the project 
will support environmental training for key personnel and the appointment of an 
Environmental Specialist and Environmental and Social Focal Points to guide the 
environmental management of sub-projects.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are regional and national institutions such as the Agence Nationale 
de Conseil Agricole et Rural (ANCAR), Association Senegalaise pour la Promotion du 
DÃ©veloppement Ã  la Base (ASPRODEB); and the Cadre Local de Concertation des 
Organisations de Producteurs (CLCOP). Persons to be potentially affected by future sub-
projects will be consulted during the environmental and social screening process and 
subsequent discussions of mitigation measures. The results of these consultations will be 
accessible to the public.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/14/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/13/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/13/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/14/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/13/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/13/2005 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/14/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/13/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/13/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
Yes 
Page  9
review and approve the EA report? 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Renato Nardello 
01/24/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
01/26/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Demba Balde 
01/26/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mary A. Barton-Dock 
01/24/2006 
Comments:   
