Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2785 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/05/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Serbia 
Project ID: P090492 
Project Name: Energy Efficiency Project (Serbia) Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Varadarajan Atur 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 1, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 12, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: District heating and energy efficiency services (97%);Central government 
administration (3%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Pollution management and environmental health (P);Access 
to urban services and housing (P);Public expenditure, financial management and 
procurement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
18.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
2.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives of the parent Energy Efficiency Project were to improve energy 
efficiency in heating buildings in order to make heating more affordable as well as improve the 
functional and health enivronment of the users.  An important associated objective was to reduce 
the local and global environmental impact of the use of dirty fuels for heating buildings in 
Serbia.  These development objectives are consistent with the proposed project for additional 
financing, and therefore will not be revised.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The main aim of the proposed additional financing is to enable the government to complete the 
original scope of the project (cost overrun) and to scale up energy efficiency improvements to 
include lighting in schools, energy efficiency improvements in social buildings such as 
orphanages and homes for the elderly, and energy efficiency improvements in additional schools 
and hospitals across Serbia. The project would consist of three components: (i) environmental 
Page  2
improvement, rehabilitation of the heat supply system and energy efficiency improvements in the 
Clinical Center of Serbia (CCS) in Belgrade and in one other large building complex such as the 
Clinical Center of Nis or three other possible sites to be determined during appraisal; (ii) energy 
efficiency improvements in social service buildings (schools, hospitals, orphanages and homes 
for the elderly); and (iii) institutional development for the Serbian Energy Efficiency Agency 
(SEEA).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented at various sites located all over Serbia.  The Clinical Center of 
Serbia is located in Belgrade. The other large building complexes are located outside of 
Belgrade. One of the criteria for selection of buildings under component (ii) is wide geographical 
distribution. There will be 5 buildings retrofitted under additional financing for the cost overrun 
and 71 buildings (schools, hospitals, orphanages) retrofitted under the additional financing at 
sites still to be selected.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
A
review of the potential environmental and social impacts and appropriate mitigation measures 
was carried out during the preparation of the original project, and the project was classified as 
Category B for environmental impacts.  An Environmental Assessment Report was prepared for 
the Clinical Center of Serbia (CCS) component.  Appropriate mitigation measures were prepared 
and have been used throughout the implementation of the project, and the project has not had any 
environmental, social or other safeguard problems.  The Borrower's institutional capacity to 
address safeguard issues is therefore satisfactory.  Activities proposed under the additional 
financing are neither expected to change the environmental categorization of the project 
(Category B), nor to trigger any new safeguard policies that would be beyond the Borrower's 
capacity to manage. No land acquisition has taken place under the original project and none is 
expected under the additional financing.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Nikola Ille (ECSSD) 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An EMP was prepared for the original project.  This EMP will be updated once the large 
building complex site has been selected.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/30/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
ECA Safeguards Consultation Meeting held January 9, 2007.  
 
A
safeguards supervision was carried out in February 2007 and the report is filed in IRIS.  
 
Environmental Assessment for Component A to be prepared after large building complex 
site is selected (decision expected by March 31, 2007) and confirmed.  Preparation and 
disclosure of EA and EMP for Component A will be a dated covenant in the Financing 
Agreement. Already existing EMP for COmponent B will be used for activities under 
Component B.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Varadarajan Atur 
02/26/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/02/2007 
Comments:  Seen and approved. The team has a clear strategy for addressing potential environmental 
issues, which are likely to be minor. These are summarised in the minutes. Delegated to task team. 
MAB,for RH. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
03/05/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
