Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/25/2007 
Report No.:  AC2824
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Serbia 
Project ID:  P105270 
Project Name:  Serbia Irrigation and Drainage Rehabilitation Project Additional 
Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Usaid I. El-Hanbali 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 26, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 14, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Flood protection (90%);Irrigation and drainage (10%) 
Theme:  Analysis of economic growth (P);Natural disaster management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
12.50
12.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The primary objective of the project is to enhance the scope of the flood control program 
initiated under Component 1 (Rehabilitation and improvement of drainage and flood 
control infrastructure) of the Irrigation and Drainage Rehabilitation Project (IDRP) 
currently under implementation: to reduce the risk of damage from flooding to land, 
crops, property, infrastructure as well as reducing risk of life loss from flooding in project 
areas. The activities envisaged will strengthen the results expected under both Goals 2 
and 3 of the Country Assitance Strategy for FY05-07 by helping to further improve 
agricultural output and exports and to further protect poor and vulnerable populations 
from the potentially devastating effects of flooding.   
 
3. Project Description 
The total cost of the Additional Financing would be about US$62.5 million, of which 
US$ 50 million would be financed by the Bank and US$ 12.5 million equivalent by the 
Government of Serbia (GOS). The project will finance GOS proposed flood control 
program covering all main rivers in the country and including a reconstruction (about 
US$43.4 million) as well as a rehabilitation program (about US$19.0 million). The 
project would scale-up the following two components of the on-going IDRP:  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Rehabilitation and Improvement of Drainage and Flood Control 
Infrastructure (US$62.5 million) - scale-up activities would include: (i) rehabilitation 
works (about 80 small works) that affects major (e.g., Danube, Tisaza, Sava, Tamis)as 
well as smaller rivers and are more in the nature of emergency repair taking care of major 
landslides, culvert collapses, rebuilding retaining walls, and structures guiding and 
regulating flows. The rehabilitation program (totalling US$19.0 million) also includes 
rebuilding or protection of pump stations, embankment foundations as well as crests, and 
rehabilitation of embankments; and (ii) reconstruction works (about US$43.4 million) 
consisting of larger, continuous efforts along the four major streams - the Danube, Tisza, 
Tamis, and Sava - and strengthening about 89 km of flood defenses. In the reconstruction 
program there is also a provision in the first year of additional financing for mobile 
equipment (mainly pumps) to be kept in reserve on the left bank of the Danube near Novi 
Sad, to be used to help evacuate localized flooding behind the embankments, including 
that caused by local rainfall.  
 
Component 2: Project Management and Monitoring (US$ 1.0 million): scale-up of this 
component would provide support to the Government to implement the project, including 
funds for: (i) overall project management and technical assistance in such areas as 
detailed design, contract administration and construction supervision, procurement and 
financial management, and participatory water management institutions; (b) monitoring 
and evaluation of project impacts; development of environmental management plans for 
rehabilitation and construction activities carried out under the project; and (d) annual 
financial audits of project accounts.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Additional Financing would allow for a significant expansion in the geographical 
scope of flood protection activities under the IDRP.  The largest single basin effort 
covered by the Additional Financing would be the Tisza River, which cuts through 
Vojvodine southward to the Danube, and which suffered most severely in 2006.  A 
significant effort would also be mounted along the Tamis, also coming from the north, 
which suffered worst in 2005.  Among the smaller rivers, the Velike Morava south of the 
Danube would now also be included in the program.  Altogether, the Additional 
Financing activities could provide mandated protection levels for 500,000 ha of land and 
2.5 million people.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The additional financing project has been proposed as environmental assessment category 
"B" and triggers the Bank policy OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment. An 
Environmental Assessment (EA) was prepared for the IDRP as part of the Framework 
Environmental Impact Study.  The Study includes assessment of potential impacts of the 
proposed project and the likely significance of such impact, recommended mitigation 
measures, outline of monitoring plan and organization responsible for implementation of 
mitigation measures. Specific EAs have been prepared for the proposed flood and 
drainage schemes, while a framework EA has been prepared for the irrigation schemes. A 
site specific EMP for the first irrigation scheme is presently being developed.  A public 
consultation and disclosure process was undertaken in accordance with World Bank 
policy and guidelines.  The EA was publicly disclosed in March 2005. The existing EA 
(developed under IDRP) is applicable to the works that are considered for the Additional 
Financing together with corresponding EMPs.  
 
All Danube riparians were informed of the initial project, and no objections were 
received, but this approach was specifically based on the irrigation component of the 
project, which will eventually abstract an extremely small proportion of the enormous 
transboundary flows through Serbia.  The flood control works, including all works under 
the Additional Financing, will still take place in the Danube River Basin but will not 
adversely change the quality or quantity of water flows to the other riparians and will not 
be adversely affected by the other riparians possible water use, and thus is exempt from 
the notification requirement of OP 7.50.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The proposed additional financing will not raise the environmental category of the project 
nor trigger any new safeguards. Several proposed flood protection rehabilitation works 
are near by four designated Ramsar sites. Solid assessment of possible environmental 
impacts on these sites due to proposed works will take place in the pre-appraisal misison 
Page  4
scheduled in March 2007. No significant indirect or long-term environmental impacts are 
expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Management Plan was developed for the original Project and 
disclosed. It specifies roles and responsibilities for implementation and enforcement. 
Mitigation measures are related mostly to safe transportation and disposal of construction 
materials and waste and debris, landscaping (restoring to original conditions) of 
construction site. The PIU through its Environmental Specialist will be responsible for 
supervising that the EMP is properly and timely implemented. The Borrower's 
institutional capacity is demonstrated by the satisfactory implementation of the ongoing 
operation. The EMP is applicable for the Additional Financing.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management, 
its Directorate of Water and Public Water Companies, and communities living in flood-
prone areas. Before starting construction works at project sites public awareness meetings 
will be conducted with population of communities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/01/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/22/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/09/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Page  5
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
No 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Usaid I. El-Hanbali 
03/13/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
03/13/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari 
03/20/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/16/2007 
Comments:  The next mission will assess in more detail whether OP 4.04 applies and if so, what 
approaches are needed to avoid, mitigate and monitor impacts.  A revised ISDS will be prepared 
thereafter. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
03/23/2007 
Comments:  Cleared. 
