Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/12/2007 
Report No.:  AC2511
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Serbia 
Project ID:  P096823 
Project Name:  Delivery of Improved Local Services Project 
Task Team Leader:  Truman G. Packard 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 10, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 14, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (34%);Health (33%);General education sector (33%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Decentralization (P);Social safety nets 
(P);Education for all (P);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
68.80 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
3.80
3.80 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The DILS project will help improve access to and the efficiency, equity and quality of 
local delivery of health, education and social protection services, by increasing the 
capacity of institutional actors and beneficiaries in a decentralizing environment.   
 
3. Project Description 
The activities financed by the DILS project are structured into four components.  
 
Component I: Making Fiscal Decentralization Work. (Estimated cost, US$22.0 million; 
Bank financing, US$21.7 million). The 2006 Law on Local Self-Government Finance 
places new responsibilities on line ministries and LSGs to develop and adopt mechanisms 
for ear-marking and allocating funds to investment and programs at the local level.  
Furthermore, new financing structures will have an impact on the existing network of 
service provision and force greater efficiency in service delivery.  This component will 
support implementation of the Law through investments in technical assistance and 
training, grant financing to municipalities and bridge financing. Specifically, the project 
will:  
 
-- Develop new 'funds-follow-the-user' formulae and financing framework with the line 
ministries and the Commission for Local Self-Government Finance, including 
Page  2
'compensating weights' to correct inequalities across municipalities, and so that funds are 
allocated to municipalities in a transparent, rational and predictable way that is consistent 
with their new service delivery responsibilities.  Because the new financing approaches 
will also change the relationship between the financiers and the end users in some cases 
(e.g. PHC capitation), efforts will be made to explain the changes and encourage support 
for the new mechanisms.  
 
-- Provide transition financing to allow providers to adjust to new financing 
mechanisms, consistent with the move to allocations based on funding following the user.  
The project will provide bridge financing to support introduction of new financing 
mechanisms, spreading out the impact of any budget reductions and allowing providers to 
make the necessary capacity adjustments, consolidations and efficiency improvements to 
cope with these funding levels.  
 
-- Provide training and capacity building for sector actors at national and local levels in 
applying the new financial framework. Both at the central government and the local 
levels and in service providers (schools, etc.), training will be required to apply the new 
financing framework.  It is expected that all relevant staff in the national ministries will 
receive training as will staff in municipalities.  
 
Component II: Improving Outreach and Access through Development and Expansion of 
Innovations in Service Delivery. (Estimated cost, US$15.7 million; Bank financing, 
US$13.1 million). Decentralization provides a window of opportunity for LSGs and non-
government service providers to identify new approaches and models for delivering 
services. Specifically, through goods, training, grants to municipalities, and technical 
assistance, this component will:  
 
-- Increase the capacity of the Social Innovation Fund (SIF) to evaluate and support 
integrated innovations in service delivery, especially those that combine social, health 
and education services for greater welfare impact.  An example of integrated, innovative 
approaches found to have had substantial positive impact on the welfare of excluded and 
vulnerable groups include conditional cash transfer programs in countries such as Mexico 
(Oportunidades) and Brazil (Bolsa Familia).  
 
-- Increase the absorption capacity and 'top up' the SIF.  This sub-component will 
channel more resources through the Fund, by providing grants to municipalities.  In 
particular, the project will further support the 'scale-up' of innovative service delivery 
models already proven to be successful, using impact evaluation techniques to draw 
further lessons from a wider deployment of successful innovations, with the objective of 
eventual national roll-out.  
 
-- Build LSG capacity to address the special needs of excluded vulnerable groups.  
Training and technical assistance will be provided to LSGs to help them to identify and 
implement alternative service delivery arrangements, such as small group homes and 
independent/supportive living units to move people out of social welfare institutions; 
collaborative approaches between health, social welfare, and education to ensure 
increasing access to quality pre-school; or between social and medical services to provide 
rapid and coordinated intervention in urgent situations; as well as support for long-term 
care of elderly.  One set of outputs from this sub-component will be project proposals for 
SIF funding.  
Page  3
-- Improve knowledge and establish institutions to safeguard citizens' rights.As service 
delivery changes with decentralization, it will be critical to inform citizens of their rights 
to quality services, provide citizens with information on which to make choices between 
and to influence the behavior of service providers, and to establish mechanisms to 
safeguard those rights.  The project will finance technical assistance to develop 
information material and safeguard institutions and mechanisms.  
 
Component III: Supporting a New Regulatory, Oversight and Quality-Assurance Role 
for Central Government Ministries. (Estimated cost, US$10.0 million; Bank financing, 
US$9.8 million). This component will support the shift in the role of central government 
ministries, through training and technical assistance.  These ?knowledge transfer? 
investments will complement investments in goods and civil works financed through 
Serbia's NIP.  This component will:  
 
-- Develop and support the training required for Central Government ministries to shift 
to a regulatory, oversight and quality assurance role.  Training and capacity building will 
be provided for line ministry staff to strengthen their capacity to undertake new 
regulatory, oversight and quality assurance roles.  
 
-- Define regulations and standards for local service delivery, including the specification 
of the new roles and responsibilities of municipal staff and service providers in the 
decentralized system.  
 
-- Develop mechanisms and capacity to ensure quality improvements through piloting, 
monitoring, impact evaluation and performance analysis.  The project will have a strong 
focus on building the capacity of line ministries to conduct monitoring and impact 
evaluation in the social sectors, both to ensure the effectiveness of specific project 
investments and to support evidence-based decision making and accountability. In 
particular, the project will support the government in implementing impact evaluations of 
decentralization in education, health and social protection.  
 
Component IV: Improving Capacity of LSGs as Service Providers. (Estimated cost, 
US$23.7 million; Bank financing, US$23.2 million). LSG staff and service providers will 
need knowledge and skills to make informed decisions in management, strategic 
planning, needs assessment and budgeting, service delivery, and monitoring and 
evaluation.  Further, support will be provided to improve, connectivity to the internet and 
national data networks, information management, and improvements in IT. Specifically, 
the project will, through technical assistance, training, grants to schools and 
municipalities, and IT investments:  
 
-- Create mechanisms to foster and assure quality, including developing systems of 
accreditation, licensing and accountability to enable municipalities to monitor service 
delivery, to ensure compliance with procedures and standards, as well as accountability in 
management and service delivery.  
 
-- Supporting capacity building, tailored to LSG needs.  LSGs vary greatly in their 
administrative capacity.  The DILS project will support the development and delivery of 
training programs to build the minimum competences required for delivery of the 
services being decentralized, including critical training and capacity building in financial 
management and procurement, to ensure improvement in transparency and local good 
governance.  However, the project will also support a 'bottom-up', demand-driven 
Page  4
approach, tailored to the specific capacity needs of LSGs, by making small grants 
available for local authorities to purchase the training they themselves identify from 
providers certified by the line ministries.  
 
-- Topping up the Education Innovation Fund facility.  Under the Serbia Education 
Improvement Project (SEIP), supported by the World Bank, Serbia has successfully 
encouraged innovations for better quality in schools, by providing a grant facility that 
finances proposals for quality enhancement set out in their school development plans 
(SDPs).  The MOES has now mainstreamed this facility and wishes to extend it by 
focusing on particular policy issues, such as Roma inclusion, healthy and safe 
environments for youth, and rewards for greatest improvement in performance. Technical 
assistance will be provided to Local School Administrations to further enhance their 
capacity to work with schools on their SDPs. The project will top up this existing facility 
to ensure that it continues to provide a strong incentive for locally-inspired quality 
improvement. Average grant size would be approximately $15,000; it is expected that 
550 schools would receive grants over the Project period.  
 
-- Improve the use of information, statistics and Information Technology (IT).Increasing 
decentralization will require better information at all levels for policy making, planning, 
and budgeting of services, as well as for operating, managing and monitoring. This sub-
component will support consolidating existing IT strategies in each of the sectors, as well 
as the design of a common platform for integration of existing data bases for sharing data 
in real time, and adding new data as future needs arise. This support will be financed by 
the project mainly in the design phase, to prepare for IT infrastructure investments 
already planned in the NIP.  The support will also include technical assistance on the 
legal and privacy aspects of administrative use of information on citizens, to ensure 
compliance with EU information and privacy standards.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Municipalities across the country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Tijen Arin (ECSSD) 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  5
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No safeguards issues or impacts apply.  
 
During project preparation, it was determined that the project will solely finance 
knowledge-transfer and staff-retrenchment activities.  Whereas at the PCN stage, the 
possibility of support for some civil works (construction of schools and decommissioning 
of hospitals) was considered and the project was rated Category B - Partial Assessment, 
these activities have now been completely ruled out.  It was decided that such activities 
would be supported separately under the Government's own National Investment Plan. 
Hence, the Environmental Assessment Safeguards Policy is no longer triggered.  For the 
same reason, unlike at the PCN stage, no potential impact on Physical Cultural Properties 
is envisaged.  Hence, the Cultural Property Safeguards Policy is also no longer triggered.  
These changes in the project design justify the recategorization of the Project as C.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect or long term impacts apply.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The project does not trigger any of the World Bank Safeguards Policies.   
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Truman G. Packard 
04/12/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Tijen Arin 
03/01/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Arup Banerji 
 
Comments:   
