Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2118 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/07/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Serbia and Montenegro 
Project ID: P096598 
Project Name: Energy Community of South East Europe APL 3 Project 
Task Team Leader: Husam Mohamed Beides 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
3.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
3.00
6.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed ECSEE APL 3 (Mon
tenegro) project is the third in series of the World Bank’s 
multi-phase ECSEE APL Program approved by the Board on January 27, 2005.  The objective of 
ECSEE APL Program is the development of a functioning regional electricity market in South 
East Europe and its integration into the internal electricity market of the European Union, 
through the implementation of priority investments supporting electricity market and power 
system operations in electricity generation, transmission and distribution and technical assistance 
for institutional/systems development and project preparation and implementation.  
 
The ECSEE APL3 (Montenegro) project would provide support to Montenegro for 
implementing essential infrastructure investment projects necessary to strengthen the capacity of 
the transmission network and improve the operation reliability of the electricity supply in 
Montenegro.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will have the following three components:  
 
Page  2
Component 1 
–
Transmission Network Reinforcement  
 
This component includes the following two transmission reinforcement sub-projects:  
 
•
Reinforcement of the 110 kV connection of Andrijevica 110/35 kV substation. This sub-
project includes the construction of an additional 2 km 110 kV transmission line circuit to 
reinforce the substation’s connection the to the transmission network in order to comply with the 
“N-1” transmission planning criterion and to reduce in the duration and amount of energy 
interruptions of the load supplied by Andrijevica substation.  
 
•
Reinforcement of the 220 kV connection of Mojkovac 220/110/35 kV substation. This 
sub-project includes the construction of an additional 2.5 km 220 kV transmission line circuit to 
reinforce the substation's connection the to the transmission network in order to strengthen the 
transfer capacity of the transmission system in the substation local area and to eliminate energy 
interruptions in the area due to transmission bottlenecks caused by outages occurred during peak 
demand periods.  
 
The total cost of the sub-projects included in Component 1 is estimated at US$ 3 million.  
 
Component 2 – Improvement of Operational Reliability of Perucica HPP  
 
This component includes the following two sub-projects:  
 
•
Replacement of the existing trash rack and trash rack cleaning machine (TRCM)installed 
at the bottom outlet of Vrtac retention reservoir of Perucica HPP.  The exiting trash rack and 
cleaning machine at Vrtac outlet which have been in unremitting operations since 1960 will be 
replaced by a new track rack with a screen that is designed for urban type wastes and a new 
cleaning machine based on modern technology.  
 
•
Supply of spare turbine runners for units 1 to 5 in Perucica HPP some which have been in 
use for over 35 years with more than 150,000 hours (assumed useful life of the runners) of 
operation and have been showing symptoms of damages due to runner cavitations, run down and 
outdated conditions.  
 
The total cost of the sub-projects included in Component 2 is estimated at US$ 3 million.  
 
Component 3 – Additional Investments  
 
If additional regional funds become available to increase the size of this ECSEE APL3 
(Montenegro) project, all or part of the following two sub-projects may be considered as 
additional investment sup-projects candidate for financing by the project:  
 
•
Development of telecommunications backbone network for EPCG, including 
telecommunications links with regional utilities using optical ground wires (OPGW).  
 
Page  3
•
Rehabilitation of the distribution network in the Zeta and Tuzi areas to improve the 
reliability of the electricity supply.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Component 1 – Transmission Network Reinforcement  
 
Andrijevica 110/35 kV substation is located in the northeast area near the major population 
centers of Andrijevica, Gusinje and Plav.  
 
Mojkovac 220/110/35 kV substation is also located in the northeast area about one kilometer of 
the city of Mojkovac.  
 
Component 2 – Improvement of Operational Reliability of Perucica HPP  
 
HPP Perucica is located in the center of the western part of Montenegro.  The trash rack is 
located at the plant bottom outlet. The old trash rack and cleaning machine will be disposed to a 
nearby steel smelter.  
 
The spare runners will be stored in the plant power house and will be installed when needed to 
replace failed runners.  
 
Component 3 – Additional Investment Projects  
 
The development of the telecommunication backbone network sub-project entails the 
installation of optical ground wires in existing high voltage transmission lines located in different 
parts of the country.  
 
The rehabilitation of the distribution network sub-project entails the construction, upgrade of 
overhead distribution lines and substations in Zeta and Tuzi areas. The areas of Zeta and Tuzi 
extend to the south of Podgorica from Cemovsko Polje in the north towards Skadar Lake in the 
south to the Albanian border in the east and the river Moraca in the west. It represents an area of 
about 400 km2 with a population of about 41,000.  The area is characterized by a number of 
villages with recent increases in residential housing and small businesses.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The World Bank environmental specialist worked closely with the technical staff of the 
Electricity Utility of Montenegro (EPCG) to assist them in the preparation of the EMP 
documents for the project components. EPCG demonstrated a very good understanding of the 
environmental issues and appropriate approaches for both environmental mitigation and 
monitoring. The mitigation is based upon good engineering design and practice. It is clear that 
EPCG staff have more than sufficient capacity to properly implement EMPs for each of the 
subcomponents described above.  
 
Similarly, the World Bank social safeguards specialist worked with EPCG staff to prepare a 
draft land acquisition policy framework. EPCG land acquisition staff members are experienced 
Page  4
and fully capable of managing the land acquisition effectively to meet both local and Bank 
standards.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
Mr Bernard Baratz (ECSIE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The sub-projects of the Transmission Network Reinforcement (component 1) and the 
distribution sub-project involve a modest amount of construction activity for construction of a 
transformer bay and the suspension of high voltage electrical lines. There are no unique or 
unusual environmental issues. During construction, the impacts are standard (dust, noise, solids 
disposal-primarily at Mojkovac substation-land clearance etc.) and can be mitigated with good 
engineering practice. During operation, the chief concerns are with electric and magnetic fields, 
neither of which is problematic at the voltages involved. The overhead transmission lines, towers 
and substations will be designed to provide electric and magnetic field strengths to meet 
international standards at ground level (transmission/distribution lines) or at the fence-line 
(substations). All these issues have been reflected in the EMPs. Consultation and disclosure of 
the EMPs for the transmission sub-projects will be completed by the appraisal mission.  The 
Bank team will ascertain whether the transmission lines cross any officially designated forest 
areas or officially designated or known natural habitats.  
 
The trash rack sub-project primarily involves the purchase of a new piece of equipment and 
disposal of the older obsolete system. An EMP of high quality was prepared by EPCG based 
upon and in accordance with recommendations of the World Bank dam safety specialist. 
Consultation and disclosure of the EMP for the trash rack sub-project will not be needed because 
the pieces of equipment to be installed are on existing company property and there are no 
affected groups anywhere near the project site. No EMP will be prepared for the supply of the 
spare turbine runners, as the new runners will be used as spare parts installed when needed and 
EPCG staff are well trained and have performed this activity many times during the plant 
operation.  The work involved in these two sub-projects is not supposed to have any impacts on 
existing dams or their safety, but current procedures for assuring the integrity of the structures as 
well as provisions of emergency response should be confirmed in the appraisal stage of the PAD. 
The telecommunications backbone network sub-project will have no environmental impact 
and no EMP will be developed for this project.    
 
EPCG has prepared an EMP for the distribution sub-project which is satisfactory of the 
Bank environmental specialist. Consultation and disclosure of the EMP will be completed if the 
project is selected and approved for financing by the APL 3 (Montenegro) Credit.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The transmission lines sub-projects will require land acquisition for the tower footprints and 
may require the removal of some structures to clear the right of way under the transmission lines. 
EPCG has prepared a Land Acquisition Policy Framework acceptable to the Bank that will guide 
land acquisition during project implementation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
The work involved in Component 2 sub-projects is not supposed to have any impacts on 
existing dams or their safety, but current procedures for assuring the integrity of the structures as 
well as provisions of emergency response should be confirmed in the appraisal stage of the PAD.  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/24/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Draft EMPs had been sent to the World Bank for review and comment on February 3, 2006. 
It is anticipated that the final EMPs of the transmission line sub-projects, including detailed 
documentation of all public consultations, will be disclosed locally in the local language and 
English language versions suitable for delivery to the Infoshop would be available by March 
24, 2006 .  
 
The Land Acquisition Policy Framework will be finalized and disclosed by the end of 
February.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Husam Mohamed Beides 
02/22/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
02/23/2006 
Comments:  Cleared at the PCN stage 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
02/23/2006 
Comments:  Cleared 
