Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/19/2007 
Report No.:  AC2897
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Serbia 
Project ID:  P090492 
Project Name:  Energy Efficiency Project (Serbia) Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Varadarajan Atur 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 23, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 14, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  District heating and energy efficiency services (97%);Central government 
administration (3%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P);Pollution management and environmental health (P);Access 
to urban services and housing (P);Public expenditure, financial management and 
procurement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
18.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
2.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives of the parent Energy Efficiency Project were to improve 
energy efficiency in heating buildings in order to make heating more affordable as well as 
improve the functional and health enivronment of the users.  An important associated 
objective was to reduce the local and global environmental impact of the use of dirty 
fuels for heating buildings in Serbia.  These development objectives are consistent with 
the proposed project for additional financing, and therefore will not be revised.   
 
3. Project Description 
The main aim of the proposed additional financing is to enable the government to 
complete the original scope of the project (energy efficiency improvements in 3 social 
buildings, 8 schools and 6 hospitals left out due to cost overrun) and to scale up energy 
efficiency improvements to include: rehabilitation of the heat supply system of the Nis 
Clinical Center along with energy efficiency improvements in all 17 contiguous buildings 
at the campus; complete retrofitted lighting in 10 schools and partial lighting retrofit in 10 
schools; energy efficiency improvements in an additional 7 social buildings (such as 
Page  2
orphanages), 18 schools and 8 hospitals across Serbia. Also,  energy efficiency 
improvements will be implemented in 4 buildings at the University of Kragujevac.  
 
The proposed additional financing project scope will be implemented through the 
following main components:  
 
(i) Component A:  Energy System Modernization (US$5.44 million):  Energy system 
modernization of the Nis Clinical Center.  The energy system will be designed taking into 
consideration energy efficiency measures in all the buildings of the clinical center, which 
will reduce the energy supply requirements for the same energy demand and will 
demonstrate the enhanced benefits from coordinated implementation of efficient energy 
supply and demand components.  
 
(ii)Component B:  Energy Efficiency Improvements in Social Service buildings 
(schools, hospitals and orphanages) across Serbia (US$18.9 million). This component 
will finance the installation of energy efficiency equipment and retrofitting in schools, 
hospitals and orphanages.  The investment program consists of 26 primary schools and 4 
buildings of University of Kragujevac, 33 hospitals (out of which 17 in NIS CC) and 10 
orphanages as well as complete lighting retrofits in 10 schools and partial lighting 
retrofits in 10 schools.  Eligible energy efficiency measures are: roof insulation, including 
roofing; wall insulation; window replacement; basement ceiling insulation; piping 
insulation; balancing valves; thermostatic valves; automatic temperature control at the 
boiler or substation level; replacement of boiler and/or burner; lighting. The lighting in 
the surveyed schools was found to be inadequate and poorly designed, often a source of 
eye strain for the children. Based on the experience of the project implementation, 
working conditions (quality of air, temperature and lighting) and social and demographic 
impact would be additional considerations in selection of sites and buildings for 
retrofitting.  
 
(iii)Technical Assistance (US$1.13 million):  The TA under the proposed additional 
financing would help (a) the SEEA to provide technical support such as energy audits and 
monitoring and undertake external communications, including training of officials; and 
(b) project financial management, auditing and incremental costs covering office space 
and facilities for the PIU, operating and maintenance costs of equipment, vehicle, office 
supplies, utilities, communications costs, translation costs, and office equipment.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented at various sites located all over Serbia.  The Clinical 
Center of Nis is located in Nis. Significant environmental benefits are expected from the 
proposed works at Nis CC, which include replacement of the present fuel (coal, mazut 
and fuel oil) by natural gas and replacement of existing old wornout boiler plants with a 
new centralized boiler plant. Ash will be eliminated, whereas SO2 and NOx emission 
will be greatly reduced. Noise and dust associated with coal and fuel oil handling and 
transportation will also be eliminated. Construction of gas pipeline within clinical center 
and to connect Nis facility with nearest gas pipeline which is about 100 meters from the 
perimeter of Nis CC, and installation of gas fired boilers will require appropriate 
environmental and safety measures. An Environmental Assessment report will be 
Page  3
prepared along the same lines as was done for Belgrade Clinical Center, including an 
environmental management plan (EMP) to address any potential adverse impacts.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (ECSSD) 
Mr Nikola Ille (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Safeguard issues and impacts are associated with the design, construction and operation 
of the centrallized boiler plant, connecting the gas pipeline, and the gas and heat 
distribution networks. Nis is similar to Belgrade CC, and thus measures will be outlined 
in the EMP for noise abatement from the boiler plant, SO2 and NOx emissions reductions 
from the boilers, assuring the safety of gas pipeline construction, as well as mitigation of 
minor adverse impacts during construction. These will be appropriately included in the 
design and technical specifications and their implementation included in the respective 
contracts. The prefeasibility study has confirmed that there will be no acquisition of land 
of displacement of people. The expected connection to gas pipeline is across from the Nis 
CCS and would be laid through underground trenches. Other than temporary 
inconvenience, no other damage or removal of dwellings, kisoks, structures is expected. 
Public consultation will be held in Nis where the details of the proposed project will be 
shared with the public, media and NGOs.  
 
The energy efficiency retrofitting in buildings will involve improvements to insulation, 
heating systems, thermostatic valves, windows, etc. Other than handling asbestos and 
minor construction related disturbances, no major safeguard issues are expected. The PIU 
and SEEA will ensure that contractors comply with applicable health and safety 
regulations during execution.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is expected to produce positive environmental and health benefits to the 
target population.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
review of the potential environmental and social impacts and appropriate mitigation 
measures was carried out during the preparation of the original project, and the project 
was classified as Category B for environmental impacts.  An Environmental Assessment 
Report was prepared for the Clinical Center of Serbia (CCS) component in 2003.  
Appropriate mitigation measures were prepared and have been used throughout the 
implementation of the project, and the project has not had any environmental, social or 
other safeguard problems.  The Borrower's institutional capacity to address safeguard 
issues is therefore satisfactory. Activities proposed under the additional financing are 
neither expected to change the environmental categorization of the project (Category B), 
nor to trigger any new safeguard policies that would be beyond the Borrower's capacity 
to manage. Facility specific EA/EMPs will be prepared as needed, as part of the design 
process, during implementation. No land acquisition has taken place under the original 
project and none is expected under the additional financing.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EA and EMP for Nis Clinical Center will be prepared during project implementation 
as part of the feasibility study, which is expected to be completed by December 2007.  
Disclosure of EA and EMP in the country and at the Bank's Infoshop is a condition of 
disbursement for Component A. Nis CC and Nis municipal authorities are aware of the 
need to consult local communities, NGOs and media. The PIU and the SEEA, which 
have experience with similar undertakings in Belgrade CC project, will also be directly 
involved.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/17/2003 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/20/2003 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/20/2003 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  5
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Varadarajan Atur 
04/06/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Nikola Ille 
04/10/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari 
04/10/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
04/19/2007 
Comments:  Approved 
