Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/23/2007 
Report No.:  AC2918
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Serbia 
Project ID:  P094212 
Project Name:  Transitional Agriculture Reform Project 
Task Team Leader:  Julian A. Lampietti 
GEF Focal Area: B-Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID: P093545 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 3, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 20, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Payment systems, securities clearance and settlement (40%);General agriculture, 
fishing and forestry sector (30%);Agricultural extension and research (30%) 
Theme:  Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Rural policies 
and institutions (P);Other rural development (S);Biodiversity (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
17.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
12.30 
 Local 
Communities 
0.63
12.93 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to enhance the competitiveness of Serbian 
agriculture. The global environmental objective is to conserve the globally important eco-
system in the Stara Planina mountainous area.  
 
Key outcome indicators would include: (i) improved Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry 
and Water Management (MAFWM) ability to target the use of rural development funds, 
disburse them transparently and evaluate their impact on the agri-food sector; (ii) an 
increased number of agricultural producers and processors using competitive, market 
oriented agriculture technologies and practices; and (iii) expanded areas under ecological 
management and/or restoration within the Stara Planina Nature Park (SPNP) and 
surrounding area.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project objectives will be achieved through a series of strategic public investments 
that aim to: (i) improve and strengthen the Government of Serbia (GoS) system for 
transparently delivering rural development investment grants and evaluating their impact; 
(ii) improve the knowledge and capacity of agricultural producers and processors to make 
the best use of these funds; and (iii) improve management of the SPNP, including its flora 
and autochthonous livestock breeds, in partnership with local communities and other 
stakeholders. It will build on and enhance existing Government systems and programs to 
help the agri-food sector fully benefit from the new opportunities arising from the GoS 
market-oriented reform agenda, and accelerate the harmonization of these systems with 
EU requirements.  This includes support for the implementation of an efficient, 
transparent and EU-compatible farm payment system and for the implementation of a 
rural development program consistent with Pillar 2 of the EU Common Agricultural 
Policy. The project would also develop a system for the competitive contracting and 
delivery of extension and applied research outcomes consistent with beneficiary needs 
and empower stakeholders to oversee this process. Global Environmental Facility (GEF) 
co-financing will increase capacity and incentives for agricultural producers and 
processors to engage in activities that support agro-biodiversity conservation and 
sustainable land use, and to support ecosystem restoration and management in the SPNP.  
 
Component 1: Strengthening the Agriculture and Rural Development Support System  
 
The Government of Serbia provides several types of support for the agriculture and rural 
development sector, totaling about Euro 200 million in 2006. Of this amount, over Euro 
120 million was for structural support, including Euro 28 million in the form of matching 
grants for which individuals can apply, based on certain eligibility criteria.  As part of its 
overall economic reform and in line with the process of moving towards EU accession, 
the GoS is progressively de-emphasizing price subsidies and shifting resources towards 
investment grants and income support.  
 
This component will support the shift towards structural support. It will involve building 
capacity for processing and administering the national rural investment grant program.  
The project would fund development and implementation of data processing software 
across the Payment system (PS). Technical assistance would be used to design the 
national PS integrated administration and control system (IACS), a pilot land parcel 
information system (LPIS) and a risk management program. In PY3, the project will 
support the updating of the national rural development plan and support measures. This 
component complements the work of European Agency for Reconstruction (EAR) 
SRDPPS project, which is supporting the development of an EU-compatible fiduciary 
system within the MAFWM and the preparation of a national rural development plan and 
supporting measures.  
 
Component 2: Building Knowledge and Capacity of Agricultural Producers and 
Processors  
 
Page  3
This component will help develop and disseminate the knowledge and technology 
needed for agricultural producers and processors to raise agricultural production and 
competitiveness and to access and make effective use of the structural support provided 
by the MAFWM.   Adopting best practice EU measures, this component will build upon 
and enhance existing GoS systems, in which research and extension activities are carried 
out through transparent, competitively awarded contracts including private sector 
delivery.  While extension delivery must be tailored to specific country environments, 
systems such as those in the UK and Holland, where government funds up to 70% of the 
privately delivered advisory services, provide working models for Serbia.  
 
The component will include:  
 
(i) 
Improvement of Agricultural Extension Delivery  
 
a. 
Strengthening of MAFWM capacity: the project will support the establishment 
and capacity building of a Department for Rural Development and Extension Services 
(DRDES) within the MAFWM to oversee the Serbian applied research and extension 
system, with responsibility for adopting an Agricultural Extension Strategy and 
approving contracts and making payments to Extension Service Providers. Project inputs 
will include office and computing equipment and vehicles for the DRDES, technical 
assistance and capacity building in extension management and effective communication 
for DRDES staff and trainers and support for annual workshops and training programs.  
 
b. 
Incremental funding for extension services contracts:  over the project life, 
existing funding for contracts to service providers for training of extension contractors, 
extension services to farmers and for facilitating farmer's rural development grant 
applications will be doubled. Demand driven extension contracts, co-financed by the 
project and the MAFWM, will be awarded on a competitive basis to certified  service 
providers, including restructured agricultural stations, academic institutions (e.g. 
agricultural schools), NGOs, private companies and private individuals.  
 
(ii) 
Improving Applied Research Delivery: A national Advisory and Applied 
Research Fund would be established as defined in the 1991 Law on Agriculture 
Departments. The project would co-finance separate applied research and extension 
services programs supporting competitively awarded contracts based on EU best practice, 
including:  
 
a. 
Capacity building for applied agricultural research: to strengthen the relevance 
and effectiveness of the applied research program, the project will support technical 
assistance and training in applied research management and implementation and regional 
study tours for the members of a project supported Applied Research and Extension 
Council.  
 
b. 
Incremental funding for applied research contracts:   up to Euro 1.3 million will 
be provided annually for co-financing, with the MAFWM, contracts for demand driven 
applied agricultural research, which will be awarded on a competitive basis to accredited 
research institutes and, at a lower level of funding, to innovative farmer, agro-industry 
and civil society groups for technology testing and demonstration;  
Page  4
(iii) 
Development of stakeholder representation: The MAFWM extension and applied 
research program will be overseen by a multi-sectoral Agricultural Extension and 
Applied Research Council including representatives of the MAFWM, MSEP, civil 
society and target beneficiaries (agricultural producers and processors). The project will 
also support the establishment of a system supporting democratic, gender-balanced 
stakeholder representation in local extension and applied research management.  Project 
inputs will include a consultation and communication package on the development of 
stakeholder representative bodies and TA and capacity building in support of effective 
representation. The project will also fund TA and capacity building in applied research 
management at both scientific and Council levels and funding for national Council 
operations.  
 
Component 3: Management of the Stara Planina Nature Park  
 
Component 3 will support aspects of improved management and biodiversity 
conservation and sustainable natural resource use within the non-core conservation areas 
(Zones 2 and 3) of the SPNP.  This includes TA, training and some equipment for the 
management authority (Srbijasume) and support for preparation of management and 
operational plans for the SPNP, public awareness raising, strengthening of cooperation 
with local authorities and communities, strengthening  trans-boundary cooperation, 
ecological restoration of priority sites (particularly degraded high elevation meadows), 
development and certification of 'SPNP-branded' products based on sustainable use of 
natural resources, incentives to farmers for maintaining rare indigenous livestock breeds, 
small scale infrastructure to support rural/eco-tourism, and establishing an ecological 
monitoring system. GEF co-financing will be used to strengthen MAFWM capacity in 
areas such as agro-environmental production and agro-tourism. While targeted toward the 
SPNP, these competencies will be applicable anywhere in the country.  
 
In the Stara Planina area Euro 1.8 million (US$2.5 million) will be applied as 
competitive grants to support the global objectives of promoting sustainable land use 
(particularly well-managed extensive grazing), ecological restoration, sustainable rural 
tourism and related enterprises, and preservation of natural and agro-biodiversity, 
including using the LEADER approach where appropriate. Twenty five percent of the 
grant amount will be paid by local communities (Euro 0.5 million) and 75 percent will be 
financed by the GEF grant (Euro 1.3 million). This will supplement the limited funds 
available from GoS for these purposes (in 2005, approximately Euro 103,000 equivalent 
went to farmers in the 4 Stara Planina municipalities). The GEF investment grants will 
fund up to 100% of investment costs, to encourage recipients to undertake activities with 
a
high public goods element (such as ecological restoration) or higher than usual financial 
risk.  
 
The grants, to be managed through a Stara Planina Advisory Committee, will support 
integrated strategies for sustainable local development, prepared through decentralized, 
integrated and bottom-up approaches. In the agriculturally marginal SPNP area, GEF 
Page  5
funds will help to pilot approaches to introduce sustainable farming and forestry practices 
and to diversify household and local economies.  
 
Component 4: Project Management and Coordination  
 
The project will be managed as an integral program of MAFWM, without the 
establishment of an independent project implementation unit.  This component will 
support incremental costs of consultant services, training, equipment and operations to 
facilitate project implementation including procurement and financial management, 
monitoring and evaluation and reporting. A Project Implementation Team within 
MAFWM, working under the direction of a MAFWM Project Manager, will provide 
technical, procurement and financial management support to participating MAFWM 
Sectors. A small technical advisory team will be located in the Stara Planina area to 
support MAFWM and Srbijasume in implementation of the GEF-financed activities, 
particularly under Component 3. Day-today implementation of the project sub-
components will be the responsibility of the associated MAFWM Divisions, Directorates 
and Sectors and Srbijasume in the case of for the SPNP program.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Components 1 and 2 will cover the entire territory of Serbia, while component 3 will 
focus on the Stara Planina Nature Park (SPNP) area located in the south-eastern Serbia.  
 
Stara Planina is situated in the West Balkan Mountain Range, on the southeastern border 
of Serbia and Bulgaria. It is part of the Balkan Mountains Biodiversity Center, which is 
one of six temperate centers of biodiversity in Europe.  About 8,700 people now live in 
the SPNP, while the total population of the four municipalities in the territory of SPNP is 
almost 178,281.  The main land uses are agriculture (53% of the territory land) and 
forestry (41% land).  
 
The SPNP combines the elements of nature protection and agro-biodiversity.  The area 
is known for its rich biological and geological diversity as well as its cultural heritage.  
The traditional agricultural production systems in the Stara Planina region were both 
shaped by and helped to conserve its biodiversity.  A rich diversity of vegetation in the 
mountain meadows developed as a result of moderate grazing pressure, and large areas of 
the SPNP are covered with this vegetation.  However, in recent years changes in livestock 
rearing practices have led to overgrazing in lowland areas and under-utilization of high 
elevation pastures, resulting in environmental degradation and biodiversity loss.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss (ECSSD) 
Mr Julian A. Lampietti (ECSSD) 
 
Page  6
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project triggers OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment. The project is rated Category 
B, since environmental impacts are expected to be limited, and mainly positive or neutral. 
The objective of facilitating harmonization with EU requirements and accessing EU 
markets with the associated cross-compliance requirements, in itself, promotes movement 
towards more environmentally sound methods. This will be supported by agricultural 
research and extension on aspects such as integrated pest management, organic 
production and reduction in pollution from processing plants. The project will 
supplement and strengthen the GoS's existing provisions for supporting agri-
environmental activities and sustainable tourism. The project will also directly support 
improved management and ecological restoration in the SPNP, which is a globally 
significant biodiversity area. While the project aims to increase livestock numbers, there 
is little risk of triggering overgrazing as the overall trend is towards depopulation of these 
areas, and the objective is to encourage the use of a few currently under-utilized high 
elevation meadows which are suffering from bush encroachment. Also, while the project 
aims to help develop markets for livestock products, the increased production will be 
from a very low base. Furthermore, the project will emphasize development of niche 
products whose market value will depend directly on certification as being ecologically 
friendly and supporting the sustainable use of the nature park. The project will also 
support a sustainable, ecologically friendly and socially supportive tourism development 
model, providing an alternative to current pressures for an unsustainable, infrastructure-
intensive model based on ski resorts. Any tourism-related infrastructure to be supported 
by the project will be small scale (e.g. visitor centers, trails) and consistent with the SPNP 
management plan, as well as being subject to prior environmental assessment.  
 
The project also triggers OP 4.04 on Natural Habitats. The policy is triggered since the 
project will support investments which aim to improve the conservation of Stara Planina 
Nature Park, including restoration of priority sites such as degraded high elevation 
meadows, and support environmentally sustainable agriculture and tourism development 
Page  7
within the multiple-use zones of the Park. No critical natural habitats are expected to be 
converted.  
 
OP 4.09 on Pest Management is not triggered by the project because the subprojects will 
not finance purchase of any agricultural inputs, including pesticides. The project will also 
support integrated pest management approaches to be mainstreamed in the agriculture 
advisory program.  
 
OP 4.36 applied since the project aims to bring about changes in the management of 
Stara Planina Nature Park, which has about 40% forest cover (with the remainder being 
pasture and cultivated land). The project will provide general support for strengthening 
the capacity of the responsible authority (Srbijasume) to manage the nature park.  
Ecological restoration and biodiversity conservation activities will focus on pastures and 
cultivated lands, while rural tourism investments (including some small scale 
infrastructure) will involve both forest and non-forest areas.  The project will not finance 
exploitation or planting in the forested areas.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The main environmental impact of the project will occur through the implementation of 
component 3 subprojects in the SPNP. Potential impacts will vary depending on specific 
features of each subproject. The EA has set out procedure on how the environmental 
appraisal of individual subprojects will be carried out.  The procedure will ensure that 
likely adverse environmental effects are minimized; subproject proposals with negative 
environmental impacts will not be supported by the project.  
 
The EIA/EMP for the project, which also includes a specific EIA for component 3 has 
identified the main sensitive environmental aspects specific for rural development and 
agriculture, including forestry and tourism in the territory of the Stara Planina Nature 
Park.  The EIA provides analysis of potential impacts on water and air pollution from 
agricultural sources, over-exploitation of the water sources, soil degradation, nature and 
biodiversity, as well as transport related environmental impacts, which could occur 
through implementation of subprojects that would involve (i) grasslands, cattle breeding, 
and agricultural production; (ii) rehabilitation of diary processing facilities; (iii) 
rehabilitation of roads and increase of traffic; (iv) visitor centers, tourism trails; and (v) 
potential increase of visitors.  The EIA study also provides recommendations on 
mitigation measures, as well as sets out eligibility criteria for subprojects.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Considering that the main environmental impact of the project will occur through the 
implementation of its subprojects realized by individual developers, the EIA procedure 
Page  8
required under the terms of Directive 97/11/EC amending Directive 85/337/EEC on 
assessment of the effects of certain public and private projects on the environment, which 
has been fully transposed into the Serbian legislation, will be one of the key measures 
securing the environmental soundness of the activities taking place within the project at a 
local level. The Directive sets out the guidelines for decision as to what types of projects 
require the EIA to be carried out.  
 
The EIA/EMP sets out a detailed procedure of the environmental monitoring, which 
involves four main steps, incl.(1) determination of the relevant environmental issues at 
project level; (2) evaluation and selection of specific subprojects, including (i) informal 
pre-project evaluation; (ii) modification of the subproject; (iii) formal evaluation and 
selection; (3) monitoring of the environmental impacts of the specific subprojects; and (4) 
monitoring of the overall environmental impacts of the entire project. The EIA/EMP 
provides guidelines on reporting.  
 
During the EIA/EMP process the current procedures for assessing the environmental 
impact of rural development measures funded by MAFWM and related agricultural 
services addressed under the loan have been reviewed and compared with WB 
requirements, and recommendation on how to fill any gaps provided. The proposed 
project envisages further strengthening of the Borrower's capacity for the safeguards 
relevant to the project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are state institutions, agricultural producers, farmers associations, 
local NGOs, agro-processors. During the project preparation a survey was conducted 
among rural households, a structured interview were done with various decision makers 
and numerous focus groups with the key stakeholders, namely agricultural producers and 
processors, representatives of farmers associations and local NGOs, local development 
institutions were held. One conclusion that came out from these focus groups is that 
farmers in general are lacking the representatives in order to better communicate with 
governmental and other institutions involved in rural development. The project will 
support the role of farmers' organizations, their horizontal and vertical structure in 
communicating farmers' needs to the other key stakeholders of agriculture and rural 
development.  
 
The project will ensure that reporting related to the safeguards is properly 
communicated to the public and is publicly available. During elaboration of the 
EIA/EMP the MAFWM consulted interested paries and NGOs about the project's 
environmental aspects. The hearing to introduce the project and present and discuss the 
EIA/EMP was held on April 27, 2007.  The same day the EIA/EMP was published on the 
MAFWM website.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Page  9
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/27/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/27/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/30/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  10
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Julian A. Lampietti 
05/07/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
05/07/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Julian A. Lampietti 
05/07/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
05/07/2007 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
05/07/2007 
Comments:  Seen and Cleared. 
