Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  
36911
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/26/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Serbia and Montenegro 
Project ID: P096823 
Project Name: Local Social Service Delivery 
Task Team Leader: Dena Ringold 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 4, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: February 20, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (34%);Health (33%);General education sector (33%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Decentralization (P);Social safety nets 
(P);Education for all (P);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
26.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project would (i) improve access to and quality of social services, ensuring continuous 
improvements in service delivery for better human development outcomes; and (ii) ensure 
effective management of social service delivery at the local level through enhanced coordination 
as well as improved policy and financial support from the central government.  
 
The project will contribute to Goal 3 of the 2004 CAS for Serbia and Montenegro which aims 
at: "Reducing poverty levels, and improving social protection and access to public services."  
 
Project development indicators to be monitored in this area will be consistent with the CAS 
outcomes of (i) improved coverage and targeting of social protection; and (ii) improved quality, 
access and financial sustainability of healthcare and education.  
 
Possible indicators for measuring project outputs and outcomes could include:  
 
-
Increased pre-school enrollment rates;  
 
-
Improved targeting of social assistance (% of poor households receiving MOP benefits);  
Page  2
-
Improved patient satisfaction with primary health care treatment, and improved quality 
and efficiency in primary health care.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project currently includes the following components which will be further defined during 
preparation.  
 
Component 1 - Policy Evaluation, Learning and Dissemination (estimated total US$9 million).  
 
This component would (i) identify information needs, develop systems, and build capacity to 
use information for policy making and service delivery across levels of government; (ii) support 
monitoring and evaluation of alternative approaches to decentralized service delivery and 
identify approaches for scaling these up into national policy; (iii) conduct targeted research and 
analysis on topics related to service delivery at the local level; (iv) and undertake 
communications and public information activities needed to disseminate information about 
changes in service delivery.  
 
Information Management. Increasing decentralization will require better information at all 
levels for policy making, planning, and budgeting of services, as well as for operating, managing 
and monitoring. Across education, health, and social welfare there is a need for better data and 
information systems to manage cross-cutting responsibilities.  
 
-
As a first step, a needs assessment of information data requirements at various levels of 
the system and an inventory of existing databases would identify sector-specific information 
management needs as well as areas where shared databases will be needed.  
 
-
Priorities for information management could include data for system planning to inform 
planning of networks of schools and health care facilities, and to guide decisions about further 
rationalization of services. This would serve as a base for municipalities to make their 
investment decisions to improve overall access to services and the quality of those services.  
 
-
Linkages between central and local data needs should be defined. In health, selected data 
needs to be provided to the HIF for analysis and payment adjustment and for eligibility 
verification, and to the municipality for capital and investment planning, and accountability.  
Linkages also need to be defined across local service providers to improve continuity of services 
within or between sectors, or facilitate access to required services.  
 
-
Management information systems are needed for on-going operation of services and 
programs. In social welfare a networked and integrated management information system is 
needed to for consolidating information on cash benefits and services. Better information will 
improve targeting to the poor and reduce administrative costs. Integration with other databases, 
including unemployment benefits, will also reduce errors of inclusion and exclusion.  
 
Monitoring and Evaluation. The project will have a strong focus on M&E, both to ensure the 
effectiveness of specific project investments, and to support evidence-based decision making and 
accountability. Because there are many options for the organization of service delivery at the 
local level, impact evaluation will be critical to assess what works and what does not, evaluate 
results, inform decisions on whether to expand, modify, or eliminate programs or policies, and 
provide accountability in the achievement of policy objectives. M&E will include:  
Page  3
-
Piloting and evaluating new approaches to service delivery. Increasing local involvement 
will require testing and evaluating new service delivery approaches and scaling-up successful 
approaches.  
 
-
Ensuring effective project monitoring. This component will also include the essential 
investments in staff training and information systems to ensure effective monitoring of project 
investments and outcomes and mainstream these approaches into the control systems of line 
ministries, local governments and service providers.  
 
Research and analysis. Decentralization entails risks to equity of access and quality across 
municipalities, as all LSGs may not have the same capacity to deliver services.  
 
-
The project can support targeted analysis of issues of equity and social inclusion to 
identify gaps in the system and policy options. For example, this could include survey analysis 
on primary school drop-outs and access to schools for disabled children, as well as satisfaction 
with service delivery across socio-economic group.  
 
Communications. Good quality and widely available information on new services, eligibility 
criteria, and delivery arrangements will be essential at all levels of the system for both 
beneficiaries and providers alike. The focus on evaluation for policy development will require 
strong information links to scale up lessons from the local level into policy. This can include:  
 
-
Communication between municipalities and clients to strengthen municipalities? 
understanding of client need and to assess the impact of changes in service delivery, with a focus 
on outcomes and citizen satisfaction, as well as to strengthen clients' understanding of 
municipality performance by supporting transparency and accountability in management and 
service delivery. In primary health care (PHC) centers this would build on the patient-centered 
PHC information systems that are currently under development and the school report cards in 
education.  
 
-
Communication between central and local government to ensure agreement on policy 
development and implementation, as well as to enable learning and dissemination of good 
practice.  
 
Component 2 - Developing the Financial Framework (estimated total US$1.5 million).  
 
The proposed Law on Local Self-Government Finance envisages significant innovations in the 
way that public funds are distributed. The project could help implement aspects of this Law once 
it is adopted through investments in technical assistance and training. Areas for support can 
include:  
 
-
Developing the system of grants from central to local governments, so that funds are 
allocated to municipalities in a transparent, rational and predictable way that is consistent with 
their new service delivery responsibilities.  This will be an essential feature of the delegation of 
more responsibilities to municipalities.  
 
-
Helping municipalities with budget preparation, planning and execution.  Municipalities 
will need to strengthen their ability to use the money they receive from various sources to 
improve the quality and efficiency of service delivery.  Local budget departments will need to 
work closely with the different sector departments to allocate resources effectively to service 
providers.   
Page  4
-
Strengthening incentives for service providers by moving to allocations based on 
capitation approaches (funding following the client).  This is also expected to lead to the 
rationalization of the network of providers in health and education.  
 
-
Mechanisms for tackling issues for inter-municipality collaboration, such as school 
transport, social exclusion, support for the unemployed will need to be strengthened.  
 
-
Supporting effective procurement and financial management processes in municipalities, 
so that the flow of funds is transparent and supports accountability, and increased resources are 
spent effectively and efficiently.  This includes contracting arrangements with NGOs.  
 
Component 3 - Improving Decision Making of Local Governments and Service Providers 
(estimated total US$4.5 million).  
 
Across sectors, central government and LSG staff and service providers will need knowledge 
and skills to make informed decisions in management, strategic planning and budgeting, service 
delivery, and monitoring and evaluation. Areas for support include:  
 
-
Specification of the new roles and responsibilities of municipal staff and service 
providers in the decentralizing system. For example, PHC and school directors need training in 
management and planning; school and health boards need support in the areas of governance and 
human resource management.  
 
-
Developing systems of accreditation, licensing and accountability to enable 
municipalities to monitor service delivery, to ensure compliance with procedures and standards, 
as well as accountability in management and service delivery. For example, municipalities need 
support in ensuring an transparent and fair appointment process for primary care directors, as 
well as in keeping managers accountable for their performance.  
 
-
On-going professional upgrading to ensure quality service delivery.  This might require 
the development of a network of training facilities and providers.  Managers in local 
governments and of service providers will need help in focusing their work and the work of their 
staff on outcomes and learning how to improve performance.  
 
-
Organizational arrangements can be developed and tested to identify new ways of 
organizing institutional arrangements and revised roles and responsibilities within municipalities 
and social service institutions.  
 
Component 4 - Innovations in Social Service Delivery (estimated total US$11 million).  
 
Decentralization provides a window of opportunity for LSGs and service providers to identify 
new approaches and models for delivering services. The MLESP's Social Innovation Fund (SIF) 
has already demonstrated the strong interest of LSGs and service providers in identifying new 
models. However, the SIF activities are currently limited by the competences of the MLESP (e.g. 
these activities are restricted to employment and social welfare provision and cannot involve 
education or health sectors). The project could build on the success of the SIF and expand it to 
cover multi-sector services:  
 
-
Alternative service delivery arrangements, such as small group homes and 
independent/supportive living units to move people out of social welfare institutions; 
collaborative approaches between health, social welfare, and education to ensure increasing 
access to quality pre-school or between social and medical services to provide rapid and 
coordinated intervention in urgent situations.  
 
-
An "innovation fund" to provide financial incentives for municipalities and service 
providers to develop new services for excluded groups, and to identify ways to spread good 
Page  5
practice throughout the country. This could potentially build on the existing SIF and expand its 
work into education and health. This fund could potentially be an instrument for targeting EU 
Structural Funds once they become available.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Countrywide/Municipalities   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower will develop and enforce an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) to mitigate 
risks associated with small scale civil works, including possibly on Physical Cultural Resources. 
Given the need for a comparative review of Republic of Serbia  and World Bank requirements 
for environmental assessment and EMP, respectively, the borrower will likely hire on a 
temporary basis an experienced local environmental assessment consultant for assistance with 
the preparation of the EMP and the public consultation process. The borrower will also hire on a 
part-time basis an environmental specialist consultant during project implementation to ensure 
that EMP guidelines are followed when civil works are identified and carried out. Adequate 
project resources will be allocated for this purpose.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Tijen Arin (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project would pose limited environmental risks associated with rehabilitation of existing 
social service facilities, including education and training centers, dare care centers and possibly 
primary health care facilities.  An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared 
covering the principal risks of small scale civil works; including dust and noise control, waste 
removal and disposal, site erosion, etc.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Since the location of the rehabilitated or new facilities may not be known at appraisal, the 
EMP would include an approach to carry out a reconnaissance-level site review of local 
environmental risks, including possible effects on Physical Cultural Resources. The PCR 
safeguard would be triggered if the facilities are ?listed building?, near such buildings, or located 
in a historic district. Provisions to ensure compliance with good PCR procedures (based on 
Serbian law) would be needed in the EMP.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  6
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/15/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Dena Ringold 
07/26/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
07/26/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gordon Betcherman 
07/26/2006 
Comments:  Approved. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
