Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2779 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/28/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Serbia 
Project ID: P096206 
Project Name: TRANSPORT REHABILITATION ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
Task Team Leader: Richard Martin Humphreys 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 13, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 14, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (90%);General transportation sector (10%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The provision of additional finance for the Transport Rehabilitation Project will: (i) enable the 
entire scope of activities planned under the original project to be completed, thereby 
substantively achieving the aims encapsulated by the existing Project Development Objective 
(PDO); (ii) allow for an amendment to the PDO to ensure a better fit with the proposed scope of 
activities in the project; and (iii) scale up project activities to extend the gains realized so far in 
the introduction of performance based maintenance in the two pilot regions, and road 
rehabilitation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Potential components for additional financing include: (i) enhancement of road maintenance and 
rehabilitation (including road maintenance contracts, road rehabilitation contracts and road 
supervision consulting services); and (ii) road (traffic) safety improvement (including works, 
goods, and essential consulting services). The components will be discussed with counterparts in 
Serbia and confirmed during project preparation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Country-wide, but within the right-of-way of existing roads.   
Page  2
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower will develop and enforce an Environmental Management Plan acceptable to the 
Bank to mitigate identified risks related to the civil works in the project and raise contractor 
awareness of environmental issues.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (EASTE) 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is proposed for a Category B classification because of its limited potential impact 
on the environment. The proposed additional financing will be used to fund the rehabilitation of 
additional roads, entirely within the right of way, and is expected to be entirely consistent with 
the current safeguards categorization of the TRP. This will be confirmed during project 
preparation, through an update of the social and environment assessment.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/02/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ISDS (appraisal stage) will be prepared and submitted to Infoshop.   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  3
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Richard Martin Humphreys 
03/23/2007 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/28/2007 
Comments:  The Task Team will confirm whether the existing EMP is adequate. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Henry G. R. Kerali 
03/23/2007 
Comments:  As this will be additional financing, the extent to which the Borrower has developed 
capacity for implementing safeguards policies should be noted. 
