Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/18/2006 
Report No.:  AC2219
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Serbia and Montenegro 
Project ID:  P096598 
Project Name:  Energy Community of South East Europe APL 3 - Montenegro Project 
Task Team Leader:  Husam Mohamed Beides 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 10, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
9.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.00
7.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed ECSEE APL 3 (Montenegro) project is in the third phase of the World 
Bank’s multi-phase ECSEE APL Program approved by the Board on January 27, 2005.  
 
The objective of ECSEE APL Program is the development of a functioning regional 
electricity market in South East Europe and its integration into the internal electricity 
market of the European Union, through the implementation of priority investments 
supporting electricity market and power system operations  
 
The objective of the ECSEE APL3 – Montenegro project is to improve the efficiency 
and reliability of the power system in Montenegro, through better supply security and 
closer integration into the regional markets.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have the following three components:  
 
Component 1 – Telecommunications System Development  
 
This component includes one sub-project for the development of a modern 
telecommunications network for EPCG, including telecommunications links with 
Page  2
regional utilities. The sub-project includes installation of the necessary communication 
equipment mainly using optical ground wires (OPGW) as the main communication links 
and using SDH and PDH technologies.  The new developed telecommunication network 
and regional links will include the installation of about 620 km of OPGW in existing high 
voltage transmission networks.  
 
Component 2 
–
Transmission Network Reinforcement  
 
This component includes the following two transmission reinforcement sub-projects:  
 
•
Reinforcement of the 110 kV connection of Andrijevica 110/35 kV substation. 
This sub-project includes the construction of an additional 2 km 110 kV transmission line 
circuit to reinforce the substation’s connection to the transmission network in order to 
comply with the “N-1” transmission planning criterion and to reduce in the duration and 
amount of energy interruptions of the load supplied by Andrijevica substation.  
 
•
Reinforcement of the 220 kV connection of Mojkovac 220/110/35 kV substation. 
This sub-project includes the construction of an additional 2.5 km 220 kV transmission 
line circuit to reinforce the substation's connection to the transmission network in order to 
strengthen the transfer capacity of the transmission system in the substation local area 
and to eliminate energy interruptions in the area due to transmission bottlenecks caused 
by outages during peak demand periods.  
 
Component 3 – Improvement of Operational Reliability of Perucica HPP  
 
This component includes the following two sub-projects:  
 
•
Replacement of the existing trash rack and trash rack cleaning machine installed 
at the bottom outlet of the Vrtac retention reservoir of Perucica HPP.  The exiting trash 
rack and cleaning machine at Vrtac outlet which have been in continuous operation since 
1960 will be replaced by a new track rack with a screen that is designed for urban type 
wastes and a new cleaning machine based on modern technology.  
 
•
Supply of spare turbine runners for units 1 to 5 in Perucica HPP where some 
runners have been in use for over 35 years with more than 150,000 hours (assumed useful 
life of the runners) of operation and have been showing signs of damage.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Component 1 – Telecommunications System Development  
 
The development of the telecommunications backbone network sub-project entails the 
installation of optical ground wires in existing high voltage transmission lines located in 
different parts of the country. New control and telecommunications equipment will also 
be installed at the substations or power plants to which the transmission lines are 
connected.  
Page  3
Component 2 
–
Transmission Network Reinforcement  
 
Andrijevica substation is located in the northeast area near the major population centers 
of Andrijevica, Gusinje and Plav.  
 
Mojkovac substation is also located in the northeast area about one kilometer from the 
city of Mojkovac.  
 
The route of the two transmission connections will highly likely follow existing right-
of-way and may use the existing tower footprints.  If new right-of-ways will be required 
for the construction of the new connections, the right-of-ways will not cross any officially 
designated forest areas or officially designated or known natural habitats.  
 
Component 3 – Improvement of Operational Reliability of Perucica HPP  
 
HPP Perucica is located in the center of the western part of Montenegro.  The trash rack 
is located at the plant bottom inlet. The old trash rack and cleaning machine will be 
disposed of at a nearby steel smelter. The work involved in this sub-project will not have 
any impacts on existing dams or their safety. The plant follows regular inspection and 
maintenance procedures, required by country regulations, to ensure the integrity of the 
dam structures. The plant operation procedures include operation safety procedures and 
an emergency response plan.  
 
The spare runners will be stored in the plant power house and will be installed when 
needed to replace failed runners.  
 
The World Bank environmental specialist worked closely with the technical staff of 
EPCG to assist them in the completion of the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) 
documents for the project components. EPCG demonstrated a very good understanding of 
the environmental issues and appropriate approaches for both environmental mitigation 
and monitoring. It is clear that EPCG staff have more than sufficient capacity to properly 
implement the EMPs for each of the subcomponents described above.  
 
Similarly, the World Bank social safeguards specialist worked with EPCG staff to 
prepare a draft land acquisition policy framework which is acceptable to the Bank. EPCG 
land acquisition staff members are experienced and fully capable of managing the land 
acquisition effectively to meet both local and Bank standards.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
Mr Bernard Baratz (ECSIE) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is rated Category B. EMPs are required for the construction of the new 
connection lines between the main transmission lines and the two substations at 
Andrijevica and Mojkovac. Also, an EMP is required for the new trash rack and cleaning 
machine. These EMPs have been prepared by EPCG and reviewed by Bank Staff.  
 
A
land acquisition policy framework (LAPF) is needed for possible acquisition of land 
for tower bases for the short tie lines between the substations and the main transmission 
lines. This LAPF has been prepared by EPCG and reviewed by Bank Staff.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no potential large scale significant or irreversible impacts associated with the 
project. All environmental issues are easily mitigated through good engineering 
construction practices and design to internationally accepted standards.  
 
The project will improve the long term reliability of the Montenegrin Power System in 
general by improving communications within the system and with other regional systems 
and by improving the operating reliability of the two substations and the Perucica 
Hydropower Plant.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
EPCG prepared the EMPs for the project. These were reviewed by Bank Staff. EPCG 
demonstrated a very good understanding of the environmental issues and appropriate 
approaches for both environmental mitigation and monitoring.  
Page  5
EPCG prepared the LAPF for the project which was also reviewed by Bank Staff and 
disclosed on the EPCG website. EPCG land acquisition staff members are experienced 
and judged fully capable of managing the land acquisition effectively to meet both local 
and Bank standards.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The only component that effects the population directly is the additional tie lines between 
the two substations and the transmission lines. The EMPs for these have been prepared 
and translated into the local language. They have been disclosed on the EPCG website.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/29/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/31/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/03/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/30/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/31/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/03/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The EMP for the trash rack is not expected to be disclosed since both the new and old 
rack are entirely within the site of the hydropower plant and the population is not affected 
except to receive more reliable service.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
Yes 
Page  6
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Husam Mohamed Beides 
04/10/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bernard Baratz 
04/10/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody 
04/11/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Rita E. Cestti 
04/12/2006 
Comments:  I cleared this on behalf of Hoffer. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
04/12/2006 
Comments:   
