Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2586 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/20/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Serbia 
Project ID: P096592 
Project Name: SERBIAN RAILWAY REFORM PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Richard Martin Humphreys 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: December 14, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Railways (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regional integration 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
75.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project Development Objective is to reduce the generalized cost of railway 
transportation on Corridor X for both passengers and freight, thereby contributing to improved 
operational and financial performance, whilst also supporting the continuing implementation of 
the reform process defined in the new railways law.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project cost and components. The project is envisioned as an   Adaptable Program Loan (APL)on 
standard IBRD terms, implemented in two phases, with a size of the first phase provisionally 
estimated at US$75million. This project will focus on the rehabilitation of the infrastructure on 
Corridor X, which forms the backbone of the railway network, in terms of both traffic and 
revenue.  The proposed components include the rehabilitation of the section on Corridor X with 
temporary speed restrictions, procurement of track maintenance equipment, reconstruction and 
modernization of selected sections of the corridor, upgrade of the management information 
system and some technical assistance.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  2
The project will be located entirely within the Country of Serbia, with all potential major civil 
works taking place entirely within right-of way of the existing rail lines.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The capacity of the borrower to prepare the appropriate documentations, monitor and manage 
any safeguard issues is limited. Currently  CIP prepares all of the environmental documentation 
for ZS. The Bank has recommended the establishment of a small environmental unit within ZS. 
The issue of strengthening ZS environmental management capacity will be pursued further by 
the team.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (EASTE) 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will involve civil works, in the form of rehabilitation and/or upgrading on 
Corridor X - the main north-south line on the network.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/04/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  3
The project is currently assessed as Category B project, subject to confirmation by the World 
Banks internal project review. If classification is confirmed, an Environmental Management 
Plan (EMP)acceptable to the World Bank and consistent with any environmental assessment 
requirements of the Government of Serbia would be discussed the Borrower and launched 
after the Pre-appraisal mission planned for June 2007, and completed before the scheduled 
appraisal mission in October 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Richard Martin Humphreys 
03/05/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/06/2007 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards pending confirmation of applicable policies by QER 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
03/06/2007 
Comments:   
