Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/16/2007 
Report No.:  AC2881
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Serbia 
Project ID:  P092999 
Project Name:  BOR REG DEVT 
Task Team Leader:  Alexander Pankov 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 20, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 14, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSPF 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Mining and other extractive (40%);Other social services (30%);Micro- and SME 
finance (20%);General industry and trade sector (10%) 
Theme:  State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (P);Small and medium 
enterprise support (P);Environmental policies and institutions (P);Social safety nets 
(P);Macroeconomic management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
32.34 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to support the Government of Serbia's (GoS) 
efforts to revive the depressed Bor region through: (i) dealing with urgent environmental 
and social legacy issues arising from mining sector restructuring, and (ii) fostering new 
sources of economic growth and job creation in the region.  
 
Key performance indicators are as follows:  
 
-
management of state environmental liabilities in a technically sound manner;  
 
-
progress in remediation of environmental trouble spots;  
 
-
number of beneficiaries from various employment and training incentives schemes, 
and placement of beneficiaries in jobs;  
 
number of loans, amount disbursed, and loan repayment rates in micro-finance program;  
 
-
number of jobs created/supported by the project.  
Page  2
The project contributes to all three overarching development goals identified in the 
current CAS: (i) creating a smaller, more sustainable, and more efficient public sector; 
(ii) creating a larger, more dynamic private sector; and (iii) reducing poverty levels and 
improving social protection and access to social services.  It supports the first goal by 
helping the GoS resolve one of the country's largest socially-owned enterprises that has 
been consistently undermining fiscal discipline.  The project furthers the second goal 
through promoting private-sector based recovery of the regional economy.  Finally, the 
project provides considerable support for employment creation, aiming at alleviating 
poverty in the region.  
 
The project is fully consistent with the GoS? structural reform agenda, supported by the 
Bank through a series of development policy loans.  On a broader scale, the drastic 
reduction in mining sector subsidies, mitigation of environmental hazards, and general 
socio-economic regeneration of the Bor region, supported under the project, are essential 
for Serbia?s EU accession aspirations.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project consists of the following components:  
 
A. 
Environmental Management and Remediation Component will support the 
following:  
 
-
strengthening the capacity of the GoS to manage the past environmental liabilities 
remaining the responsibility of the state following the privatization of RTB Bor assets;  
 
-
strengthening the capacity of the GoS to monitor the compliance of the new owner of 
RTB Bor mining and smelting assets with Serbian environmental norms; and,  
 
-
remediation of the most pressing environmental problems remaining within state 
responsibility, as identified by the recent Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA).  
 
A.1. 
 Management of Environmental Liabilities  
 
In the course of the recent tender for the core (production) assets of RTB Bor, the GoS 
physically separated the area clearly associated with past environmental liabilities from 
the subject of privatization by excluding it from the license area offered to the private 
investor.  These facilities, all located in the municipality of Bor, remain under direct 
control and responsibility of the state and include two old tailings ponds, and a number of 
waste disposal sites.   The objective of this sub-component is to provide TA to the GoS in 
the monitoring and the management of the area with past environmental liabilities. In 
particular, the sub-component will assist the qualified local entity in managing liabilities 
on behalf of the state, including the supervision of the design, construction, and 
maintenance of remediation works financed under the Project.  
 
Page  3
In parallel, assistance will be provided to the GoS and authorized local bodies to 
monitor the environmental performance of the new owner of RTB Bor core assets and 
enforce his compliance with the Serbian environmental legislation. The proposed 
activities will include a comprehensive program in the Bor and Majdanpek mining areas 
to monitor tailing dams stability and the level of soil, river sediment, and groundwater 
pollution. The monitoring activities will complement and strengthen the existing work of 
authorized local bodies in water and air (quality and emissions) monitoring.  
 
A.2. 
Remediation of urgent environmental hazards  
 
This sub-component will assist the GoS in mitigating the urgent environmental hazards 
that remain under the responsibility of the state following the privatization of RTB Bor. 
In particular, financial resources will be provided for: (i) the design, construction and 
maintenance contract to undertake the closure and remediation of  two tailing disposal 
facilities(TDFs) at Bor; and (ii) containment measures to reduce wastewater discharge 
from waste disposal sites (mine overburden material, municipal solid waste and other 
waste).  
 
The most important elements of the tailings ponds remediation work include: (i) dam 
stability and stabilization works; (ii) water management (storm water, decanting water, 
seepage water, leakages, and silt wash run off); (iii) tailings pond closure and partial re-
vegetation; and (iv) post-construction monitoring and maintenance.  Special attention will 
be given to the large TDF at Veliki Krivelj mine that requires the rehabilitation/rerouting 
of the river bypass (collector) currently located underneath the tailings pond.  
 
B. 
Socio-Economic Regeneration Component is designed to serve two mutually 
reinforcing goals:  
 
support the improved labor redeployment programs and employment services aimed at 
RTB Bor redundant workers and unemployed population of the Bor region; and,  
 
promote the development of the private sector in the region.  
 
B.1. 
Labor Redeployment and Employment Support  
 
This sub-component will support, through provision of consultants, training and goods, 
a
labor redeployment program and improved employment services targeting both the 
workers displaced by the decline in mining activities and the general population in the 
region. Specifically, the sub-component will include the following activities, to address 
structural unemployment and lack of demand for labor:  
 
(i) job search assistance programs, including vocational and social counseling; provision 
of labor market information; aptitude/interest assessments; job club programs; conducting 
vacancy and job fairs; and strengthening labor exchange and placement services;  
 
(ii) off-the-job education and training services, including short-term vocational courses 
for unskilled and semiskilled workers; short-term technical courses for more skilled 
Page  4
workers in high-demanded fields of study (e.g., computer training, language training, 
accounting, environmental monitoring, and remediation); and short-term upgrading of 
current skills;  
 
(iii) on-the-job training services (employer incentive scheme), covering the costs of 
classroom training and/or apprenticeship in order to provide financial incentives to 
employers in the region to expand their businesses through the retraining and the hiring 
of unemployed workers;  
 
(iv) temporary employment programs (public works) to assist local communities with 
environmental cleanup, refurbishment of public infrastructure, provision of assistance 
and support to social agencies (e.g., schools, retirement homes, clinics); and,  
 
(v) strengthening the institutional capacity of the regional branches of the National 
Employment Service through provision of training, equipment, and technical advice.  
 
Programs will be primarily demand-driven. This means they should be based, to the 
extent possible, on pro-active requests from unemployed workers and employers and 
matched against the current market needs. The contracts with service providers will be 
performance-based, meaning that the final payment will be in the form of a bonus 
conditional on the achievement of negotiated job placement rates.  Qualified service 
providers will be recruited to develop appropriate public information strategy and 
dissemination materials.  
 
Particular attention will be given to providing adequate redeployment services to 
women and youth. The gender-based activities will include specialized training and 
technical assistance to local women?s groups, to assist them in developing leadership, 
advocacy and management skills, and to promote business clusters and home-based 
entrepreneurial activities. The youth population will benefit from the virtual enterprise 
training and other specifically designed training programs tailored to their needs.  
Outreach measures will be included to raise awareness among youth regarding the 
various training and counseling programs financed under the project.  
 
B.2. 
Private Sector Development  
 
This sub-component aims at fostering private sector based sources of economic growth 
and employment creation in the region in order to compensate for the relative decline of 
the mining industry.  Specifically, the following activities are envisioned:  
 
(i) 
provision of business development services ? consulting and training -  to 
individuals and new enterprises to facilitate successful business establishment and 
sustainable growth;  
 
(ii) 
assistance to local communities with establishing and operating business 
incubation facilities (managed workspace centers) for small firms and individual 
entrepreneurs; and,  
Page  5
(iii) 
line(s) of credit to qualified microfinance institutions (MFIs) to improve the 
access to finance of firms and entrepreneurs operating in the region.  
 
The proposed advisory services and training will equip entrepreneurs with business 
skills and knowledge critical for different stages of enterprise development, including 
business planning, bookkeeping, financial management, marketing and sales skills, as 
well as knowledge of regulatory requirements. Technical assistance to local business 
development services providers will enhance their capacity to meet the evolving needs of 
local entrepreneurs and SMEs.  
 
The proposed support for business incubators will assist local stakeholders in 
establishment and efficient operation of incubation facilities in Bor and Majdanpek. 
Business incubators will complement business development services by providing 
working space, shared office support services, and office equipment to newly established 
enterprises.  The project will also address capacity building needs of incubators? 
management.  
 
The line(s) of credit will provide financing, largely in the form of working capital loans 
and small equipment loans, to existing private micro, small and medium enterprises in the 
region.   This program will be administered by one or two qualified financial 
intermediaries with a track record of successful microfinance lending operations in other 
parts of Serbia.  
 
Project Implementation and Evaluation Component will support the following activities:  
 
(i) 
Project Management Unit.  The project will finance the salaries and operational 
costs of a qualified Project Management Unit (PMU) established at the Privatization 
Agency (PA).  
 
(ii) 
Impact Monitoring and Evaluation.   Third-party assessments will be undertaken 
at a mid-term and at the end of the project, focusing on the gross outcome of activities 
supported under the Socio-Economic Regeneration component.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Bor region (Borski okrug) located in eastern Serbia.  Physical remediation works in 
Component A will focus on the area associated with environmental liabilities arising 
from the past operations of the copper mining and processing complex of RTB Bor. This 
area, located in the municipality of Bor, has been carved out from the license boundaries 
of the recently privatized core (productive) assets of RTB Bor, and remains under direct 
control and management by the Government.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Frank Van Woerden (ECSSD) 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (ECSSD) 
 
Page  6
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is expected to result in substantial improvement in the environmental 
situation in the Bor region.  These improvements will be achieved both through the actual 
remediation of some of the most pressing environmental legacy issues, including the old 
tailings ponds, and through improvements in the capacity of local and central authorized 
bodies to manage environmental liabilities.  The project would also help the GoS monitor 
the progress made by the private operator of RTB Bor assets in bringing the smelter 
complex and mining facilities into compliance with Serbian environmental norms, in 
accordance with the schedule agreed in the privatization contract.  In a broader sense, this 
can be considered as a pilot project for responsible management of past environmental 
liabilities in Serbia, which would provide hands-on experience in monitoring, mitigation 
and remediation of environmental legacy of past mining operations.  
 
In line with the World Bank's OP 4.01, the project has been assigned an environmental 
assessment category 'A'.  The Government of Serbia has contracted a qualified consulting 
team to undertake a comprehensive Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) under terms 
acceptable to the Bank. The EIA covered all existing facilities and operations of RTB Bor 
copper mining and processing complex, and included an assessment of environmental 
damages from past operations, determining the environmental issues and the required 
clean-up measures. A draft EIA report, including an Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP), was completed in June 2006 and underwent several rounds of public consultation 
at the local and national level.  The final version of the EIA was published by the World 
Bank InfoShop in January 2007, and made available publicly in the country.  
 
The requirements triggered by the Bank's Safety on Dams safeguard policies (OP/BP 
4.37) are observed through the input of international dam safety experts in the core team 
of the Consultant that is preparing the feasibility study and conceptual design for the 
remediation of the two existing tailings ponds' dams.  The Ministry of Science and 
Environment will review the Consultant's work on behalf of the GoS. During project 
implementation, specialists in the engineering team to prepare the detailed design and the 
Page  7
review by the Ministry of Science and Environment will put in place the required 
safeguards to deal with dam safety issues in the remediation of these existing tailings 
ponds.  
 
The remediation of tailings ponds triggers the International Waterways safeguards 
policy (OP7.50). All environmental trouble spots affected by the project are located in 
water streams that are part of the Danube catchment area. The project will reduce risks of 
tailings dams collapse and mitigate wastewater discharges into these water streams. For 
this reason, the project team has received an exemption from the requirement to notify 
riparian states.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Project has long been conditional on the successful resolution of core (production) 
assets of RTB Bor through their sale to a strategic investor, in an environmentally and 
socially responsible manner.  Consistent with the Bank's recommendations, the 
privatization agreement signed between the GoS and Romania's Cuprom in March 2007 
includes a minimum investment program aimed at meeting Serbian environmental 
standards by the end of the four year period following the purchase of assets.  Most 
importantly, the privatization contract includes a time-bound compliance schedule aiming 
at the gradual reduction in sulphur dioxide emissions in the course of the four year 
period.  The initial, notable improvements will be achieved through improvements in the 
existing operations, while the full compliance is expected through introduction of new, 
environmentally friendly smelting technology by the investor.  Besides the cash penalties 
for exceeding the pollution levels as negotiated in the compliance schedule, the 
enforcement mechanisms for non-compliance include the forfeiture of a very large 
performance bond, revoking of operating license, and cancellation of the Sale-Purchase 
Agreement.  
 
The social impact of privatization has been mitigated by the substantial severance 
package provided by the GoS for recent lay-offs (all voluntary), as well as by the 
investor's social program (part of the privatization contract) agreed with the trade unions, 
which stipulates minimum retention term for pre-defined number of workers and 
generous compensation terms for involuntary future redundancies.  In the longer run, 
positive social effect of privatization will be felt, as the badly needed investments help 
reverse the decline of the mining industry and generate new jobs.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
One major alternative would be to de-link the Bank project from the resolution of core 
assets of RTB Bor. Despite the strong local opposition to privatization, the team has 
rejected this option at the concept review stage, as it would not have provided a long-term 
solution to the problems of the region.  While the Bank could have addressed some of the 
environmental hazards early on, the continued existence of RTB Bor as a heavily 
subsidized socially-owned holding would perpetuate the environmental pollution and 
deepen the relative decline of the region.  Global experience with mono-industrial regions 
Page  8
has demonstrated that it is impossible to reverse the decline without addressing the 
problems of the core industry first and foremost.  To this end, the Bank project was made 
conditional on the successful restructuring and privatization of RTB Bor, which should 
correct the historic misallocation of production assets and labor in the region.  
 
The opposite approach would be for the Bank to insist on the immediate closure of 
mining and processing operations due to their detrimental effect on the environment and 
public health.  While this option was briefly considered by the team following the initial 
result of the feasibility study, it was rejected in view of the negative implications of 
liquidating one of the country's largest employers for social stability and political 
economy in the region and Serbia as a whole.  Very importantly, the team recognized 
early on, that given the abundant natural resource endowment of the Bor region, mining 
activities should remain one of the mainstays of the regional economy.  Therefore, the 
Bank has supported the Government's efforts to attract a reputable strategic investor 
capable of developing the region's rich mining reserves in an environmentally and 
socially sound manner.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Primary responsibility for Safeguard Policies will lie with the Ministry of Science and 
Environment (MOSE).  MOSE has been actively involved in the preparation and 
dissemination of EIA, including EMP.  On the ground, the compliance with Safeguard 
Policies will be ensured by the Local Implementation Unit formed from the qualified 
staff of RTB Bor mining complex.   The Project will provide continued support, through 
consulting services, goods and training, for strengthening the existing institutional 
capacity, both at the local and national level, to implement the planned activities in 
accordance with the applicable recommendations of EMP.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Participatory approach was followed in preparation of EIA, with regular public 
consultations at both the local and national level. The results of the EIA and the EMP 
were presented in public hearings on June 20 and 21, 2006 in the Bor region, and covered 
in the national and local media. An additional public presentation of the final report was 
held in Belgrade on October 12, 2006. All consultations were held in Serbian language.  
 
The final Serbian version of EIA report is available to the public on the website of 
Serbian Privatization Agency (http://www.pa-serbia.co.yu/).   The English version was 
disclosed on the World Bank's Infoshop website.  
 
The project concept as a whole has been discussed with affected local groups/NGOs in 
the Bor region in a series of public consultation/roundtables organized throughout the 
past two years by the Bank jointly with the Government of Serbia and RTB Bor. The 
package of employment support programs has attracted special attention in view of the 
high unemployment levels that are expected to increase in the short term as a result of 
RTB Bor restructuring and privatization.   
Page  9
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/15/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/12/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/01/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
02/26/2007  
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
No 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Page  10
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alexander Pankov 
04/12/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Frank Van Woerden 
04/12/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari 
04/13/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
04/16/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gerardo M. Corrochano 
04/12/2007 
Comments:   
