Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2316 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/30/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sierra Leone 
Project ID: P096105 
Project Name: Rural Development and Private Sector Development 
Task Team Leader: Gayatri Acharya 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: February 6, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTS4 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural marketing and trade (50%);General industry and trade sector (50%) 
Theme: Small and medium enterprise support (P);Other urban development (P);Rural 
markets (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
28.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00
2.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The higher-level objective of the project is to contribute to the objectives of the CAS Strategic 
Priority 2 of sustained growth in agriculture with increased competitiveness in export and higher 
value crops; increased employment and increased rice and palm oil production.  The proposed 
project objectives are to raise rural incomes through improved agricultural exports and farm 
revenues for project beneficiaries.  
 
The key outcome indicators would be as follows: (i) Increased volume of supported agricultural 
exports by 40%; (ii) a 50% increase in incomes of supported producers and traders.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would be a sector investment loan (SIL) for a period of 5 years.  The 
amount being considered is $28 million and would include three components (financing is 
indicative only):  
 
Component A: Improving Domestic Marketing (7 million)  
Page  2
This component aims at improving domestic distribution channels for crop and livestock 
products to improve the ability of farmers to market their goods in Freetown and other large 
domestic markets. Positive and visible developments in improving domestic marketing are 
expected to provide major incentives to producers for increased production. This component 
comprises three subcomponents: (i) Domestic supply chains consolidation for specific crops and 
products; (ii) Rural Market Infrastructure improvement (to address critical infrastructure needs 
for select products); (iii) Knowledge management and technical assistance to improve access to 
market information and identification of opportunities.  
 
The component will develop or support business models in key supply chains for the domestic 
and regional markets and help design appropriate strategies for the establishment and 
management of market facilities and support market information systems. It would provide 
grants to local communities and market associations (women???s associations, petty traders??? 
associations) to contract with private entrepreneurs to develop enterprises particularly in the 
fields of agro-processing.  It would also provide matching grants to selected rural and urban 
SMEs investing in transport and storage of agricultural products and inputs.  The commodities 
(including potentially fisheries and livestock) supported under this component will be 
determined based on the results of the DTIS and field work.  
 
Component B: Agricultural export promotion (12.5 million)   This component will provide the 
necessary tools and services for promoting agricultural exports of traditional and non-traditional 
products such as cocoa, cashew, oil palm, cassava and possibly ginger.  The component will 
support a pilot export promotion initiative for these commodities identified as promising for 
export by the DTIS. Target beneficiaries include agricultural producers, agricultural exporters 
and other private enterprises.  It would support four main activities: (1) the upgrading and 
creation of market and export infrastructure to provide facilities where produce is transacted, 
assembled, processed, and prepared for shipment; (2) technical assistance for product 
development and adaptation, proactive marketing and compliance with quality and phytosanitary 
standards and (3) a market information system to provide producers and exporters with 
information on market opportunities and increase their bargaining power.  The component would 
provide technical assistance, training, operational support, and matching grants to implement 
these activities.  In an effort to ensure transparency and fairness in the process, the matching 
grants will be administered through a public-private partnership and an operational manual will 
be developed to guide the decisions.  
 
Component C:  Improved Agricultural Technology and Services  
 
(4.5 million) - aims at increasing farmer access to improved agricultural technology and 
practices to support the production and processing of commodities supported in Components A 
and B.  It targets rural producers and public and private providers of agricultural services.  It 
would support (1) the demonstration and introduction of improved technologies (e.g., improved 
crop varieties, processing technologies (such as rice hullers), irrigation techniques for off-season 
production, crop diversification, etc; (2) the creation of legally-registered farmer organizations, 
agribusinesses, marketing entities, and other rural businesses, (3) public and private rural 
advisory services, decentralized to the district level; and (4) studies in strategic areas 
(rehabilitation of agricultural research, export promotion, etc.) to initiate future programs.  
Page  3
The project would provide technical assistance, training, operational support, and matching 
grants to implement these activities. Matching grants would support the initial acquisition of 
improved plant materials, investment in innovative small-scale irrigation infrastructure and 
investments in private seed farming. The operational support would be directed through 
decentralized public services providing demonstration and advisory services, either through 
public or private service provision.  
 
Component D: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation  
 
(4 million) would finance the project management function. The project would be advised by an 
inter-ministerial steering committee with representation by the Ministry of Agriculture, the 
Ministry of Trade and Industry and the Ministry of Local Government.  The project would be 
coordinated by an implementation unit composed of executive level civil servants within the 
Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Trade and Industry. The implementation unit would 
also be responsible for monitoring and evaluation.    
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be implemented country-wide.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Sierra Leone National Commission for Environment and Forestry (NACEF) is the lead agency 
with te responsibility of setting environmental standards (water and air quality, noise levels etc) 
and enforcing compliance.  As structured, NACEF is composed of the former divisions of the 
Environment and Forestry, which were hived off the Ministries of Land and Country Planning 
and Agriculture and Food Security.  Staff and responsibilities of the old Divisions were moved to 
the NaCEF.  Besides is regulatory functions, NaCEF has the mandate for advising sector 
Ministries on policies and programs related to environmental protection.  
 
Sierra Leone has developed national policies and legal frameworks on environment as well as 
guidelines and procedures.  The NaCEF has a number of collaborators including state agencies 
like the National Commission for Social Action which provide assistance to the NaCEF in the 
discharge of its duties.  Existing capacities appear to be sufficient to develop and monitor 
implementation of social and environmental safeguard plans and remediation measures. Some 
capacity and experience have been built through the development and implementation of donor 
supported projects in health, education, energy, social fund and biodiversity conservation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour (AFTS4) 
Ms Pia Peeters (AFTS2) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project reveals that WB safeguard policies on environmental assessment and pest 
management will be triggered.  Components B and C reinforce this conclusion.  The 
implementation of key interventions under the project specifically a)upgrading and creation of 
market infrastructure and b) demonstration and introduction of improved and new technologies 
into agricultural production may result in adverse social and environmen
tal impacts.  While the 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
focus of the activities will be on land already under cultivation, risks may include increased agro-
chemical use, upsurge of pest incidence, pollution of air and water, contamination of soils etc. 
Therefore, project design and formulation will cover the preparation of an ESMF with a 
mitigation plan which is costed and time bound.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
No impact is expected but environmental assessment to determine if this is triggered   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
No impact is expected but environmental assessment to determine if this is triggered   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The project reveals that WB safeguard policies on environmental assessment and pest 
management will be triggered.  Components B and C reinforce this conclusion.  The 
implementation of key interventions under the project specifically a)upgrading and creation of 
market infrastructure and b) demonstration and introduction of improved and new technologies 
into agricultural production may result in adverse social and environmental impacts.  While the 
focus of the activities will be on land already under cultivation, risks may include increased agro-
chemical use, upsurge of pest incidence, pollution of air and water, contamination of soils etc. 
Therefore, project design and formulation will cover the preparation of an ESMF with a 
mitigation plan which is costed and time bound.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
No impact is expected but social assessment will determine if this safeguard is triggered.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Project preparation will determine whether land will need to be set aside for the location of 
critical infrastructure. If such activities will take place and land aquisition is likely then rules for 
the siting of the infrastructure and a resettlement framework will need to be developed.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
No major social risks are foreseen. Currently, it has been concluded that the safeguards of 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) and Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) are not triggered. 
However, Component A: Improving Domestic Marketing includes rural market infrastructure 
improvement. Currently the types of infrastructure improvement have not been identified yet. In 
case these infrastructure improvements would include feeder/rural roads, an Environmental and 
Social Policy Framework will be prepared as appropriate, building upon the experience of  the 
GoSL from the Infrastructure Development Project, for which an Environmental and Social 
Policy Framework and a Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared.  
 
Although no major social risks are foreseen, during project preparation (including social 
assessment), the team will pay special attention to avoid supporting only traditional elites in 
Sierra Leone (especially related to Component B: Agricultural export promotion) and endevour 
to include different vulnerable groups such as women associations and youth.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
Page  5
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/06/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The SMU has accepted responsibility for safeguards preparation for this project.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Gayatri Acharya 
05/22/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/25/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mary A. Barton-Dock 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
