Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1849 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/02/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sierra Leone 
Project ID: P094307 
Project Name: Sierra Leone Wildlife Protection and Biodiversity Conservation 
Task Team Leader: Edward Felix Dwumfour 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 17, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: August 14, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTS4 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00
2.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) will be to improve capacity development among all 
stakeholder groups for a sustainable protected area (PA) system management, wildlife resources 
protection and conservation of biological diversity within SL for an accelerated socio-economic 
development, expansion of environment-benign and -supportive employment opportunities and 
improvement of livelihoods of rural communities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Strengthening Institutional, Legislative and Policy Framework for Wildlife 
Protection and Biodiversity Conservation  
 
Support will be provided to develop capacities of and strengthen the enabling environment for 
Government agencies led by the Forestry Division of Minister of Agriculture, Forestry & Food 
Security (MAFFS) and other line Ministries to prepare, pass, and enforce strong environmental 
policies and laws and test innovative approaches, and in particular Conservation Concessions. 
Collaborative frameworks will be established (if necessary) or strengthened and energized (if 
already existing) to ensure synergies and operational efficiencies within and between agencies 
Page  2
(public and private) that are responsible for environmental protection and conservation in the 
country.  A key outcome from implementing these interventions should lead to the establishment 
of an effective legal protection status for the selected ecological (biodiversity) sites and 
development and implementation of collaborative resource management frameworks (and plans).  
 
Component 2: Capacity Development and Awareness Raising at National and Local Levels  
 
Government agencies and national NGOs will be provided with the tools and information to 
take conservation action at high biodiversity sites.  Activities will focus on raising awareness and 
increasing national know-how and improving capacities to manage high-biodiversity sites 
(Protected Areas and non-Protected Areas) in ways that improve productivity while protecting 
biodiversity. This will include strengthened scientific and technical standing, improved tools for 
monitoring, advocacy and direct site conservation action, and improving data and information 
reliability, retrieval, accessibility and distribution through development of a geo-referenced 
biodiversity information management system, appropriate knowledge and experience through 
regional and global information networks.  Institutional and operational structures of key 
institutions will be reviewed and strengthened, e.g. Forest Division, Wildlife Conservation 
Branch, and Environmental  Protection Division. Actions proposed under the ‘Cross-sectoral 
Action Plan’ in the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) will be reviewed 
and implemented where appropriate.  At the local level, the project will broaden and strengthen 
local constituencies for conservation e.g. through the formation, development and strengthening 
of interest groups and site support groups (SSGs).   Strategies will be designed and implemented 
to empower local communities to participate in the management and monitoring of high 
biodiversity sites (PAs and non-PAs).  This component will focus on promoting and enhancing 
greater involvement of civil society at project sites through effective engagement strategies to be 
developed during the project planning stages.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented country-wide but activities will be location-specific mainly in 
the following protected area systems:  
 
((i) Gola Forest Reserve: It is the only extensive patch of lowland tropical rainforest remaining 
in Sierra Leone and is situated in the southeast, between the Moa River and the Liberian border. 
It is a remnant of the swathe of Upper Guinea Forest Ecosystem that once stretched from 
Freetown to Western Ghana. It is inhabited by more than 222 species of birds, 178 species of 
trees and 46 species of larger mammals have been observed here as well as small mammals and 
bats, insects and plants, amphibians and reptiles). Ten years ago, eight bird species and ten 
mammal species were considered to be threatened by global extinction (this number may have 
changed since then to include more species). A huge colony of the bare-headed rockfowl 
(Picthartes gymnocephalus) also exists in the Gola Forest.  
 
(ii) Tiwai Island Wildlife Sanctuary: The Tiwai Island, situated 45 miles south of the city of Bo, 
is a mixture of old secondary forest and regenerated farm bush. The sanctuary is host to more 
than 150 species of trees, 120 species of bird as well as an abundance and diversity of primate, 
including chimpanzees.  
 
(iii) Loma Mountains Non-Hunting Reserve: The mountain massif in the northeast covers 330 
sq km and includes the peak called Bintumani which is the highest mountain in West Africa west 
of Mount Cameroon. The reserve is characterized by forests and savanna covered mountains 
which are interspersed by gallery forests along the river banks. Leopard, bush cow, and primates 
Page  3
are being observed here, as well as the rare pygmy hippo in the Bafin and Bagbe rivers. 245 
species of birds have been recorded, including the rare and endangered rufus fishing owl.  
 
(iv) Outamba- Kilimi National Park: The Outamba-Kilimi is the only protected area in Sierra 
Leone with national park status. It is situated in the northwest corner, along the Guinea border. 
Outamba is characterized by the mountain with the same name, the three rivers named Kabba, 
Mongo and Lolo which create corridors of gallery forests, interspersed by swamps and closed 
forests and savanna woodland. More than 260 species of birds have been observed as well as 
elephants, waterbuck, wart hogs, Aardvark and genets. The pygmy hippo inhabits the Kabba 
River. The Kilimi section consists of open woodlands and short grass vegetation which attracts 
more savanna species such as the Kori bustard and baboons.  
 
(v) Mamunta-Mayosa Wildlife Sanctuary: This is a small sanctuary, 20 square km, which 
mainly consists of Lake Roneita and the surrounding swamps and other small lakes. Besides 
being an important stop over for migratory bird species on their route to and from Europe and 
Africa, this wetland area is very important for many species of waterfowl and the endangered 
short-nose crocodile and a huge number of wetland snails. The threat from advancing farmers is 
eminent.  
 
(vi) Kangari Hills Forest Reserve: The forest reserve at Kangari Hills is home to an important 
wildlife community, including forest- and savanna-dependent birds, chimpanzees and elephants 
and it protects the watersheds of many rivers (e.g. Pampana River to the northeast and the Moa 
River to the southwest), supplying towns and villages in central Sierra Leone. A recent survey 
identified 115 species of bird, representing 34 families and including three globally threatened 
species 
–
the white-necked rockfowl, the black-faced rufous warbler and the green-tailed 
bristlebill. Threatened primate species that occur here include the Western Chimpanzee, red 
colobus monkey, black-and-white Colobus monkey and the Diana monkey. Other threatened 
mammals are the leopard, water chevrotain, black duiker (NT), Maxwell duiker, the forest 
elephant and the forest buffalo. Forest destruction and land degradation have been attributed to 
slash-and-burn farming, gold mining and logging, especially for building poles.  
 
(vii) Yawri Bay: The Yawri Bay’s rich tidal mudflats and mangroves are home to tens of 
thousands of birds for a third of the year.  The Yawri Bay is a shallow coastal wetland with a 
9,100 ha expanse of intertidal mudflats that extends along 60 km of foreshore. The mudflats are 
backed primarily by mangrove swamp interlaced with a network of creeks stretching to 24,505 
ha. It accounts for 14.  3% of the total mangrove swamp in Sierra Leone. Three rivers, Ribbi, 
Bumpe, and Kagboro, each with its own estuary, flow into the Yawri Bay. 46 species of 
palaearctic migrant birds including the avocet, the lesser-crested tern, the water dikkop, and the 
near-threatened damara tern are known to occur in the bay. An African Waterfowl Census 
(1994), covering about 60% of the bay, recorded 15,070 waterbirds.  
 
The Yawri Bay’s ecological diversity is under pressure from its local fishing industry and the 
mangroves have suffered from cutting for fish smoking and slash-and-burn farming. In spite of 
this, the bay also has great potential for ecotourism.  
 
Page  4
(viii) Western Area Reserve and Guma Valley Trail: This reserve was established almost 100 
years ago in order to protect the remaining forests of the peninsula, which had been heavily 
exploited for the ship-building industry. The reserve status also protects the catchments of the 
Guma Valley reservoir for Freetown's water supply. It is also home to an endemic frog 
(Cardioglossi aurcoli) as well as the bare-headed rockfowl (Picthartes gymnocephalus). The 
Western Area Reserve provides for panoramic views and spectacular scenery. Furthermore, the 
Western Area Reserve is home to the Tacugama Chimpanzee Sanctuary (TCS) which is the last 
resort to 73 chimpanzees who were formerly held captive as pets in Freetown and elsewhere and 
who can never return to the wild.  The TCS plays a very important role in sensitizing and 
educating the public about wildlife and primates in particular, and is visited by a high number of 
school classes every week.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Sierra Leone's Environment Division of the Ministry of Land, Housing, Country Planning and 
Environment is the country's agency charged with the regulation of the environment through 
setting environmental standards (e.g., water and air quality) and enforcing compliance or due 
diligence. In addition, it has the institutional mandate for advising the sector Ministry on policies 
related to environmental protection. Sierra Leone has developed environmental impact 
procedures and guidelines, which is being operationalized.  The Environment Division has a 
number of collaborators including other state agencies like the National Commission for Social 
Action (NaCSA), Forest Division, Wildlife Branch that assist the Environment Division in the 
performance of its function. In Freetown and in the provinces the ED works with and through 
civil society organizations, principally non-governmental bodies (both local and foreign) and 
community-
based organizations. Generally, the Division’s work is hampered by failure of the 
central government to provide at all times and in the needed quantities and qualities resources 
such as financial, material and human. NaCSA has built capacity during the implementation of 
the National Social Action Project. Also, experience from the preparation and implementation of 
projects in health, education, hydo-electric power generation, social fund will be placed at the 
availability of project designers. There are firms and individuals in SL with great experience in 
developing and monitoring implementation of safeguard plans and remediation measures.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter (AFTS1) 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This safeguard policy will be triggered as the selected ecological sites identified as those 
needing urgent attention and to provide baseline data on biophysical,political, economic, social 
and institutional indicators realted to the selected sites to enable the consideration of effective 
interventions and mechanisms for achieving project objectives. The borrower will prepare an 
Environmental Assessment for the selected sites.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Recognizing the dearth of data and information on SL's protected areay systems, wildlife 
resources and biodiversity it is suggested that a comprehensive assessment of
the major 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
ecological systems and biological diversity be done.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
This policy is triggered because the selected sites under the project needs to improve 
management effectiveness of high-biodiversity areas through policy, legislative and institutional 
reforms, establishment of long-term PA financing facility, the use of increased capacity and 
skills, site-based partenerships between Govt. agencies, civil society (NGOs), the private sector 
and the local communities.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
This safeguard policy will be re-visited during project appraisal.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project activities will be implemented in locations which are to various degrees protected 
areas. It is therefore likely to expect that the access to natural resources by local communities 
will be restricted and limited. Therefore, according to OP 4.12, a Process Framework will be 
prepared, approved and disclosed before appraisal. The Process Framework establishes the 
process for how to involve potentially affected communities in planning and implementation of 
the project while at the same time it identifies how affected communities will be assisted in 
restoring their livelihood. During planning and implementation of the project, the final 
resettlement action plan (s), which should be reviewed and approved of by the Bank and 
thereafter disclosed, can, while taking into account all the requirements of OP 4.12, be very 
flexible depending on the scenario.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/15/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities. Safeguard reporting 
instruments plan will be disclosed prior to appraisal. An Environmental Assessment (EA), a 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
Resettlement Action Plan in case the people are resettled and a Process Framework will be 
done if people lose access to traditional natural resources or other resources.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour 
01/31/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
01/31/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mary A. Barton-Dock 
01/31/2006 
Comments:   
