Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2538 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/14/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sierra Leone 
Project ID: P099357 
Project Name: Sierra Leone:  Mineral Sector Technical Assistance Project 
Task Team Leader: Michael C. Stanley 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 25, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: September 25, 2007 
Managing Unit: COCPO 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Mining and other extractive (100%) 
Theme: Administrative and civil service reform (P);Regulation and competition policy 
(P);Participation and civic engagement (P);Decentralization (P);Environmental policies 
and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
1.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The principal development objective of the project would be to accelerate sustainable 
development of extractive industries through strengthening the policy, fiscal and regulatory 
framework and thereafter to attract investments for continued sector growth.  
 
The project is expected to yield the following outcomes: (i) increased payments receipts from 
the extractive industries to the government; (ii) mitigation of poor licensing practices through 
non-discretionary administration of all mineral rights nation-wide; (iii) improved understanding 
of the extractive industry by the public through increased transparency of transactions and 
improved sector governance and regulatory enforcement; and (iv) building capacity in 
enforcement of environmental and social compliance.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project Components.  The project is expected to be financed through IDA Grant of US$6 million 
equivalent.  The project will focus on:  
Page  2
A. 
Increasing of Sector Revenues through (a) improved fiscal regime and improved 
regulatory enforcement of payments from small and large-scale mining; (b) establishing a 
framework and appropriate regulations for auctioning (tender) of appropriate mineral assets; and 
(c) strengthening assessment and collection of royalty payments.  
 
B. 
Strengthening of Mineral Rights Regime by building on the PGRGG policy trigger 
relating to mineral licensing.   The project will (a) strengthen and build technical capacity of an 
independent cadastre office to international standards; and (b) improve monitoring and 
enforcement of health and safety regulations, and enforcement of environmental and social 
compliance.  
 
C. 
Improving Mineral Sector Governance through (a) institutional reform and capacity 
building of key agencies and their staff; (b) formulation and implementation of a comprehensive 
national mineral policy based on the guiding principles defined within the Core Mineral Policy, 
(c) developing new regulations for operation of the minerals sector in line with international 
practices; and (d) support of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative to introduce 
transparent monitoring and reporting of sector revenues.  
 
D. 
Mining Sector Development through (a) follow-on work based on findings of the 
Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA, to be completed in April 2007) relating 
to communities and small-scale mining; and (b) mineral sector promotion through the 
establishment of a mineral resource information center in Freetown.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nationwide   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
While the institutional capacity of the Recipient is considered weak at this stage, the project will 
assist building up the capacity needed for adequate implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas (AFTS1) 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost (AFTS4) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This is a technical assistance project which will not support physical works; the project 
Category B is confirmed.  The project is expected to have positive impact on environmental and 
social aspects, as it will focus on regulatory framework and transparency measures.  In 
environmental and social areas, it will build on findings and recommendations of the Strategic 
Social and Environmental Assessment (SESA) of mining sector which is expected to be finalized 
by April 2007 - prior to project appraisal. Prior to appraisal, the Government will also issue a 
sector policy letter for the project confirming conclusions of SESA and endorsing its 
recommendations.  A decree on Environmental Impact Assessments for mining projects 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
(including consultation and disclosure procedure) will be adopted prior to the project 
effectiveness.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Indirectly, the project is expected to result in increase in mining activities in Sierra Leone, 
which in its turn may result in involuntary resettlements. To mitigate this risk, an Involuntary 
Resettlement Framework will be prepared by the Government prior to project appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/20/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1. A letter of sector policy in regards to the environmental safeguards will be signed by the 
Government prior to appraisal (building on the recommendations of the Strategic 
Environmental and Social Assessment for Mining Sector to be completed in April 2007) and 
both documents will be disclosed in the country and in the Bank?s InfoShop.  
 
2.
The Involuntary Resettlement Framework will be prepared prior to appraisal and 
disclosed in the country and in the Bank?s InfoShop.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael C. Stanley 
03/12/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/12/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter A. van der Veen 
03/12/2007 
Comments:   
