Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/11/2007 
Report No.:  AC2911
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sierra Leone 
Project ID:  P103740 
Project Name:  Health Sector Reconstruction and Development Project - Additional 
Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Evelyn Awittor 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 4, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTH2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Other communicable diseases (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall development objective is to assist the country to: i) restore the essential 
functions of its health care delivery system; and ii) strengthen both public and private 
health sector capacities, so as to improve the efficiency and responsivness of the health 
sector to the needs of the population. The project will also achieve more specific 
objectives of:  
 
(a) Increasing access to affordable essential health services by improving primary and 
first referral health facilities in four districts of the country.  
 
(b) Improving the performance of key technical programs responsible for coping with 
the country's major public health problems  
 
(c) Strengthening health sector management capacity to improve efficiency and further 
decentralize desicion-making to the districts.  
 
(d) Support development of the private NGO health sector and involvement of civil 
society in decision-making.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
This is an additional financing to be used to support the ongoing Health Sector 
Reconstruction and Development Project. Project restructuring is also being proposed 
following an MTR in 2006 through changes to some key performance indicators.  
 
Component 1:  Restoring Essential Health Services.  
 
The proposed Additional Financing would help fund the costs associated with: (a) the 
implementaton of additional and expanded activities that scale up the project's impact and 
development effectiveness; and (b) the completion of original project activities due to 
cost overrun of civil works.  The provision of essential services by health posts and health 
centers is important, as it is helping the most populous communities and chiefdoms in the 
four districts to solve the majority of health needs, and is increasing the relevance and 
efficiency at the first referral level.  The hospitals (all first referral hospitals) are also very 
important since they deliver essential surgical care and other higher level of care that are 
not delivered by the health centers.  It is, therefore, at this level that complicated 
pregnancies and emergency cases receive obstetrical and surgical assistance.  Amputees, 
women and children with psychological trauma could receive prosthetic and 
psychological support (the other alternative being to refer the patients to the tertiary 
hospitals in Freetown).  
 
The additional financing will fund:  
 
(a)  civil works and some equipment, furniture, training and supervision needed for the 
adequate functioning of the health facilities that are being rehabilitated and reconstructed 
under the HSRDP.  This component will not imply any resettlement of the population.  
 
(b) In the four participating districts and in some cases nationwide the additional 
financing will support the delivery of essential preventive and curative care, thus being 
able to contribute to the improvement and expansion of all major public health programs.  
The additional financing will support activities related to Onchocerciasis control.  
Onchocerciasis is a major threat to Sierra Leone and its neighbors since the war disrupted 
all activities that were being supported by the regional control program. The project will 
focus on: (i) strengthening case management and on the promotion and distribution of 
ivermectin once a year with support of community distributors; (ii) community 
sensitization and mobilization; (iii) training of nurses and Primary Health Unit staff as 
well as training for Community-Directed Distribution of Ivermectin (CDD); and (iv) 
monitoring, supervision, data collection and analysis.  
 
c)  Avian Influenza has become a worldwide emergency of public health interest that 
needs to be addressed by every country.  The additional financing will support (i) the 
training of health workers to be able to detect and manage the disease; (ii) the 
establishment of surveillance centres; and (iii) equipping laboratories in the health 
facilities to assist with diagnosis.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening Pulic and Private Sector Capacity.  
 
The project will achieve this through (i) fostering decentralization and improving the 
performance of District Health Management Teams; (ii)  strengthening the key MoHS 
support programs in the area of human resources development, planning, financial 
management, monitoring and statistics, procurement and donor/NGO coordination; and 
Page  3
(iii) promoting development of the private sector and participation of civil society in the 
health sector. The additional financing will not cover activities under component 2.  
 
Project Restructuring.  
 
While the project is performing satisfactorily, the Governemnt has requested several 
project changes for the following reasons:  
 
(a) Redeploy resources - The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria 
recently committed additional funds to support the Government's malaria program, which 
means that the IDA funding originally allocated to malaria can be redeployed to other 
high priority uses in the health sector.  
 
(b) Revise the outcome indicators in the results framework - The original outcome 
indicators in the project results framework were very general, overly numerous for 
strategic management for results, and not consistent with the sector-wide indicators 
recently developed by the MoHS for monitoring its activities. The Government is 
therefore proposing to make them more specific, mesurable and outcome-based.  
 
The ongoing project is implementing the Medical Waste Management Plan dated 
October 2002 in a satisfactory manner. The Ministry has established a National Waste 
Management Program within its Environmental Health Division with a program 
manager. Burn pits have been designed and distributed to all government health facilities 
nationwide and they are working well. The dump sites and the incinerators in the district 
hopsitals are not among the civil works that face cost overruns. However, incinerators for 
some of the primary health clinics are included.  
 
In-country disclosure of an Updated EIA/EMP took place on April 10, 2007.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The additional financing will support on-going activities implemented under the main 
project (Project Number: P1074128) in four districts of the country and also Oncho and 
Avian Influenza control activities throughout Sierra Leone.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour (AFTS4) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The potential negative impact of the additional financing is site-specific and this may 
relate to the on-goign civil works. The completion of the on-going civil works will be 
carried out in the selected project areas without any design adjustments that could trigger 
any adverse environmentalk and social impacts. The World Bank Safeguard Policy on 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) will not be triggered because the proposed 
onchocerciasis and avian control activities will not require any land acquisition, 
relocation or displacement of people; there will be no loss of assets or access to assets, 
loss of income sources or means of livelihood.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The activities to be funded directly under the support for avian influenza prevention and 
control will not generate waste. However, in case of an outbreak waste will be generated 
in the form of laboratory waste, dead birds, infective materials and farm waste. The 
potential negative environmental impacts of these wastes include polution of land, water 
resources and the air, if sufficient care is not taken with disposal related issues.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not relevant   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In 2001-2002 the Borrower prepared an Environmental Assessment (including an EMP) 
and a Medical Waste Management Plan which were disclosed both in-country and in the 
World Bank's Infoshop. These are being implemented. These two reports have been 
updated in April 2007 to reflect activities under the additional financing support and they 
will be implemented as soon as the support becomes effective.   
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Ministries of Lands, Housing and Country Planning, Agriculture and Food Security, 
Health and Sanitation, National Commission on Environment and Forestry, paramount 
chiefs, elders, general public and local NGOS in the four beneficiary districts and other 
parts of the country, respective district health management teams, program managers of 
technical programs and  regional environment and forestry officers.  
 
During the preparation of the updated documents the consultants held discussions with 
the various groups of people and discussions were held, where applicable, in local 
languages. The GoSL has disclosed the updated reports in two widely read local 
newspapers and has placed copies in offices of the Ministry of Health and Sanitation in 
Freetown and the selected districts. Any further comments from the general public will be 
submitted as supplementary latest by April 30, 2007.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/10/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/11/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
Yes 
Page  6
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Evelyn Awittor 
04/10/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour 
04/10/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
03/15/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
03/15/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
04/11/2007 
Comments:   
