Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2753 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/27/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sierra Leone 
Project ID: P103740 
Project Name: Health Sector Reconstruction and Development Project - Additional 
Financing 
Task Team Leader: Evelyn Awittor 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 20, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTH2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Other communicable diseases (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The projecct overall development objective is to assist the country to: i)  restore the essential 
functions of its health care delivery system; and ii) strengthen both public and private health 
sector capacities, so as to improve the efficiency and responsiveness of the health sector to the 
needs of the population.  The project will also help achieve more specific objectives of:  
 
(a)  Increasing access to affordable essential health services by improving primary and first 
referral health facilities in four districts of the country.  
 
(b)  Improving the performance of key technical programs responsible for coping with the 
country's major or public health problems.   
 
(c)  Strengthening health sector management capacity to improve effeciency and further 
decentralize decision-making to the districts.  
 
(d)  Supporting development of the private NGO health sector and involvement of the civil 
society in decision-making.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
This is an additional financing to be used to support the ongoing Health Sector Reconstruction 
and Development Project. Project restructuring is also being proposed following an MTR in 
2006 through changes to some key performance indicators.  
 
Component 1:  Restoring Essential Health Services.  
 
The proposed Additional Financing would help fund the costs associated with: (a) the 
implementaiton of additional and expanded activities that scale up the project's impact and 
development effectiveness; and (b) the completion of original project activities due to cost 
overrun of civil works.  The provision of essential services by health posts and health centers is 
important, as it is helping the most populous communities and chiefdoms in the four districts to 
solve the majority of health needs, and is increasing the relevance and efficiency at the first 
referral level.  The hospitals (all first referral hospitals) are also very important since they deliver 
essential surgical care and other higher level of care that are not delivered by the health centers.  
It is, therefore, at this level that complicated pregnancies and emergency cases receive obstetrical 
and surgical assistance.  Amputees, women and children with psychological trauma could 
receive prosthetic and psychological support (the other alternative being to refer the patients to 
the tertiary hospitals in Freetown).  
 
The additional financing will fund:  
 
(a)  civil works and some equipment, furniture, training and supervision needed for the 
adequate functioning of the health facilities that are being rehabilitated and reconstructed under 
the HSRDP.  This component will not imply any resettlement of the population.  
 
(b) in the four participating districts and in some cases nationwide the additional financing will 
support the delivery of essential preventive and curative care, thus being able to contribute to the 
improvement and expansion of all major public health programs.  The additional financing will 
support activities related to Onchocerciasis control.  Onchocerciasis is a major threat to Sierra 
Leone and its neighbors since the war disrupted all activities that are being supported by the 
regional control program. The project will focus on: (i) strengthening of case management and 
on the promotion and distribution of ivermectin once a year with support of community 
distributors; (ii) community sensitization and mobilization; (iii) training of nurses and Primary 
Health Unit staff as well as training for Community-Directed Distribution of Ivermectin (CDD); 
and (iv) monitoring, supervision, data collection and analysis.  
 
c)  Avian Influenza has become a worldwide emergency of public health interest that needs to 
be addressed by every country.  The additional financing will support (i) the training of health 
workers to be able to detect and manage the disease; (ii) the establishment of surveillance 
centres; and (iii) equipping laboratories in the health facilities to assist with diagnosis.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening Pulic and Private Sector Capacity through.  
 
The project will achieve this through (i) fostering decentralization and improving the 
performance of District Health Management Teams; (ii)  strengthening the key MoHS support 
programs in the area of human resources development, planning, financial management, 
monitoring and statistics, procurement and donor/NGO coordination; and (iii) promoting 
development of the private sector and participation of civil society in the health sector. The 
additional financing will not cover activities under component 2.  
 
Project Restructuring.  
Page  3
While the project is performing satisfactorily, the Governemnt has requested several project 
changes for the following reasons:  
 
(a) Redeploy resources - The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria recently 
committed additional funds to support the Government's malaria program, which means that the 
IDA funding originally allocated to malaria can be redeployed to other high priority uses in the 
health sector.  
 
(b) Revise the outcome indicators in the results framework - The original outcome indicators in 
the project results framework were very general, overly numerous for strategic management for 
results, and not consistent with the sector-wide indicators recently developed by the MoHS for 
monitoring its activities. The Government is therefore proposing to make them more specific, 
mesurable and outcome-based.  
 
The ongoing project is implementing the Medical Waste Management Plan dated October 2002 
in a satisfactory manner. The Ministry has established a National Waste Management program 
within its environmental Health Division with a program manager. Burn pits have been designed 
and distributed to all government health facilities nationwide and they are working well. The 
dump sites and the incinerators in the district hopsitals are not among the civil works that face 
cost overruns. However, incinerators for some of the primary health clinics are included.  
 
In-country disclosure will take place by March 29, 2007.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The additional financing will support on-going activities implemented under the main project 
(Project Number: P1074128) in four districts of the country and also Oncho and Avian Influenza 
control activities throughout Sierra Leone.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Overall Safeguard compliance has been rated unsatisfactory in the last two ISRs due to delayed 
implementation of the  Environmental Management Plan (EMP)during the initial years of project 
implementation. The Ministry has made progress on it and is in the process of carrying out site-
specific environmental impact assessment of proposed dump-sites.  Additionally, an officer has 
been appointed in the Ministry of Health and Sanitation, following the MTR, to oversee 
implementation of critical safeguard actions.  
 
Regarding the country's capacity, Sierra Leone's newly established National Commission for 
Environment and Forestry (NaCEF) is the country's agency charged with the regulation of the 
environment through setting environmental standards (e.g., water and air quality) and enforcing 
compliance or due diligence. NaCEF was created in October 2005 and is composed of the former 
Environment Division of the Ministry of Land Planning and Housing (MLPH) and the Forestry 
Division of the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (MAFS). NaCEF therefore assumed 
mandates that were hitherto in the domain of MLPH and MAFS, combining responsibility for the 
regulation, development and management of the environment and natural resources (inlcuding 
forestry, wildlife) as well as advising sector Ministries and sub-national administrative structures 
on how to mainstream environmental concerns into sector policies, programs, projects and 
initiatives. Sierra Leone has developed national safeguard policies in the form of procedures and 
guidelines for conducting environmental impact assessments (EIAs), which have been made 
Page  4
mandatory. The Environment Division of NaCEF itself has a thin staff but has a number of 
collaborators including other state agencies such as the National Commission for Social Action 
(NaCSA), the Forestry Division of NaCEF, Wildlife Branch that assist the Environment Division 
in the execution of its mandates and functions.In Freetown and in the provinces the NaCEF 
works with and through the sub-regional/provincial entities, civil society organizations, 
principally non-governmental bodies (both local and foreign) and community-based 
organizations. Indeed, NaCEF's work is hampered by lack of human resources in sufficient 
quantities, however the main constraint is the failure of the central government to provide the 
needed quantities of financial and material resources. NaCSA has a wealth of experience in 
promoting public environmental awareness and education. It has also built capacity during the 
implementation of the National Social Action Project. Sierra Leone has gained experience from 
the preparation and implementation of various Bank-financed projects in health, education, 
hydo-electric power generation, social fund, transport, etc and this will be placed at the 
availability of project designers. There also is good number of consultancy firms and individual 
experts in SL with great experience in doing environmental and social assessments and preparing 
and monitoring implementation of safeguard plans and remediation measures.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour (AFTS4) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The original project did not include provisions for the control and prevention of 
onchocerciasis and avian influenza, but these will be addressed through an updated EMP, 
including a description of the activities to be funded by the additional financing.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/04/2007 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
The Ministry of Health and Sanitation prepared and Environmental Management Plan 
before the on-going project started implementation.  The MoHS has subsequently been 
implementing the EMP.  For the purpose of the additional financing the Ministry has started 
the process of updating these documents to be disclosed in-country and at the World Bank 
Infoshop. The SMU has agreed to accept trasfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Evelyn Awittor 
03/23/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/26/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
03/27/2007 
Comments:  The team will need to carefully monitor the implementation of the activities listed above. 
BTOR will have to reflect that. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
