Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/19/2007 
Report No.:  AC2544
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sierra Leone 
Project ID:  P096105 
Project Name:  Rural and Private Sector Development 
Task Team Leader:  Gayatri Acharya 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 27, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTS4 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural marketing and trade (50%);General industry and trade sector (50%) 
Theme:  Small and medium enterprise support (P);Other urban development (P);Rural 
markets (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
28.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00
2.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project objectives are to raise rural incomes through improved agricultural 
exports and farm revenues for project beneficiaries.  
 
The key outcome indicators would be as follows: (i) Increased volume of supported 
agricultural exports by 40%; (ii) a 50% increase in incomes of supported producers and 
traders.  Baselines will be established during project preparation. The higher-level 
objective of the project is to contribute to the objectives of the CAS Strategic Priority 2 of 
sustained growth in agriculture with increased competitiveness in export and higher value 
crops; increased employment and increased rice and palm oil production.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have four components with an indicative outlay of US$28 million:  
 
Component A: Improving Domestic Marketing (7 million).  
 
This component aims at improving domestic distribution channels for crop and livestock 
products (rice and cassava, fruits and vegetables and livestock under a pilot initiative) to 
improve the ability of farmers to market their goods in Freetown and other large domestic 
Page  2
markets. Positive and visible developments in improving domestic marketing are 
expected to provide major incentives to producers for increased production. It will also 
assist consumers with availability of commodities at competitive prices. This component 
comprises three subcomponents:  
 
(a). 
Domestic supply chain consolidation for specific crops and products;  
 
(b). 
Rural Market Infrastructure improvement to address critical infrastructure needs 
for select products; expected to fill gaps and not substitute for support under other on-
going projects);  
 
(c). 
Knowledge management and technical assistance to improve access to market 
information and identification of opportunities.  
 
The component will develop or support business models in key supply chains for the 
domestic and regional markets and help design appropriate strategies for the 
establishment and management of market facilities, and support market information 
systems. It would provide grants to local communities and market associations (market 
women associations, petty traders? associations) to contract with private entrepreneurs to 
develop enterprises particularly in the fields of agro-processing. It would also provide 
matching grants to selected rural and urban SMEs investing in transport and storage of 
agricultural products and inputs.  
 
Component B: Agricultural export promotion (7.5 million).  
 
This component will provide the necessary tools and services for promoting agricultural 
exports of traditional and non-traditional products namely cocoa, cashew, oil palm, 
cassava and ginger (fisheries if possible).  
 
The component will support a pilot export promotion initiative for these commodities 
identified as promising for export by the DTIS. Target beneficiaries include agricultural 
producers, agricultural exporters and other private enterprises in the value chain. The 
promotion initiative would support four main activities: (1) upgrading and creation of 
market and export infrastructure to provide facilities where produce is transacted, 
assembled, processed, and prepared for shipment;  (2) technical assistance for product 
development and adaptation, proactive marketing and compliance with quality and 
phytosanitary standards and  (3) a market information system to provide producers and 
exporters with information on market opportunities and increase their bargaining power.   
 
The component would provide technical assistance, training, operational support, and 
matching grants to implement these activities. In an effort to ensure transparency and 
fairness in the process, the matching grants will be administered through a public-private 
partnership and an operational manual will be developed to guide the decisions.  
 
Component C: Improved Agricultural Technology and Services (9.5 million).  
 
Page  3
This component aims at increasing farmer access to improved agricultural technology 
and practices to support quality improvement and processing of commodities supported 
under Components A and B. It will target rural producers and public and private 
providers of agricultural services and will support the following activities:  
 
1. 
demonstration and introduction of improved technologies e.g., improved crop 
varieties, processing technologies (such as rice hullers), irrigation techniques for off-
season production, crop diversification, etc;  
 
2. 
assistance in the creation/strengthening of legally registered farmer organizations 
and their unions, agribusinesses, marketing entities, and other rural businesses;  
 
3. 
public and private rural advisory services, decentralized to the district level; and  
 
4. 
studies in strategic areas (rehabilitation of agricultural research, export promotion, 
etc.) to initiate future programs.  
 
The project would provide technical assistance, training, operational support, and 
matching grants to implement these activities. Matching grants would support the initial 
acquisition of improved plant materials, investment in innovative small-scale irrigation 
infrastructure, investments in private seed farming and in small and medium agro-
processing. The operational support would be directed through decentralized public 
services providing demonstration and advisory services, either through public or private 
service provision or a combination of the two.  
 
Component D: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (4 million).  
 
The component would finance the project management function. The project would be 
advised by an inter-ministerial steering committee with representation by the Ministry of 
Agriculture, the Ministry of Trade and Industry and the Ministry of Local Government. 
The project would be coordinated by an implementation unit (PIU) with specialists such 
as finance and accounting, procurement, monitoring and evaluation and technical 
operations support who will be competitively recruited.  These specialists will work 
closely with the Ministries systems and will provide support to strengthen Ministry 
systems over time. The Project Coordinator will also be competitively recruited. He will 
chair meetings of the Project Technical Committee (PTC) carrying representation of key 
implementers for day to day management and coordination of the multi-agency project 
operations and resolving emerging technical issues. Technical assistance to advice the 
project management team on best practices in supply chain development and 
management can be provided under this component.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be implemented country-wide.   
 
Page  4
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Pia Peeters (AFTS2) 
Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour (AFTS4) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Farmer's use of fertilizer in Sierra Leone is the lowest in Sub Sahara Africa. Seeds and 
planting materials are also used with relative infrequency relative to the rest of Africa. 
The project components will include activities which will have a positive impact on the 
environment and will also include mitigation measures for potential adverse impacts. 
Through an environmental and social study to be carried out by consultants, the following 
documentation will be prepared:  
 
1. Environment and Social Management Framework for road links and other major 
marketing  infrastructure, as required;  
 
2.
Resettlement Policy Framework for road links; and  
 
3.
Guidelines for disposal of waste and effluents from processing of produce.  
 
A
small amount of resettlement may be involved where the project by itself supports 
new infrastructure such as a key road link, not covered by other donors/GoSL. For this, 
the above-mentioned resettlement policy framework will be developed to guide the re-
location of rural households who may need to be re-settled.  
 
Interventions in the marketing infrastructure and systems as well as establishment of a 
good market information system will help lower transaction costs and increase farmer 
margins. Interventions for improving quality of the produce and production will also help 
the farmers by increased production of quality yielding more income than before. Women 
should benefit but the project will also monitor this impact to ensure that this group is 
being included. Impacts of each project intervention will be evaluated in terms of the 
Environment and Social Study recommendations and appropriate safeguard policies will 
be applied.   
Page  5
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
NA.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The PCU will be appropriately strengthened and its operation officers trained to ensure 
systematic monitoring of environmental and social issues; and to assist consultants and 
contractors seeking guidance. Under cooperation arrangements to be established, the 
environmental unit in the Transport Ministry, which has developed capacity to act as a 
resource center for environmental and socially related functions, will provide the 
necessary back up to the PCU. Similarly, HIV/AIDS management team of the Transport 
Ministry could provide the PCU necessary back up and advice for sensitizing the 
stakeholders. Cooperation arrangements will be finalized during project preparation and 
appraisal.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders and their institutions that the project intends to strengthen, and the 
systems that it would help establish to facilitate their operations, are overwhelmingly in 
the private sector. These include farmers, traders, processors and exporters and support 
services e.g. transporters, financial intermediaries. Farmers are grouped into Farmer 
based organizations (FBO) while most markets have trader associations. The ESIA and 
the process framework will be sent to project partner, involved institutions, key 
stakeholders, strategic information center. They will also be disclosed at the Infoshop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/07/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/15/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/15/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/07/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/15/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/15/2007 
 
Page  6
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
In addition to the current level of disclosure, a consultative workshop will be held on the 
24th of January in Freetown.  The document will be discussed and further revised 
subsequently.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
No 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Gayatri Acharya 
01/15/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour 
01/15/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Pia Peeters 
01/15/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mary A. Barton-Dock 
01/18/2007 
Comments:   
