Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/17/2007 
Report No.:  AC2998
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Solomon Islands 
Project ID:  P089297 
Project Name:  Rural Development Program 
Task Team Leader:  Marianne Grosclaude 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 6, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: August 30, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASRE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (50%);General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (35%);General public administration sector (15%) 
Theme:  Other public sector governance (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural 
policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
3.20 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.89 
 
AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development 6.61 
 Local 
Communities 
1.08 
 
EC: European Commission 
10.06
18.64 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the proposed Rural Development Program (RDP) is to 
raise the living standards of rural households by establishing improved mechanisms for 
the delivery of priority economic and social infrastructure and services by the public and 
the private sector.  This would be achieved through (a) increased, cost-effective and 
sustained provision of local services and basic infrastructure determined through 
participatory planning and prioritized by the villages themselves, (b) increased capacity 
of agriculture institutions to provide demand-driven farm services at local level, and, (c) 
support for rural business development.   
 
3. Project Description 
The RDP includes four components: (i) local infrastructure and service delivery; (ii) 
improved agricultural services; (iii) rural business development; and, (v) program 
management.  
Page  2
Component 1: Local Infrastructure and Services Delivery (base cost US$ 9.08 million).  
The specific objective of this component would be to increase access to and use of 
infrastructure and services in rural areas through participatory planning, budgeting and 
implementation mechanisms at community and provincial level.  The component would 
provide (i) annual allocations to the provinces for community development grants 
identified through a participatory planning process and in each province (ii) capacity-
building to key stakeholders to plan, budget, implement and monitor and cultivate sub-
projects.  
 
Component 2: Improved agriculture services (base cost US$ 6.42 million). The specific 
objective of this component would be to improve access of smallholder households to 
quality agricultural services to support rural income growth.  The strategy is to build 
long-term the capacity of service providers including Ministry of Agriculture and 
Livestock (MAL), and where there are active NGOs, churches, Rural Training Centers 
(RTCs) and the private sector to respond to the demand identified in the villages, and to 
establish a mechanism for sustainable  financing of these services.  The component would 
provide (i) annual agricultural service allocations to provincial level to finance service 
agreements (contracts and MOUs) with providers to deliver agriculture and related 
services to smallholders; and (ii) capacity building of: (a) MAL at the national level to 
facilitate and supervise provincial service delivery; (b) provincial service providers; and 
(c) rural households.  
 
Component 3: Rural Business Development (base cost US$2.37 million).  The specific 
objective of this component is to facilitate rural enterprise development through provision 
of an equity financing facility and associated training and technical assistance. This 
component would contribute to the broader initiatives promoted by Government to 
expand access to finance and to stimulate private sector investment in rural areas.  A 
US$2 million “Supplemental Equity Facility” aiming at alleviating a shortage of project 
equity for investment projects of Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) involved in rural 
business will be established under this component. A grant of US$2,000 to US$50,000 
would be offered to such SMEs in conjunction with a loan approval from a participating 
commercial bank. Equal amounts of owner’s equity and supplemental equity from the 
Supplemental Equity Facility (SEF) would be linked to a bank loan covering at least 60 
percent of project costs. The resulting financial plan for the investment project would 
typically be 20 percent owner’s equity, 20 percent supplemental equity and 60 percent 
bank loan. Selection and approval of the supplemental equity grants would be done by 
the commercial banks, in accordance with pre-set criteria covering the points above.  The 
Project Coordination Unit (PCU) and the Central Bank of the Solomon Islands (CBSI) 
will jointly carry out six-monthly reviews of the performance of the SEF, giving an 
opportunity for scheme adjustments to be made.  
 
Component 4:  Project Management (base cost US$ 3.7 million).  This component 
would provide support to project management. Overall project management including 
coordination, communication activities, planning and implementation scheduling, 
monitoring and evaluation, procurement, financial management, reporting and operation 
Page  3
of the Designated Account for the project would be the responsibility of a PCU within the 
Ministry of Development, Planning and Aid Coordination (MDPAC).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The RDP would initially start in four provinces of the Solomon Islands: Choiseul, 
Malaita, Temotu and Western provinces.  The program would progressively expand to 
the other provinces from project year 3 based on agreed benchmarks. Choiseul and 
Temotu are small provinces (with a population of approximately 20,000 each) remote 
from the capital city, Honiara; while Malaita is the most populated province of the 
Solomon Islands (population approximately 120,000) and centrally located, and Western 
province has a population of approximately 60,000. In larger provinces, the program 
would initially start in a region before being scaled-up. The 4 initial provinces cover the 
broad range of conditions in the Solomon Islands.  
 
The Solomon Islands archipelago consists of a double chain of six major islands and 
990 smaller islands, atolls and cays. The six major islands are mostly rugged and 
mountainous and were naturally covered with tropical moist forests, large areas of which 
have been logged. The smallest islands range from coralline atolls to bare sandy islets. 
The major islands are mostly of volcanic origin and form part of the Pacific "ring of fire".  
 
The vegetation comprises grasslands, swamps, lowland rain forest, montane forest and 
secondary vegetation. 85 percent of the country is naturally covered by forests, which are 
an integral part of the daily lives of rural Solomon Islanders. The most fertile soil groups 
are found on North Guadalcanal (now planted with oil palm) and on other agricultural 
opportunity areas throughout the country which were mapped in the 1970s.  
 
The Solomon Islands marine and coastal ecosystem is part of the world's largest center 
of diversity - the Western Pacific. Coastal zones contain some of the most biologically 
diverse ecosystems in the world.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Susan S. Shen (EASRE) 
Mr Bruce M. Harris (QAG) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental impact or issues associated with the majority of subproject investments 
under RDP are not expected to be significant; they are expected to be temporary and can 
be mitigated.  
 
The vast majority of investments will be small in scale and will involve the 
rehabilitation or upgrading of existing small-scale infrastructure. Construction of new 
facilities is also expected to be small in scope. The average size of subprojects is 
expected to be in the range of US$ 2,000 to 15,000 (SBD 15,000 to 120,000).  
 
The potential impact of any subproject will depend on the nature, location and specific 
characteristics of the investment. In most cases, adverse environmental impacts are 
expected to be temporary and limited to the construction phase. They could include 
temporary disturbance of drains or streams, noise and dust during construction, small-
scale vegetation loss, and pollution from inappropriate construction materials waste 
disposal.  
 
Most adverse impacts will be highly localized (construction work site), temporary, and 
easily mitigated through appropriate siting of the subprojects and good construction and 
operation practices. The subproject screening process (Described in the Environment and 
Social Management Framework 
–ESMF) and the use of standard construction practices 
and mitigation measures will ensure adequate mitigation of those risks.  Civil works 
contracts will include standard clauses to ensure the mitigation of any potentially 
negative impact.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no long-term impacts anticipated due to the very small scale nature and 
dispersed nature of the planned activities, as well as mitigation measures to be applied for 
all RDP activities.   
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
To minimize adverse impact, a screening process and standard mitigation practices will 
be used. The screening process will include considerations for alternative subprojects 
and/or alternative siting as appropriate.  The procedures to be followed are included in 
the project’s ESMF, which will be a living document and will be updated periodically 
based on the findings of review missions and other M&E activities.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Assessment, Natural Habitats and Forests: The project's approach to the 
issues identified in the Environmental Assessment (EA) is to fully address them through 
the planning and subproject selection process. Guidelines for environmental assessment, 
including screening for forests and natural habitats issues, of proposed subprojects and 
activities managed by the communities and by the provinces have been developed and 
they are integrated in the planning, selection and appraisal process. These Guidelines are 
described in detail in the program's ESMF.  
 
The Bank’s forest policy aims to reduce deforestation, enhance the environmental 
contribution of forested areas, promote afforestation, reduce poverty and encourage 
economic development. The ESMF Includes the provisions of the Key Standard 1, of 
Solomon Islands Logging Code of Practice (LCOP) which will form the basis for 
exclusion of subprojects under RDP, i.e. areas excluded from logging (except for the 
reference to altitude above 400 metres) and buffer zones, in line with World Bank 
Operational Safeguard Policies, Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Natural 
Habitats (OP/BP 4.04).  
 
RDP will, as part of its environmental awareness activities, encourage communities to 
consider establishing dedicated fuel wood plantations in order to provide for future 
demand for firewood for copra drying and also alleviate forest destruction by harvesters 
of firewood. There are several native (e.g. Casuarina spp.) and naturalized species 
(Acacia spp.) suitable for firewood lots. There are hundreds of small sawmills, including 
chainsaw mills located throughout the Solomon Islands and it is common for 
communities to provide sawn timber as co-contribution towards building costs of 
community goods.  Where such co-contribution is given by communities, the 
communities will be encouraged to reforest using native species.  
 
The requirements of OP/BP 4.04 have been addressed through the ESMF.  National 
protected areas have been identified in the EA and critical habitats will be identified 
through the screening process detailed in the ESMF to avoid financing under RDP any 
activity which would have an adverse impact on natural habitats.  
 
Indigenous Peoples: OP/BP 4.10 has been determined to apply. However, since virtually 
all of the beneficiaries of the program are rural Solomon Islanders who are living on their 
ancestral lands and are indigenous (as defined by the policy), the project documentation 
Page  6
itself, including the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) and the Project Implementation 
Plan will constitute the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP).  
 
Involuntary Resettlement: This policy is not triggered as the development of small-scale 
infrastructure (e.g. small bridges, culverts, jetties) under the project is unlikely to require 
taking of land and assets. The project will not result in any relocation of people and no 
housing will be dismantled.  In most cases, it is anticipated that any land acquisition will 
be minor and is likely to be communal land and since the land will be used for the good 
of the community it is likely it will be voluntarily donated.  Since the exact extent of such 
land acquisition is not known at this time, the ESMF covers any eventualities, including 
procedures for involuntary land acquisition (unlikely) but also the specific procedures to 
be followed for the possibility of voluntary contribution of small amounts of land 
(specifically to ensure such contributions are, indeed, voluntary and that they do not pose 
an undue burden on any individual or household).  
 
Overall capacity of the Environment and Conservation Division (ECD) to carry out its 
functions remains weak; capacity building activities have been included under the project 
to enable MDPAC, ECD and MAL to ensure that the environmental and social guidelines 
for the project are adequately followed and implemented.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders in the project will be rural Solomon Islanders who are residents of the 
villages in the wards and provinces covered by the project.  The RDP concept and design 
have been developed following an extensive, one-year consultation program which 
extended to the 9 provinces of the Solomon Islands.  Community consultation is also an 
integral part of the selection and appraisal of the project activities during project 
implementation. RDP beneficiaries will participate though public consultation meetings 
and discussions of local development priorities, representation in ward development 
committees and provincial development councils, and representation in the Subproject 
Implementation Committees (SICs).  Feedback mechanisms and community monitoring 
of project implementation have also been included under RDP.  
 
No subproject will be selected that does not flow from this planning process. This 
includes the social and environmental information, training and screening process 
described in detail in the ESMF. Facilitators will also be trained on the program's 
environmental and social guidelines. Since environmental and social criteria will be fully 
integrated throughout the planning, selection and appraisal process, stakeholder 
participation and information disclosure will be assured at every stage of project 
implementation.  
 
In the case that a specific subproject would require a stand alone EA, this would be 
posted in public places at province and ward level, and the ward development council 
will be responsible to ensure that the EA report is formally on the agenda of decision 
meetings for subproject selection.  
 
Page  7
Prior to RDP effectiveness, all safeguards procedures to be followed under the project 
will be made available to concerned stakeholders through the provincial administration in 
each province, through MDPAC in Honiara and through the Information centers of the 
World Bank. The EA/ESMF has been disclosed in country on June 4, 2007 (and in the 
Infoshop on May 14, 2007).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/04/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/14/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/04/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/14/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Please note that the full PAD will constitute the IPDP for this project. Meanwhile, a 
detailed description of the project and its components has been disclosed through the 
EA/ESMF and the Social Assessment has also been disclosed (May 14, 2007, in the 
Infoshop and June 4, 2007, in country) and those disclosure dates have therefore been 
used. Several rounds of consultations with all stakeholders have also been conducted over 
a
one
year period in the project area.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
Page  8
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Marianne Grosclaude 
05/30/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Susan S. Shen 
06/09/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Bruce M. Harris 
06/06/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Louise F. Scura 
05/31/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
07/09/2007 
Comments:   
