Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2472 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/02/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Solomon Islands 
Project ID: P089297 
Project Name: Rural Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Marianne Grosclaude 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 5, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASRD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (50%);General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (35%);General public administration sector (15%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural 
policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
2.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.50 
 
AUSTRALIA: AUSTRALIAN AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT 6.50 
 
EC: EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
8.00
15.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed RDP would be to improve the level and security of 
rural peoples' livelihoods, through increased participation of rural communities in sustainable 
economic development, enhanced local governance and improved provision of rural services and 
infrastructure.  
 
The expected outcomes of RDP would include: (i) enhanced linkages between rural 
communities and local governments and increased participation of rural communities in 
sustainable economic development; (ii) increased capacity of SIG at central and sub-national 
level to provide services and infrastructure supporting local economic development, on the basis 
of participatory planning processes, and increased capacity of public and private service 
providers in rural areas; and (iii) improved provision of and access to, rural services and 
infrastructure for villagers and rural communities.  Additional outcomes would include: the 
Page  2
adoption and dissemination of innovation (new technologies, marketing practices, etc.) by 
agricultural/rural entrepreneurs; and a strengthened institutional framework to support 
agricultural development.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would initiate long term reforms in local governance and rural service delivery over 
a
four to five year period and be jointly financed by SIG, IDA, the EC and AusAID.  Total 
funding is estimated to amount to approximately US$ 15-17 million, including a US$ 2 million 
IDA grant, an EC grant of approximately US$ 8 million (Euro 6.4 million) and an AusAID 
contribution tentatively estimated at US$ 6-7 million (AU$ 8-10 million).  The proposed RDP 
would follow a two pronged approach: (i) strengthening institutions in support of decentralized 
and deconcentrated agricultural and rural development; and (ii) providing efficient and effective 
grant financing for investments in locally managed infrastructure and services identified as 
priorities through a participatory process.  It is expected that the program would start in two to 
three provinces in the first year and would be gradually rolled-out in subsequent years as 
capacity is built and lessons from the initial provinces integrated.  
 
The following preliminary components are envisaged and detailed design would be confirmed 
as part of project preparation:  
 
Support for the delivery of rural services and infrastructure in the provinces.  This would 
include: (i) building the capacity of local level public administration in planning and financial 
management; (ii) the promotion of participatory planning and accountability at the local level, 
and restoring linkages between provinces and communities; (iii) the provision of performance-
based block grants to provincial governments (to supplement the current provincial grants 
provided by the national government) for investments in rural infrastructure and services, and 
(iv) building the capacity of local service providers.  
 
Support for village development.  As part of activities to strengthen services and infrastructure 
delivery in rural areas, the program would pay specific attention to the development of 
mechanisms to reach underserved and more remote communities and villages (this could be part 
of the first component or through a separate component).  The program would study and phase in 
mechanisms that could sustainably be scaled up by SIG in the medium-to long-term.  
 
Strengthening the institutional framework for agricultural development.  The project would 
provide targeted assistance to key institutions responsible for the management of agricultural 
development and strengthen their capacity to work with local level government and institutions.  
Both public and private sector/civil society institutions would be eligible for support.  The 
Department of Agriculture and Livestock would receive assistance to rehabilitate its core 
functions of regulation, certification, inspection and oversight to ensure food safety, quarantine, 
pest surveillance, participation in regional (Pacific) agricultural bodies, as well as its capacity to 
work with provincial governments and to supervise and provide technical support to agricultural 
service providers.  
 
Support for agricultural/rural innovation.  The proposed program would develop a financing 
mechanism (matching grant) to support the development and dissemination of innovation (new 
Page  3
technologies, marketing and organizational innovation, etc.) through public-private partnerships, 
with a demonstration effect.  
 
Program management, monitoring and evaluation.  This would cover overall program 
coordination and management, monitoring and evaluation, and the necessary studies to support 
the implementation of program activities.  The respective responsibilities of DNPAC, the 
Department of Finance, the Department of Provincial Government and Constituency 
Development and the Department of Agriculture and Livestock would be specified during 
project preparation.  
 
Key design principles would include: i) community mobilization, ii) identification and 
prioritization of activities across sectors that would provide suitable solutions to local 
development constraints, through transparent and participatory planning processes at the 
provincial and sub-provincial level, iii) approval and budgeting at provincial level of activities to 
be funded; iv) provision of direct, incremental and predictable funding to provinces, with 
transparent conditions to ensure upwards and downwards accountability, and effective use of 
funds by both provincial governments and recipient communities; v) design and implementation 
of planned activities by the communities themselves, with support from local community-based 
organizations, NGOs and service providers; vi) capacity-development of community based 
organizations, other service providers and provincial governments to support the processes set up 
under the program, including capacity to meet mandatory minimum requirements for provincial 
governments to access grants; vii) a clear role for public and private sector institutions; and viii) 
strengthened partnerships between central agencies and provincial governments.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would be implemented in rural areas of the Solomon Islands. In the first year, the 
project would start in two to three provinces, and it would be gradually rolled-out to other 
provinces as capacity is built and initial lessons integrated.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower's institutional capacity to apply policy frameworks to ensure compliance with the 
Banks environmental and social safeguard policies is limited and will have to be strengthened.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bruce M. Harris (QAG) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This safeguard policy is likely to be triggered. The project would involve the rehabilitation, 
upgrading and maintenance of small rural infrastructure, such as feeder roads, local markets or 
storage/collection points, or small water supply infrastructure. Individual sub-projects (e.g. 
rehabilitation or upgrading of village or district level infrastructure) are expected to be small and 
limited in environmental impact. Agricultural advisory services are expected to focus on 
sustainable resource management practices (e.g. mitigating soil degradation)which are not 
expected to have adverse environmental impact. The risks are expected to be technically and 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
institutionally manageable. It is expected that those risks would be addressed through the 
application of a program- or project-specific Environmental Management Plan and screening 
procedures to ensure that environmental impact assessments are carried out to the required 
standards where necessary.  Project implementation manual(s)  would include provisions as 
regards environmental impact assessment and screening procedures.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
This safeguard policy may be triggered. Project activities are not expected to take place in or 
to affect protected areas, however some activities may be carried out around those areas or 
natural habitat areas. The final status would need to be determined during project preparation. 
The project would not include activities likely to impact adversely on important/protected natural 
areas, such as high altitude areas, mangroves or coral reefs (unless for rehabilitation purposes).   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
This safeguard policy may be triggered, as some village-level activities may include, for 
example, the utilization of non-timber forest products within village boundaries. However, the 
final status would need to be assessed during project preparation.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The overwhelming majority if not all Solomon Islanders living in rural areas are indigenous 
people. On that basis, it is expected that a separate Indigenous Peoples Development Plan would 
not be required. This would be reviewed at the time of preparation by a Safeguards review 
meeting.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
No involuntary resettlement or land acquisition is expected to take place as a result of project 
activities. However, small amounts of land may be required to implement community-based 
activities. These would involve voluntary arrangements by communities. Whether this OP would 
be triggered would therefore need to be assessed during project preparation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/30/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental impact assessment: February/April 2007.  
 
Social assessment: January/April 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Marianne Grosclaude 
09/21/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
10/02/2006 
Comments:  Asger Christensen 
Acting RSC 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
10/02/2006 
Comments:  Reviewed and approved it. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
