Page  1
SRI LANKA: DAM SAFETY AND WATER RESOURCES PLANNING PROJECT 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I
.
BASIC INFORMATION
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/03/2007 
Report No.: 39360 
 
1. 
Basic Project Data
 
Country:  Sri Lanka 
Project ID:  P093132 
Project Name:  Dam Safety and Water Resources Planning Project (DSWRPP) 
Task Team Leader:  Nihal Fernando 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 20, 2007 
Estimated Board Date:, July 12, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASSD 
Lending  Instrument:    Specific  Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (70%); Irrigation and 
drainage (30%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P); Natural disaster management (P);Rural 
services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.90 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
11.00 
 
Environmental Category: B 
–
Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2.  
Project Objectives 
 
The objectives of this project are (i) establishment of a long term sustainable system of 
dam operation and maintenance (O&M) and (ii) improved water resources planning.  
This would be achieved through three main project components: (i) improving dam safety 
and operational efficiency; (ii) upgrading and modernizing the existing hydro-
meteorological information systems; and, (iii) providing technical assistance for 
developing integrated water resources plans for selected river basins.  Each project 
component would include institutional development and capacity building for the 
implementing agencies (IAs). In addition to the above three components, the project 
would include a fourth component to support project management and monitoring.   
 
3.  
Project Description 
 
(i)  
Component 1: Improving Dam Safety and Operational Efficiency
:
The 
expected outcome of this component would be enhanced public safety of selected high-
risk dams, sustainable institutional arrangements for effective dam safety management 
Page  2
and efficient dam operation and maintenance (O&M). This would be achieved through: 
(a) Remediation works for 20 high-risk dams out of the 38 dams for which risk 
assessments have been conducted; (b) Provision of basic safety and operational facilities 
for the 80 dams classified as large dams according to the definition of International 
Committee of Large Dams - - the facilities include access roads, communications, 
monitoring instruments, rapid response facilities for emergency repairs, floodlights and 
equipment; (c) Collection of basic engineering and operational information essential for 
sustainable operation and management of the 80 large dams (d) Technical assistance for 
risk assessment on the remaining portfolio of 42 large dams, training in dam safety, 
development of O&M manuals, codes of practice and operating procedures, including the 
procurement and adoption of modern software for hydrological and structural analysis of 
dams; (d) Establishment of an inter-organizational arrangement for regular dam safety 
inspection, a sustainable need-based O&M funding mechanism and assistance for the 
establishment of dam safety regulation.  This component would finance civil works, 
goods, consultancy services required for the stated purposes and bulk of the civil works 
fall within this component.   
 
(ii)
 
Component 2:  Hydro-Meteorological Information System (HMIS
): The 
expected outcome of this component would be enhanced staff capacity and physical and 
analytical infrastructure for monitoring hydro-meteorological data, detecting and 
forecasting water hazards and assessing water resources for multi-sectoral planning, 
development and management. This component would comprise: (a) Establishment of 9 
new and 41 upgraded hydrometric stations; (b) Modernizing 30 agro-meteorological 
stations; (c) Establishment of data banks at the Irrigation Department (ID) and the 
Department of Meteorology (DoM) and improving the analytical capability of staff.; (d) 
Establishing procedures and providing tools and training for real-time analysis of flood 
situations in the influent streams of some major reservoirs; and (e) Groundwater 
monitoring and assessment including support to upgrade the groundwater database.  This 
component would finance goods, consultancy services and minor and limited civil works 
required for the stated purposes.. 
 
(iii)  
Component 3:  Multi-sectoral Water Resources Planning
:
The expected 
outcome of this component would be water resource development master plans at 
national level and for two selected river basins leading to the completion of 2-3 specific 
detailed project feasibility studies in the two river basins ready for investment. This 
component would comprise:  (a) The development of a national water-use master plan; 
(b) Optimization study on usage of available water resources in the Mahaweli and 
adjoining connected river basins leading to the preparation of a New Mahaweli Water 
Resources Development Plan. and several Feasibility reports for potential projects,  (c)  
Preparation of a holistic water resources development plan and management proposals 
for the Mundeni Aru river basin (of the Eastern Province); (d) Establishment of 
institutional arrangements, processes/procedures, manuals, state-of-art techniques and 
modern analytical tools for multi-sectoral water resources planning and management.  . 
This component would finance consultancy services required for the stated purpose.  
 
Page  3
(iv)  Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring
:
This component would 
assist the PMU and project implementing agencies to execute, manage and monitor the 
project. The assistance would include the provision of consultants, vehicles, equipment 
and incremental staff and operating costs. 
 
4. 
 
Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the 
safeguard analysis 
The proposed project would cover the entire country.  Since the project is associated with 
upgrading and rehabilitation of existing facilities there will be no major alterations in the 
existing land use patterns.  The project will not fund any activity within natural habitats, 
declared forest and wildlife reserves and protected areas, therefore would not have any 
adverse impact on environmentally sensitive areas. 
 
5.  
Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Sumith Pilapitiya (SASSD) 
Suryanarayan. Satish (SASSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X 
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X 
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X 
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) 
 
X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X 
II.  
KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGAMENT 
 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1.  
Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed 
project. Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or 
irreversible impacts: 
 
1.1 Environmental 
Safeguards
.
Since the DSWRPP is associated with upgrading and/or rehabilitation of existing dams 
under the Dam Safety component, many of the serious and irreversible environmental 
consequences as in the case of constructing of a new dam will not be encountered. 
However, the construction activities undertaken to rehabilitate/upgrade the dams will 
cause issues such as air and water pollution at the sites which would largely be of 
temporary and localized in nature provided that adequate precautions are taken to manage 
such issues. If dam rehabilitation work requires the emptying of a reservoir, there would 
be impacts on its aquatic life depending on the extent of drying up that will take place. 
Page  4
However, tanks/reservoirs in the country’s dry zone are subjected to seasonal fluctuations 
in the level of water, particularly the ones that receive water from its own catchment 
only, and the aquatic life in these water bodies are adapted to the seasonal changes that 
take place.  In addition, the water levels within the reservoirs will never be below the 
dead storage levels, even during rehabilitation works.  Hence, it is not felt that there will 
be irreversible changes to aquatic life.   
 
Solid waste/debris disposal will be another issue that will need to be addressed. The dam 
remediation works will result in removal of large quantities of top soil, rip rap etc and in 
the generation of concrete debris and other construction wastes. In addition, wastes will 
be generated from worker camps.  The project should explore options for re-using 
material such as soil and for the careful disposal of other waste material. It is also 
mentioned that many of the tanks and reservoirs currently subjected to ad hoc and hap 
hazard disposal of garbage, construction debris and industrial/domestic wastewater. Such 
practices if allowed to continue will only undermine the expected benefits from a project 
of this nature.  
 
The main environmental impacts of the dam remediation works envisaged under this 
project would be off site where large quantities of resources such as sand/soil, rocks etc 
will be extracted for rehabilitation work.  Resource extraction is a critical issue in Sri 
Lanka where unsustainable operations that have continued unabated for many years has 
destroyed natural environments beyond remediation.  Therefore, selection of sites for 
resource extraction should be made on careful evaluation of resource availability within 
the sites and in conformity with the GOSL regulations for designation of such sites.  
Another important aspect that ought to be considered in conveyance of material to the site 
is the potential danger of the spread of invasive species. Sri Lanka has many examples of 
severe invasions of aquatic weeds in waterways as well as terrestrial species in dry 
coastal areas. The spread of invasive plants in already disturbed environments such as 
construction sites, is particularly high. This risk can be minimized by identifying 
potential burrow sites in nearby areas where the occurrence of invasive types are not 
observed. Therefore, the proper identification of suitable burrow sites will be a key 
consideration in managing the above-mentioned environmental impacts.          
 
During the construction phase, potential environmental issues could arise from 
constructing and operating worker camps. Siting of labour camps should be planned out 
carefully in order to ensure that impact on sensitive natural habitats such as waterways, 
wildlife, forest areas, wetlands etc as well as on man made environments such as 
residences, schools and religious sites are minimum. Similarly, vehicle/equipment 
servicing and maintenance yards as well as stocking areas should be selected carefully 
after giving due consideration to the potential environmental problems it can give rise to. 
Disposal of sewage and solid wastes from worker camps can add to the pollution load 
and hence need to be provided with appropriate facilities for safe disposal of such wastes. 
Conformity with Local Authority requirements for septic tanks for toilets is a 
requirement.  Safe disposal of solid wastes should be undertaken in consultation with the 
Local Authority and the Central Environmental Authority.  These worker camps can also 
be a source of potential public health problems and therefore need to be kept clean and 
Page  5
hygienic. Provision of proper sanitation is key to this, especially in the case of preventing 
the introduction and spread of water-bourne diseases. Also, the work force may require 
substantial quantities of firewood for cooking and hence increase the demand for it. This 
could have a threatening effect on the forest resources in the area.  In order to eliminate 
this threat, the construction contract should require worker camps to be provided with 
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) as cooking fuel.  LPG canisters are freely available 
throughout the country so should not pose an undue burden on the contractor.  
 
In addition, run off from the vehicle yards containing fuel and lubricants and run off from 
material stock piles containing particulate matter can all lead to contamination of soil and 
water.  Hence, proper waste management for all types of wastes generated on-site is of 
high importance.  
 
GOSL’s investment in upgrading and/or rehabilitating selected dams under the project 
will not yield the anticipated long term benefits unless there is proper management of the 
watersheds in the catchment areas.  Major environmental factors affecting the functioning 
and the life span of the dam are those caused by land, water and other resource use in the 
catchment areas above the reservoir.  Increased pressure on upland areas above the dam 
is a common phenomenon caused by the resettlement of people from the inundated areas 
and by uncontrolled influx of people to the watershed.  On site environmental 
deterioration as well as a decrease in water quality and an increase in sedimentation rates 
in the reservoir result from clearing forest land for agriculture, grazing pressures, use of 
agricultural chemicals and illegal timber felling for commercial purposes.  It would 
therefore be of utmost importance to identify such issues and arrest them with appropriate 
measures, in order to yield the maximum benefits of the proposed interventions.   
 
The construction of buildings under some of the other components of the project may 
trigger environmental impacts.  These impacts, if any, are expected to be minimal.  If the 
construction work is to be located on sites where the implementing agency has existing 
buildings, it is not anticipated that any real environmental concerns may arise. The main 
impacts of building construction for such sites will be off-site impacts due to resource 
extraction for construction. Hence, resources should be extracted from authorized 
locations and sources that are licensed by relevant GOSL authorities. 
 
1.2 Social 
Safeguards
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12)
:
The project remediation works under its key 
component, ‘dam safety’, would involve either one or all of the following interventions: 
(i) strengthening of the existing dams; (ii) repair/ replacement of sluices; and (iii) repair/ 
improvements to existing spillways. In addition, the project would finance the 
replacement of essential electro-mechanical equipment to improve operational efficiency 
of dams. None of these activities will require acquisition of any land. Hence, no land 
acquisition is envisaged, nor will there be any displacement of people. However, in a few 
cases, it is likely that water flows into the reservoir and consequently, irrigation flows 
might have to be stopped for prolonged periods to conduct detailed technical 
investigations and repair/ rehabilitation works. This could impact livelihoods of some 
downstream users adversely. Given this situation, a better appreciation of the need, or 
Page  6
otherwise, for triggering this policy demands an understanding of the selection processes 
and  different  types of dams being covered by the project.  
 
Selection of Dams
:
Sri Lanka has 350 major dams, of which 80 dams are categorized 
as “Large Dams” according to the classification of International Committee of Large 
Dams. The selection  of dams for remedial works are based on a scientific risk 
assessment of the nature and extent of public safety. Given the paucity of resources, of 
these 80 dams, portfolio risk assessment (PRA) for 38 dams have been carried out to 
prioritize dams according to their hazard and risk levels. This risk analysis considered the 
number of population at risk in the event of dam failure as one of the risk profiling 
criterion. (details in PAD Annex 4 Component 1 project description). The risk profiles of 
the analyzed dams are ranked according to there safety deficiencies using the Risk Based 
Profile System (RBPS) developed by United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR). This 
is an internationally and widely accepted risk ranking methodology.   Subsequently,  20 
dams that pose the highest threat to public safety have been listed for remedial measures 
under the component 1.  These 20 could be classified into four broad categories 
depending on the nature and extent of social impacts point of view: 
 
·
Category I (2 dams)-- (example, Victoria) the interventions or the nature of 
remediation measures are  such that it does not obstruct the water flows into the 
down stream uses. Remedies could either be undertaken without obstructing water 
flows or that alternatives could be worked out to ensure water flows.  
·
Category II (7 dams)--  there is direct agriculture under its command but the 
nature of remedial measures are such that it  does not require suspension of water 
releases to its users for prolonged period (example, Inginimitiya Dam).  
·
Category III (9 dams) -- there is direct agriculture under its command and the 
nature of  remedial measures do require suspension of water releases to its users 
for prolonged periods (example, Tabbowa and Ridiyagama dams).  
·
Category IV (2 dams)--  those which serve multiple commands and users and 
whose radius of influence extend beyond the immediate  agriculture command 
area to a number of other distant hydraulically inter-connected agricultural 
command areas and  villages/ towns (ex; Chandrikawewa dam).  
 
Given this typology, Categories III and IV are significant from the perspective of 
adverse social impacts.  It is expected that out of the 20 dams likely to be included in the 
program, not more than 11 dams will be of category III and IV, and there may be as few 
as 2 dams in Category IV. As planned currently, project will not take up any Category IV 
dams.  Thus, some 9 dams falling under Category III will be the focus of attention due to 
interruption of water flows. 
 
 
Interruption of water flows and impacts
.
The suspension of water could prevent farmers from growing paddy. Instead, they will 
have to resort to some other crops (relatively alien to them) or forego cultivation for one 
or two seasons. However, discussions with Agricultural Experts reveal that although the 
farmers would have to forego paddy cultivation, they can grow other field crops like 
maize, cowpea and green gram and ground nuts using residual moisture and limited 
Page  7
rainfall during the Yala season and under rain-fed condition in Maha (wet) season.  
However, rainfed farming of non-paddy crops would be an entirely a new practice to 
some farmers, because it requires different crop husbandry practices and probably higher 
wage labor inputs. Thus, despite this potential alternative cropping possibility, it is felt 
that  that the livelihoods for the following users could be affected adversely:  (i) farmers 
who draw water from the reservoir for cultivating paddy; (ii) landless laborers eking their 
wages from the agricultural operations in the command area; and (iii) fishers involved in 
catching fishes from the reservoir. In addition, in a few cases, water supplies for domestic 
purposes (drinking, bathing, washing, and cooking) could also be affected. 
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11):
 
Apart from the chance finds, the project 
recognizes that, in the case of ancient dams, certain structures such as sluices could be of 
high archaeological significance. In case, they are replaced, the older ones need to be 
preserved as a ‘cultural property’.  This in view, the policy is triggered.  
 
2.  
Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated 
future activities in the project area
:
The Dam Safety component of the project essentially aims at addressing the urgently 
needed remedial work to improve dam safety in some of the tanks/reservoirs considered 
to be of high risk. Apart from the urgent interventions identified by the various 
engineering surveys and funded by the project currently, it is possible that the GOSL 
could undertake other interventions in the future as part of a continuous effort to 
improve/maintain dam safety. However, since it is not possible to define what those 
activities would constitute of, if undertaken at some point in future, it is not possible to 
assess any resultant cumulative environmental impact. For large development programs 
EIAs/IEEs will be mandatory in accordance with the National Environmental Act and 
associated regulations, hence the impacts will be addressed through the EIA/IEE studies 
in the future.  The EAs will take activities funded under this project into account, 
therefore, cumulative impacts, if any, will be addressed at that stage.  
 
3.  
Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or 
minimize adverse impacts
.
Environmental Impacts
:
The Dam Safety component of the project, which is triggering 
most of the environmental impacts, is primarily focused on reducing water induced 
hazards to the public by improving dam safety of some of the high risk tanks/reservoirs in 
the country. Therefore, the proposed interventions are essential and critical and hence 
alternative options do not apply because the dams are already constructed and the project 
is financing interventions for rehabilitation.  Different alternatives for rehabilitation will 
be considered during the engineering design stage and the most sustainable option will be 
selected. 
 
Social Impacts
:
Technical alternatives will be explored to the fullest extent so as to 
avoid stoppage of water flows and the adverse impacts thereof.  Water flow stoppage will 
be resorted to if and only if appropriate technical alternatives are not coming through.  
Page  8
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
Environmental Safeguards
:
The policy and regulatory framework in Sri Lanka provides 
an adequate basis for the mitigation of potential impacts mentioned above.  The 
Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL) established the Central Environmental Authority 
(CEA) in 1982 as the environmental regulatory agency instituted under the National 
Environmental Act (NEA).  Under the National Environmental Act (NEA), all 
development projects that fall into a prescribed category is required to go through a 
comprehensive environmental screening and planning process (EIA or IEE). CEA has 
demonstrated technical expertise and a good track record of evaluating environmental 
impact assessments.  Since the proposed project is concerned with dam rehabilitation and 
limited civil works in other components, there will be no EIA/IEE requirement under the 
NEA.  Nevertheless, it has been agreed with GOSL that all interventions that have the 
potential for adverse environmental impacts will be subject to an environmental 
assessment and any identified adverse environmental impacts will be mitigated according 
to a site specific Environmental Management Plan (EMP).  As the specific interventions 
in the selected dams have not been identified as yet, specific environmental assessments 
and EMPs cannot be prepared at this stage.  Therefore, an Environmental Assessment and 
Management Framework (EAMF) has been prepared that will serve as a template and 
guidance for preparation of specific EAs and EMPs.  The EA/EMP for the interventions 
during the first year of the project will be prepared prior to negotiations of the project and 
will be a pre-requisite for negotiations.  
 
Although an adequate policy and regulatory framework exists in the country for natural 
resource management and conservation, enforcement of such policies and regulations has 
been weak. Monitoring of EIA approval conditions, especially, is a weak area and needs 
strengthening. Several programs funded by bi-lateral as well as multi-lateral donors 
aimed at providing technical and financial assistance to CEA and other institutions 
dealing with natural resource management to improve institutional capacity have been 
implemented in the past. Some of these efforts are on-going. Hence, it is anticipated that 
the capacity to enforce regulations will gradually improve in the future.  
 
In terms of the project, the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka, which is one of the 
implementing agencies for the project and under which the PMU has been established, 
has ample experience of conducting environmental assessments for dam related work. 
Under the accelerated Mahaweli Development Program, extensive environmental 
assessments have been conducted and risk mitigation measures implemented and hence 
the availability of such expertise institutionally will be very useful. Compliance 
monitoring (with the specifications in the EMPs for dams that will be rehabilitated), will 
be mainly conducted by the environmental specialists in the PMU and in the consultants’ 
team providing supervision on implementation. They will report on the contractor’s 
performance in terms of implementing conditions give in the particular EMP and take 
appropriate action accordingly. The EMPs will be part of the “Conditions of Contract” of 
all civil works contracts financed under the project.  In addition, it is proposed that 
Page  9
safeguards monitoring committees which will include key stakeholders such as members 
from the local community and local environmental officers will be established for 
compliance monitoring.   
 
Social Safeguards
 
–
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12)
:
Voluntary Participation: 
 
In respect of Category III dams, the project encounters a 
scenario characterized by a temporary partial economic displacement to some of the 
water users. However, OP 4.12, Involuntary Resettlement, is not triggered because the 
resettlement is not attributable to the eminent domain or other forms of land acquisition 
backed by powers of the state.   The operative principles are Informed Consent and 
Power of Choice.  In respect of the former, project has put in mechanisms to ensure that 
local affected communities are fully knowledgeable about the project and its implications 
and consequences and free agree to participate in the project. Power of choice rests with 
the people viz., they have the option to agree or disagree. Efforts will be made to build 
not only full awareness of the potential social and economic disruptions of the 
contemplated dam safety remedial measures but also reach consensus with the users on 
the implementation schedule and arrangements of the repair work. Local communities 
who are likely to be affected would be identified through a comprehensive baseline 
survey for each of such dams and   informed decision making will be accomplished 
through intensive Information, Education and Consultation (IEC) campaign. However 
voluntary may be the decision making, the project has felt the need for providing 
financial help to affected people as coping assistance1.     A process cycle/ map, depicting 
sequentially activities that will go into ensuring voluntariness and further measures along 
with the role and responsibilities of the different actors as well as the review/ approval 
mechanisms has been presented in the matrix (as an appendix). This has been developed 
by GOSL in consultation with relevant stakeholders including local communities. 
.
Public Information, Education and Communication (IEC) Campaign
.
The project 
well recognizes that the stakeholders need to be prepared adequately and appropriately to 
enable an informed decision making. For this, the project would deploy Livelihood 
Support Facilitators (LSF) and launch an extensive IEC campaign mainly in respect of 
Category (iii) dams. This will comprise intensive consultations with Farmers 
Organizations, Women, Fishers, Laborers and other interest groups. These would include, 
in addition to livelihood impacts, discussions on dam safety designs, technical 
investigation and construction work schedules, quality control requirements, and 
arrangements for the monitoring of the construction program.   A Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) will be signed by the project (represented by Resident Project 
Manager/ Project Manager) and the local communities (represented by Farmers 
1
Another dimension--  Stakeholder discussions have distinctly revealed that local communities 
express willingness to participate only when they perceive (apart from the public safety) a 
commercial benefit. The project did encounter a couple of cases (Category IV) wherein the local 
communities have refused to participate in the project as they could not perceive a direct 
commercial benefit for them. And, such cases were dropped from the project's purview though 
Risk Assessments do list them in the priority list. Further, project will not include such dams 
wherein it is not feasible to ascertain 'voluntariness'
.
Page  10
Organizations and Fisher Associations).  Once a voluntary decision is made by the 
stakeholders to carry out the remedial works, a site level construction monitoring 
committee will be formed to ensure that the remedial measures are carried out in 
accordance with the agreed implementation plan and norms and the consequent 
livelihood disruption is minimal. This committee will be built on the existing farmer 
organization, federations and project management committees that exist for irrigation 
management of those dams.  A typical committee will comprise of the selected 
representatives of the affected stakeholders, technical staff of the project implementation 
agency, such as staff of the Irrigation Engineer (IE) in-charge of the dam, Resident 
Project Manager/Project Manager (RPM/PM) in-charge of irrigation management 
functions and site representative of the civil works contractor.  
 
Livelihood Support Assistance
:
During the Social Assessment enquiry, extensive 
discussions were held with the elected representatives of farmers
’
organizations and 
federations of selected critical dams to gauge their perceptions and reactions to potential 
public safety threat and dealing with the likely economic disruptions.  In cases, where 
farmers perceived the dam safety threat, and feel that the project interventions are timely 
and essential, the implementation planning and execution would be easier. In such  cases,  
farmers expressed that they would not mind foregoing one season of cultivation provided 
they are adequately consulted and informed of the nature of remedial works and the 
implementation schedule sufficiently in advance (at least 4- 6 months) of the 
commencement of the works to enable them to prepare themselves. The farmers 
expressed that as a coping mechanism, they would set apart 35 Bushels of Paddy 
(equivalent to Rs 10,000 or US$ 100) per household from their previous paddy harvest 
for the consumption during the forgone season.   However, if it extends beyond one 
season, they will not be able to sustain livelihood on their own, and external assistance 
will be needed. This in background, and that repair/ rehabilitation could disrupt water 
flows for two seasons (at the maximum) viz., an year, a sum of Rs 20,000  (US$ 200) will 
be provided to a cultivator household as coping assistance from the project.  In addition 
to an adequate budget provision to finance the assistances, institutional and 
implementation arrangements for administering the same have been worked out.  
 
In respect of landless laborers and fishers, the situation is little different from that of the 
farmers.   First; unlike the farmers, they are totally un-organized and hence no 
information exists on them.  Consequently, it is difficult to clearly identify the potentially 
affected such people.  Second, households who do not own land and which earn their 
livelihood exclusively from daily wage labor in farms are not many. Third, wage laborers 
are not fully locally based instead they migrate from one place to the other, to towns in 
search of livelihoods. In all, mapping them is difficult. But, it is expected that on an 
average, 10- 15% of the farmers to be exclusively landless laborers in any given situation. 
As regards fishers, each reservoir could have some 50- 100 fishers depending exclusively 
on the reservoir for their livelihoods. Towards ensuring that their livelihoods are not 
adversely affected, project would place funds at the disposal of the RPM / PM who (with 
the Social Animators) will prepare a Wage Assistance action plan to use the same and 
deploy labor for some asset generation/ maintenance work.  The identification of these 
Page  11
groups will be done through a baseline survey prior to the commencement of the repair 
activities.  
 
Domestic water supplies are not likely to be affected for two reasons. One, there are 
many open wells in any command areas. Two, no reservoir is expected to be emptied 
fully and even in the event of a natural disaster, some dead storage water would always 
be available. Still, if there is a necessity to ensure uninterrupted water supplies for 
drinking, the project will enlist the help of the local administration and make available 
water at certain key locations. 
 
Finances
:
Total funds required for the livelihood assistance is estimated at US$ 9 
million. This is worked out on the assumption that each dam could affect some 3,000 
cultivator households, and 1,000 fishers and/ or landless laborers.  
 
Uniform Assistance vs household wise compensation: 
.
As an alternative to the 
uniform assistance, provision for household wise compensations was deliberated and 
found not feasible for the following  reasons : 
 
Compensations implying ‘entitlements’ are characteristics of ‘involuntary resettlement’ 
and erodes the principles underpinning  ‘voluntariness’. 
 
Dam repairs and rehabilitation resultant water flow disruptions are quite common 
throughout the world and no where compensations have been made. Rather they are 
underpinned by the following principles : (a)  timely information dissemination so that 
farmers can make alternative arrangements and do not incur losses by investing in farm 
inputs; (b) counseling to farmers and fishing communities for alternatives; and (c) 
provision of some assistance – similar to calamity relief and/ or concessions.   
Estimating household wise impacts is extremely difficult – It would not only demand 
huge resources, both time and staff but also highly subjective and contestable.  
 
Cultural Property (OP 11.03):  
Project recognizes that, in the case of ancient dams, certain structures such as sluices 
could be of high archaeological significance. In case, they are replaced, the older ones 
need to be preserved as a ‘cultural property’.  Towards this, the project would seek the 
technical assistance from the Department of Archaeology and undertake an Archeological 
Impact Assessment study in cases where this issue is deemed to be prevalent. 
Subsequently, the Department of Archaeology would draw an implementation action 
plan, as deemed appropriate. This apart, Chance Finds would also be subject to enquiry 
and technical assistance thereof from the Department of Archaeology.  Details of the role 
and responsibilities of the project as well as the department will be as outlined in GOSL’s 
notification on ‘The Antiquities Ordinance’ and as per Projects Procedure Regulations 
No 01 of 2000. As per the recommendations of the department, procedures for dealing 
with the cultural property will be incorporated in the contract documents with a provision 
for an orientation program for the project authorities as well as contractors.  
 
Page  12
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
Environmental:
 The key stakeholders include (a) project affected people (b) local NGOs 
(c) administrators/regulators at the district/divisional level (d) project implementing 
agencies at the national level (Department of Irrigation, MASL and to limited extent, 
Ceylon Electricity Board) (e) Central Environmental Authority (f) any other national 
level agency under whose jurisdiction project activities may fall under (Ex: Department 
of Wildlife Conservation).  
 
Consultations have been carried out in the preparation of the EAMF while the document 
is currently opened for the public to review and comment. However, more extensive 
consultations with the key stakeholders, especially the potentially affected people, will be 
conducted when site specific EAs are undertaken. The EAMF has been made available in 
the Bank Infoshop while locally, it has been translated to Sinhala and Tamil and made 
available at public places. The project would continue with similar public disclosure 
arrangements for safeguard related documents in the future as well. 
 
Social Assessment: 
Social Assessment conducted during the project preparation has 
enabled identifying key stakeholders both from a geographical/ administrative 
–
national, 
regional, district and village – as well as from functional perspectives.  The latter 
comprised (i)  Water users of reservoirs such as farmers and farmer organizations and 
federations,  laborers earning wage from agricultural operations, fishers catching fishes in 
the reservoir, and households using water for domestic purposes; (ii)  Water Managers or 
the Service Providers at the operational level – chiefly, officers of the Irrigation 
Department, Mahalweli Authority, Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB), National Water and 
Drainage Board, Agrarian Development Department; (iii) Administrators/ Regulators 
such as the  offices of Divisional Secretary, Government Agents, at an Intermediary 
level; (iv) Water Resources Decision Makers, at the  strategic level -- Ministries of 
Irrigation, MASL, Power, Finance, Disaster Management Center, Meteorology who 
formulate draft policies/ programs as well as resource allocations; and (v)   Apex/policy 
level comprising administrators, policy makers, political functionaries, scientific and 
extension agencies who play a major role  in promoting public safety and water resources 
development and planning.  Systematic and extensive consultations with all the key 
stakeholders have been conducted as a part of the social assessments and a framework for 
continuing consultations during implementation has also been proposed in the project.   
 
Social Assessment enquiry provided
 : (i)  an insight into the water resources 
management scenario in the country in the  backdrop of  socio-economic profile which 
enabled understanding appreciate ‘diversity’; (ii) stakeholder analysis – identifying key 
stakeholders and  assessing their expectations from, as well as concerns, about the 
project; (iv) impact assessments – positive as well as negative impacts likely to occur as a 
result of the project interventions and the mitigatory measures thereof;   (v) institutional 
analysis and the implications on implementation arrangements requirements thereof; and 
(vi)  identifying key issues that merit attention in the context of project designing . 
Detailed report is available on request as well as on the project’s portal.  
Page  13
Monitoring and Evaluation
:
.
A
systematic program has been designed to monitor 
various environmental and social parameters including LSAs.  The environmental and 
social issues will be monitored as a part of the overall sub-project progress monitoring. 
Indicators for the same have been developed.   In addition, PCU will enlist the services of 
an external consulting agency to conduct an assessment thrice during the project 
implementation, at the end of 12th, 24th and 36th month.  Results of the evaluation will 
be used for midcourse corrections (if need be).  All sub-project proposals along with LSA 
Plans and EMPs will be shared with the Bank for comments before commencing 
construction (details, in Process Cycle). Public disclosure arrangements viz., making 
available information related to all the sub-project proposals, individually, as well as the 
project, as a whole, at different places, including locally at the reservoir level and at the 
national level have been made. 
 
Page  14
PROCESS MAP/ CYCLE 
Activity 
               Responsibility 
Review/ 
Approval
 
Primary Secondary 
Assoc. 
 
Pre-Planning Phase 
 
1
Preparation of Long List of Dams 
–
based on Risk Assessment 
GOSL 
2
Categorization of Dams – I , II, III and IV 
GOSL 
Priority wise Category III Dams 
–
Activity Initiation
GOSL 
3
Designing of Information, 
Education and Consultation (IEC) 
Campaign 
–
training of facilitators, 
production of training materials, 
workshops, advertisements etc. 
CDS 
(PMU) 
RPM/ PM 
LSFs 
PD 
(PMU) 
4
IEC campaign – awareness 
creation among the potentially 
affected people 
RPM/ 
PM 
LSF FOs 
PD 
(PMU) 
5
Public Consultations with farmers 
organizations (FOs), fishers and 
other community organizations. 
LSF RPM/PM 
 
-- CDS 
(PMU) 
6
Preliminary Community Mapping 
–
FOs / Fishers/ CBOs/ laborers/ 
Others 
LSF RPM/PM 
 
-- CDS 
(PMU) 
7
Agree to Do Meeting – 1: 
Communities agree on Decision  
to repair the dam culminating in a 
Resolution  
FOs/ 
Fishers/ 
CBOs 
RPM/PM 
 
LSF PD 
8. 
Submission of the Activity 
Initiation Report (AIR) to World 
Bank covering steps 3-7 above  
PMU RPM/PM 
 
World 
Bank  
PMU will seek Comments from the Bank on the AIR Report 
DECISION to go ahead or not 
–
PMU – Planning Phase Initiated 
9
Detailed Village Resource/ 
Community Mapping -  
LSF RPM/PM 
- 
CDS 
10 Baseline 
Information 
Generation 
on the potentially affected 
people/households  
LSF RPM/PM 
CDS 
PD 
11 
Consultations with the affected 
people on detailed Technical 
Proposals for dam repairs, 
construction mode and schedule. 
Feedback obtained on changes/ 
other requirements to minimize 
social/env. Impacts. Technical 
Plans Finalized.  
RPM/ 
PM 
SLF FO/ 
CBOs 
CDS/ PD 
12 
Agree TO Do- 2 
FOs/ 
RPM/ PM 
LSF 
PD 
Page  15
Communities Resolve   to carry 
out remedial works (or not)  as per 
the  finalized Technical Plan  
CBOs 
11 
Preparation of TOR for 
Environmental Assessments (EAs) 
ES/ 
PMU 
 
PD/PMU 
WB 
12 Conduct 
EAs 
ES/ 
PMU 
 
PD/PMU 
WB 
13 
Public Consultation on EA 
ES/ 
PMU 
RPM/PM  
PD/PMU 
WB 
14 
EA Review and clearance  
 
 
 
WB 
15 
Preparation of Detailed Livelihood 
Assistance Plans 
PMU RPM/ 
PM 
LSF 
FO/ 
CBOs 
 
16  
-Cash Assistance Plan for affected 
cultivating households; 
–
Number of Households  
--Total Cash Amount to be paid 
-- Number of Installments (not less 
than 4 if it is for an year) 
-- Opening of Joint Bank Accounts 
-- Finalization of the list of Bank 
Account Numbers and the Bank 
details for each household (the 
mode of payment will be through 
cheques and paid into the Bank 
accounts) 
 
17 -
Alternative Cropping/Livelihood 
Plans  
-- Crops to  be grown  
-- Input requirements and 
arrangements (seed supply etc.) 
-- Technical assistance (extension 
support etc.) 
--any other information required 
by affected people 
RPM/ 
PM 
LSF FOs 
CBOs 
PD 
18 
 
Final closure and endorsement of 
alternative crop plans 
FO 
CBOs 
LSF   PMU 
19 
Wage Employment Plans for 
landless laborers, fishers and 
vulnerable groups  
RPM/ 
PM 
LSF Labors 
Fishrs 
PMU 
Page  16
20 
Consultation and closure on the 
provision of alternative drinking 
Water supply to affected people, if 
any.  
 
21 
Consolidation of all of the above 
plans into a single report including  
aggregate costs,  supplementary 
assistance requirements, and M&E 
arrangements and. Public 
Disclosures done. Objections, if 
any, are addressed 
RPM/ 
PM 
SLF   PMU 
22 
Establish, in consultation with 
affected communities,  a 
mechanism for 
complaints/grievances redressal  
 
PMU 
PMU will share the Livelihood Assistance Plans together with dam-specific 
Environmental Assessment and Management Plan (EAMP) with the Bank 
task team and 
seek Bank’s no objection before the implementation begins.  
Implementation Phase  
23 Construction 
Management 
Committee established  - The 
committee is inclusive of the 
representatives of 
affected/beneficiary people  
RPM/ 
PM 
MASL/ID  
PMU 
24 
Cash Assistance Plan- 
Implemented 
RPM/ 
PM 
LSF FOs 
CBOs 
PMU 
25 
Wage Assistance Plan- 
Implemented 
RPM/ 
PM 
LSF DS/ 
GA 
PMU 
26 Facilities 
Plan 
–
Implemented RPM/ 
PM 
LSF DS/ 
 
GA 
PMU 
27 
EMP implemented  
EMC 
 
 
PMU/ 
WB 
28 
Day to Day oversight, Concurrent 
Monitoring, and ROGs 
RPM/ 
PM 
LSF CDS 
PMU 
29 
Monthly Meetings/ Reviews 
PMC/ 
PC 
 
30 Quarterly 
Reviews 
PMC/ 
PC 
 
PMU 
31 Preparation 
of 
Implementation 
Completion Report  
PMU 
Consultant
 
Bank 
GOSL : Government of Sri Lanka; PMU: Project Management Unit; PD: Project Director 
RPM: Resident Project Manager (Mahaweli Authority); PM: Project Manager (Irrigation 
Department); CDS: Community Development Specialist; FO: Farmers Organziation; CBOs: 
Community Based Organizations; DS: Divisional Secretariat; GA: Government Agent; Fishr: 
Fishers; Labors: Laborers; Assoc: Associated; AIR 
–
Activity Initiation Report.; IEC – 
Page  17
Information, Education and Communication; FO 
–
Farmers Organization; ID – Irrigation 
Department; MASL- Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka; LSF – Livelihood Support Facilitator; 
ES- Environmental Specialist; WB: World Bank; EMC – Environmental Monitoring Committee 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
February 
2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
January 
2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
March 2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is 
finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes – 
EAMF has 
been 
prepared 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) review and 
approve the EA report? 
Not yet 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and 
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local 
NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been 
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of 
safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and 
the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 
Page  18
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Nihal Fernando 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Sumith Pilapitiya 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Suryanarayan Satish 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Gajanand Pathmanathan 
 
Comments:   
wb101076 
C:\Documents and Settings\wb101076\My Documents\My Documents\NWAMI_SL\ISDS  Appraisal Stge -April 1- 2007.doc 
04/01/2007 9:58:00 AM
 
