                                                                                                                                                                                                      43446


Authorized
                                                                                                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                                                                                                              APPRAISAL STAGE

          Disclosure                                                                                        I. Basic Information
                                                                                                            Date prepared/updated: 05/15/2007                                     Report No.: AC2062
                    Public
                                                                                                            1. Basic Project Data
                                                                                                            Country: Sri Lanka                             Project ID: P097329
                                                                                                            Project Name: Governance and Capacity Building Project
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: Ismail Radwan
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: April 10, 2007       Estimated Board Date: November 29, 2007
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: SASFP                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                          Authorized
                                                                                                                                                           Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: Law and justice (50%);General public administration sector (25%);Central
                                                                                                            government administration (20%);Roads and highways (5%)
                                    Disclosure                                                              Theme: Other public sector governance (P);Economic statistics, modeling and
                                                                                                            forecasting (S);Macroeconomic management (S);Administrative and civil service reform

                                              Public                                                        (S);Law reform (S)
                                                                                                            IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
                                                                                                            IDA Amount (US$m.):             29.00
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            Other financing amounts by source:
                                                    Authorized                                                      BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                  8.00
                                                                                                                                                                                        8.00
                                                                                                            Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
                                                                                                            Simplified Processing                          Simple [X]           Repeater [X]
                                                              Disclosure
                                                                                                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                                                                                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [ ]
                                                                                                            or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)
                                                                        Public

                                                                                                            2. Project Objectives
                                                                                                            The proposed project will improve public sector management in the following areas by
                                                                                                            (a) providing assistance to the Auditor General's Department (AG) to improve
                                                                                                            accountability and transparency in the use of public resources (b) strengthening the
                                                                                                            capacity of the Department of Census and Statistics (DCS) to improve the evidence base
                                                                                                            for policy planning and ensuring that Sri Lanka's national policies are based on accurate
                                                                              Authorized                    and timely statistical information and analysis (c) supporting the National Procurement
                                                                                                            Agency (NPA) to build on existing achievements to guarantee that the reforms will be
                                                                                                            translated into concrete improvements in the performance of the national procurement
                                                                                                            system and make it more effective, efficient, transparent and fair; and (d) Support to
                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                            strengthen capacity at MOFP.

                                                                                                  Public    3. Project Description
                                                                                                            Component I: Improving Financial Management: Strengthening the Auditor General's
                                                                                                            Department

 Providing technical assistance to assist the AGs Department, in the following areas: (i)
Human Resources: to improve recruitment and training procedures, (ii) Communications
and External Relations: to improve communications with Parliament, auditees and the
general public for better understanding and relationships and creating the desired impacts
on Government operations; (iii) Audit Methodology: preparation of manuals and
guidelines to assist in the conduct of audits and the updating and revision for keeping up
with modern trends in public audit; and (iv) Information Technology: a gradual entry into
a fully computerized environment for audits with training programs and internet and
intranet facilities. Apart from these four areas, the Department of the AG needs to be
refurbished and up-graded, in order to facilitate working conditions as well as to
accommodate the required information technology.

 The project will finance the cost of consultants, public awareness programs, training
programs in house and overseas, civil works for refurbishment of premises, IT and office
equipment.



 Component 2: Statistical Capacity Upgrading
 Historically, Sri Lanka?s statistical system has generally enjoyed a well earned
reputation. The statistical system has carried out nationwide household and establishment
surveys since the late sixties. The Sri Lankan statistical system has evolved over time as a
decentralized system with the Department of Census and Statistics (DCS) serving as the
central hub. It has responsibility for collection, compilation, analysis, and dissemination
of a wide variety of statistics based on censuses, surveys of business establishments,
household surveys and data generated by administrative processes. The Central Bank of
Sri Lanka (CBSL) and statistical units in the Line Ministries are important players in the
system.
 However, DCS has encountered a number of inadequacies, such as under-investment in
infrastructure, weak mechanisms for coordination between the DCS, other statistical units
in the Line Ministries and the Central Bank, weak capacity to generate timely and
comprehensive data to cope with the pace of demand for data and delays in survey
processing due to the centralized data entry and processing systems.
 In order to overcome these deficiencies, the project shall support the DCS to build a
modern well coordinated national statistical system delivering comprehensive and high
quality data employing efficient and cost effective means by focusing on the following
key reform programmes: (a) Improving the statistical system through effective leadership
particularly among other data collection agencies and greater coordination among all
players in the system (b) Developing statistical series which are compatible with
international standards and conform to the needs of sustained economic development. (c)
Making effective use of IT to achieve high efficiency in survey design, data collection,
transmission, processing, management and dissemination (d) Building and improving the
statistical services to better serve data users. Therefore IDA support is for the
Implementation of the core data development program, actions covering Organizational
development & management, development of the Statistical infrastructure, investments in
Infrastructure (particularly Information Technology and office space) and an accelerated
program of Training and Skill development.

 Component 3: Improving Public Procurement
 The focus of this component is on achieving concrete results in the performance of the
national procurement system through measures and activities designed to further
implement the significant reforms that have already taken place. The aim is to achieve
and demonstrate the economic and efficiency gains brought about by the reformed
procurement system. As well as implementing additional reforms and supporting
activities, therefore, this component stresses the importance of providing demonstrable
results. The component is divided into 5 main sub-components. These are: (i)
Improvement of the procedural and legal framework in public procurement (ii)
Institutional and programmatic initiatives for training and skills enhancement (iii)
Effective procurement monitoring (a) Introduction of e-government procurement (e-GP).
(b) Implementation Monitoring Cell.
 The sub-components are briefly stated below:
 (i) Improvement of the procedural and legal framework in public procurement consists
of (a) Procurement Reform Strategy, (b) Supporting Documents (c) Complaints
Mechanism (d) Supplier/Contractor Procedures

 (ii) Institutional and programmatic initiatives for training and skills enhancement
consists of (a) Training Institute (b) Immediate Training Needs (c) Sustainable
Competence Training (d) Targeted Technical Assistance (e) Results monitoring

 (iii) Effective procurement monitoring consists of (a) System Monitoring (b) Entity
Monitoring

 (iv) Introduction of e-government procurement (e-GP) consists of (a) Tender
Publication (b) Electronic Library (c) E-tendering (d) E-cataloguing

 (v) Implementation Monitoring Cell.

 Component 4:            Capacity Strengthening Fund
 These untied resources will be to support capacity strengthening initiatives at the
Ministry of Finance and Planning (MOFP) as well as needs in other government
ministries and agencies that have not yet been foreseen or are not yet sufficiently
appraised to be included as separate sub-components within the project.

 I:Support to the MOFP: It is vital that the ministry should be equipped with the
financial, human and IT resources required to execute its responsibilities efficiently.
Support to strengthen the MOFP could focus on the following areas; (i) human resource
strengthening, (ii) organizational strengthening, (iii) IT systems implementation and (iv)
linkages program.

 II: Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA): The PEFA framework
measures the country?s PFM performance using a set of 31 indicators. This
subcomponent will support the Government of Sri Lanka to (a) carry out an integrated
assessment using the PEFA framework and to establish the baseline and a monitoring
mechanism for tracking progress in PFM; and (b) carry out appropriate capacity building

measures to improve the PFM performance. This will be done in two phases - the first
phase will involve the diagnostic work and the establishment of the baseline and the
second phase will address the capacity building initiatives identified by the study
including the establishment of a sustainable monitoring mechanism to track PFM
performance.

 III - Development of a Public Sector Professional Accountancy Institute: The Ministry
of Finance has decided to establish a Chartered Institute of Public Finance and
Accountancy of Sri Lanka. This Institute will absorb the existing Institute of Public
Finance and Development Accountancy and the Institute of Government Accounts and
Finance. The aim of the new institute would be to (i) specialize in the education and
training of accountants and auditors for the Sri Lanka public sector; (ii) preserve the
professional independence of public sector accountants and auditors and to secure
schemes of continuing professional development; (iii) have the authority to exercise
professional discipline over its members and students; (iv) have the capacity to develop
the principles, techniques and practice of public financial management, government
accounting and government auditing and to encourage the promotion of these principles,
techniques and practices within the Sri Lanka public sector in a manner that is consistent
with the reform program currently being established; (v) be able to provide advice and
consultancy and to arrange, or to undertake directly, the training of persons involved in
the delivery of public sector accounting and audit activity; and (vi) also to support the
development of financial management techniques for public sector managers. This
component will fund a technical assistance assignment to support the establishment and
the operations (training, office equipment and incremental operating costs) of the new
institute for a period of five years.

 IV - Strengthen the Sri Lanka Accounting and Auditing Standards Monitoring Board:
Corporate accounting and disclosure practices, particularly for publicly traded
companies, have improved over the past decade. In addition, GOSL has enacted the Sri
Lanka Accounting and Auditing Standards Act and the establishment of the Sri Lanka
Accounting and Auditing Standards Monitoring Board (SLAASMB). The SLAASMB,
has prepared an Action Plan based on the recommendations contained in the "Report on
Observance of Standards and Codes"(ROSC). This subcomponent is expected to cover
the cots of implementing the action plans over the first five years.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will be implemented throughout Sri Lanka.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Zarafshan H. Khawaja (OPCQC)
   Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASES)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                 Yes        No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                             X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Based on the scope of the Project the building construction civil works financed under the
project are the only activities that are likely to have potential environmental impacts.
Therefore, the components which support the civil works are:

 (a) Component I -Improving Financial Management: Civil works related to building
construction/refurbishment activities for the Auditor General's Department (AGD).

 (b) Component 2: Statistical Capacity Upgrading: Civil works related to building
construction for the Department of Census and Statistics (DCS).

 (c) Component 3: Improving public procurement: Civil works related to building
construction for a training institute for the National Procurement Agency (NPA)

 Considering the relatively limited scale of building construction works, it is not
anticipated that there will be significant and/or irreversible adverse environmental and
social impacts. Therefore the proposed operation is classified as Category B for
safeguards. The only Safeguards Policy that will be triggered under this project is OP/BP
4.01- Environmental Assessment and there is no likelihood that any other safeguards
policies will be applicable to this Project.

 Sri Lanka has a well established construction industry and the country has
institutionalized a process for obtaining building approval which ensures that the
proposed construction follows construction specifications and other relevant regulatory
requirements if the Urban Development Authority and the respective Local Authorities.
Therefore, it is proposed that Environmental Management Plans (EMP) based on an
environmental analysis of the potential impacts identified through an Environmental
Information Questionnaire would be undertaken for the routine building constructions,
instead of EIAs. In the event that any land-filling of low lying land and/or land located in
environmentally sensitive areas or in an area where there are GOSL restrictions on

building construction is proposed for any building construction a full EIA is a pre-
requisite for fund disbursement. Considering the scattered nature of construction works
under the project, it is not expected that there will be significant accumulated
environmental damage due to project activities.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Based on the activities proposed to be financed under the project, potential indirect and/or
long term impacts on the environment due to anticipated future activities in the project
area are not expected.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
As the locations of the proposed civil works are yet to be identified at this stage, site
specific EMPs or EIA cannot be conducted. In order to ensure compliance with OP 4.01,
an Environmental Safeguards Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared based
on which safeguards assessments will be conducted for the civil works financed under the
project once specific sites are identified. Accordingly, the ESMF has identified the
institutional arrangements for safeguards assessments and monitoring. The ESMF has
formed the basis for appraising the environmental and social aspects of the project.

 Construction specifications developed by the Institute for Construction Training and
Development (ICTAD) and the relevant regulation of the Urban Development Authority
and the respective Local Authorities will be followed during the construction/renovation
activities. The Borrower shall obtain all GOSL approval permits for construction and
renovation of buildings prior to fund disbursements for the civil works. The EMPs will
include specific guidelines for debris disposal as well as resource extraction (sand,
timber, metal etc). In order to avoid (encouraging) illegal extraction of resources such as
sand, clay for bricks and timber, all construction contracts under the project will include
clauses in the civil works contracts to ensure that such resources are obtained from
authorized locations and sources licensed by relevant GOSL authorities.

 SOCIAL:
 Overall, the project is expected to yield positive social development outcomes. It aims
to improve the functioning of key departments in the public sector to enhance
accountability and transparency in the use of public resources. Strengthening the
Government's ability to develop national policies based on accurate and timely statistical
information and analysis will ensure better and more transparent targeting of public
sector finances on national social and economic priorities, benefiting all Sri Lankans,
including the poor.

 Although the project supports small investments in infrastructure, particularly in
refurbishing existing government buildings for information technology and office space,
no acquisition of privately owned land or displacement of people is expected under the
project. Civil works will be carried out on publicly owned land free of any squatters or
encroachers.
 Implementation arrangements: The Procurement Officers of the respective
Implementing Agencies (AGD, DCS and NPA) shall be responsible to coordinate the
relevant procedures outlined in the ESMF. They shall procure the necessary expertise to
complete the Environmental Information Questionnaire and prepare EMPs for each site.
In addition, they will be responsible to ensure that all GOSL approval permits are
obtained prior to any fund disbursements for the respective building works. The
construction specifications specified by ICTAD and the EMP will form part of the
Conditions of Contract for all civil works contracts. Non-compliance with these
conditions should be linked to financial penalty clauses in the contract as well.
Compliance monitoring of the building codes and the EMP will be the responsibility of
the Procurement Staff and the Construction Supervisory Consultants of the respective
implementing agency/building works, respectively. Compliance will also be monitored
during IDA supervision missions.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key Implementing Agencies are the Auditor General's Department, the Department
of Census and Statistics and the National Procurement Agency. As mentioned above,
since the only activities that have the potential to cause impacts on the environment are
the civil works related to building constructions, the key implementing agencies will be
responsible to handle the construction activities according to the Government of Sri
Lanka regulations and the procedures stated in the ESMF. Since it is most likely that
building construction activities are likely to be within existing premises, limited in scale
or in authorized commercial development areas, demarcated by the Urban Development
Authority, it is not anticipated that there will be any public concerns with regard to the
project. However, in the event that there is any wider public interest with any potential
adverse impacts resulting from the civil works under this project, the respective
implementing agency is required to consult the affected public. In the event that there are
any affectees on sites being identified for the building works, all relevant stakeholders
will be consulted (according to the World Bank guidelines) and EMPs will be placed for
public comment. The ESMF has been disclosed in-country and in IDA's Public
Information Center.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       03/20/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                   03/27/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    03/30/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive

  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)        Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the        Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's     Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a     Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the         Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the           Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?

  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                            Name            Date
Task Team Leader:                 Mr Ismail Radwan                08/07/2006
Environmental Specialist:         Mr Sumith Pilapitiya
Social Development Specialist     Ms Zarafshan H. Khawaja
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg    04/23/2007
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                   Mr Simon C. Bell
 Comments:

