Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2754 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/20/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sri Lanka 
Project ID: P104792 
Project Name: Second Legal and Judcial Reforms Project (JJRP II) 
Task Team Leader: Sriyani M. Hulugalle 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 26, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASFP 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Law and justice (100%) 
Theme: Access to law and justice (P);Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project preparation commenced in 2005 as part of the Governance and Capacity Building 
Project and during a mission in December 2006, the Government requested the legal and judicial 
reforms project to be converted to a stand alone project and the request was approved by the 
SMU and CMU.  
 
The project development objective would be (i) to significantly improve the speed and 
efficiency of key governance processes within the courts, state legal agencies and Company 
Registry; and  (ii) to improve transparency in the courts, through  further investment and capacity 
building in the legal and judicial sector.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project will support the (a) formulation of a development strategy for the judiciary to ensure 
sustainability of the ongoing reforms including information technology (IT) and human resource 
development, (b) human resource development through knowledge enhancement, (c) improve 
Page  2
physical infrastructure to complement judicial and legal reforms, decentralize the appeal process, 
d)support enhancement of technology, e) support legislative and institutional reforms for 
reduction of transaction costs and f)project management.  
 
The project will therefore support the Government of Sri Lanka's long-term legal and judicial 
reforms program, and will include a selected set of priority activities identified by the 
Government as Phase II and Legal and Judicial Reforms being the follow-up-phase of a program, 
which originally commenced in the year 2000 under the ongoing Legal and Judicial Reforms 
Project.  
 
a) Judicial Reforms Strategy - Experience has shown that judicial reforms takes time and spans 
over decades. This component will assist the government and judiciary to produce a development 
strategy to guide judicial reforms in the medium and long term. The strategy in general will 
contain a vision for the future of the judiciary in Sri Lanka and a mission statement of its 
contribution to the country's development, focused on preparing the judiciary towards overall 
modernization while the infrastructure, IT and human resource strategy.  This will also help in 
establishing a judicial statistical base.  
 
2. Human Resource Development - The management of human resources in the judiciary plays 
a
key role for its performance. Phase II will provide assistance required specially to develop a 
monitoring and evaluation-based process for promotion of members of the judiciary, while 
recognizing the measures already taken by the Judicial Services Commission in this regard. In 
addition, the overall level of training in commercial law has been enhanced through long term 
and short-term foreign training as well as in-house training on a regular basis under the LJRP. 
Members of the judiciary and the legal profession have been given subject specific knowledge on 
current trends in law and new areas of law. Therefore, continuous training will be provided to 
improve and update their skills to be able to handle the more complex issues in the modern 
society.  
 
c) Infrastructure Improvement and provision of equipment: In order to improve human resource 
development and broad-base modern technology, improvement of infrastructure is an integral 
part of reforms. To support training to be conducted in a sustainable manner, a well-equipped 
modern judicial training centre is required. This facility can also be used by any others requiring 
training whenever not used for judicial training. The Government has already enacted legislation 
to decentralize hearing of appeals to the provincial level to substantially reduce the backlog and 
lead to expediency in clearing the cases and reduction in litigation. It will complement the court 
automation process further. The minor construction work in other provinces will be undertaken 
by the since some of the existing court houses in strategic locations do not have space for 
expansion and equipment will be funded by the proposed project.  
 
d) Enhancement of Information Technology:  As part of the judicial reforms strategy, the 
Government will prepare an ICT strategy for information technology. In the first phase, the 
government introduced audio recording and automated physical file tracking system in a selected 
number of courts. Drawing lessons from that initiative, the Government will introduce 
automation through a phased manner. In addition, the project will also undertake the company 
registry automation which will improve the business climate in the country, reduce the 
Page  3
transaction of businesses and facilitate entry and exit mechanisms for a company. This 
component also will further enhance the automation of the AG's department by computerizing 
the library and enhance the LawNet by incorporating regulations in the database further 
increasing access to law.  
 
e) Legislative Reforms for Reduction of Transaction Costs : The ease or difficulty of enforcing 
commercial contracts in Sri Lanka is below satisfactory level.Therefore through law revisions 
and introduction of loose leaf legislation the process of amendments and publication of the 
amendments more efficient.  
 
f) Project Management  
 
This component will constitute training, staff and administrative expenses   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be administered in Sri Lanka.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Based on the scope of the Project the sub component that is likely to result in potential impacts 
on the environment is Sub Component c), Infrastructure Improvement. This component will 
finance the construction of a judicial training centre, four Provincial high courts and the 
renovations of some court houses. Considering the relatively limited scale of construction and 
renovation works, it is not anticipated that there will be significant and/or irreversible adverse 
environmental and social impacts.  
 
Sri Lanka has a well established construction industry and the country has institutionalized a 
process for obtaining building approval which ensures that the proposed construction follows 
building codes and other relevant regulatory requirement of the Urban Development Authority. 
Therefore, the Borrower shall ensure to obtain all GOSL approval permits for 
construction/renovation of building and prepare Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) 
based on an environmental analysis of the potential impacts identified through and 
Environmental Information Questionnaire, prior to fund disbursement of the respective civil 
works. In addition, Environmental Codes of Practices developed by the Institute for Construction 
Training and Development (ICTAD) will be followed during the construction/renovation 
activities. The EMPs will contain guidelines for debris disposal and resource extraction. All 
EMPs for the construction of new sites will be approved by IDA prior to fund disbursement. In 
the event that any land-filling of low lying land and/or land located at environmentally sensitive 
areas is proposed for any building construction a full EIA is a pre-requisite.  
 
Although the project supports infrastructure improvements through the construction of a 
judicial training center and regional courts to decentralize the appellate process, agreement has 
been reached with the Government that only publicly owned land free of any squatters or 
encroachers will be used for these interventions.  No acquisition of privately owned land or 
displacement of people is expected under the project.  The Policy on Involuntary Resettlement 
OP 4.12 is not triggered by the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  4
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASES) 
Ms Zarafshan H. Khawaja (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Considering the relatively limited scale of construction and renovation works, it is not 
anticipated that there will be significant and/or irreversible adverse environmental and social 
impacts. Therefore the proposed project is classified as Category B. The Environmental 
Safegaurds Policy which will require consideration under this project is OP/BP 4.01 - 
Environmental Assessment; there is no likelihood that any other safeguard policies will be 
applicable to this project.  
 
No acquisition of privately owned land or displacement of people is expected under the 
project.  The Policy on Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12 is not triggered by the project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/21/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
time frame to launch the EMPs cannot be provided, as the construction/renovation sites 
have not been identified as yet.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sriyani M. Hulugalle 
02/15/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
02/15/2007 
Comments:  Safeguards oversight transferred to SASFD. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simon C. Bell 
02/20/2007 
Comments:  Approved 
