Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/14/2007 
Report No.:  AC2803
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sri Lanka 
Project ID:  P104792 
Project Name:  Second Legal and Judcial Reforms Project (LJRP II) 
Task Team Leader:  Sriyani M. Hulugalle 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 26, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASFP 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Law and justice (100%) 
Theme:  Access to law and justice (P);Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
45.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
5.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project preparation commenced in 2005 as part of the Governance and Capacity 
Building Project and during a mission in December 2006, the Government requested the 
legal and judicial reforms project to be converted to a stand alone project and the request 
was approved by the SMU and CMU.  
 
The project development objective would be (i) to significantly improve the speed and 
efficiency of key governance processes within the courts, state legal agencies and 
Company Registry; and  (ii) to improve transparency in the courts, through  further 
investment and capacity building in the legal and judicial sector.  
 
The project will support the Government of Sri Lanka's long-term legal and judicial 
reforms program, and will include a selected set of priority activities identified by the 
Government as Phase II - Legal and Judicial Reforms being the follow-up phase of a 
program, which originally commenced in the year 2000 under the ongoing Legal and 
Judicial Reforms Project.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The Project will support the (a) formulation of a development strategy for the judiciary to 
ensure sustainability of the ongoing reforms including information technology (IT) and 
human resource development, (b) human resource development through knowledge 
enhancement, (c) improve physical infrastructure to complement judicial and legal 
reforms, decentralize the appeal process, d)support enhancement of technology, e) 
support legislative and institutional reforms for reduction of transaction costs and 
f)project management.  
 
The main components are as follows:  
 
a) Judicial Reforms Strategy - Experience has shown that judicial reforms takes time 
and spans over decades. This component will assist the government and judiciary to 
produce a development strategy to guide judicial reforms in the medium and long term. 
The strategy in general will contain a vision for the future of the judiciary in Sri Lanka 
and a mission statement of its contribution to the country's development, focused on 
preparing the judiciary towards overall modernization while the infrastructure, IT and 
human resource strategy.  This will also help in establishing a judicial statistical base.  
 
2. Human Resource Development - The management of human resources in the 
judiciary plays a key role for its performance. Phase II will provide assistance required 
specially to develop a monitoring and evaluation-based process for promotion of 
members of the judiciary, while recognizing the measures already taken by the Judicial 
Services Commission in this regard. In addition, the overall level of training in 
commercial law has been enhanced through long term and short-term foreign training as 
well as in-house training on a regular basis under the LJRP. Members of the judiciary and 
the legal profession have been given subject specific knowledge on current trends in law 
and new areas of law. Therefore, continuous training will be provided to improve and 
update their skills to be able to handle the more complex issues in the modern society.  
 
c) Infrastructure Improvement and provision of equipment-In order to improve human 
resource development and broad-base modern technology, improvement of infrastructure 
is an integral part of reforms. To support training to be conducted in a sustainable 
manner, a well-equipped modern judicial training centre is required. This facility can also 
be used by any others requiring training whenever not used for judicial training. The 
Government has already enacted legislation to decentralize hearing of appeals to the 
provincial level to substantially reduce the backlog and lead to expediency in clearing the 
cases and reduction in litigation. It will complement the court automation process further. 
The minor construction work in other provinces will be undertaken by the since some of 
the existing court houses in strategic locations do not have space for expansion and 
equipment will be funded by the proposed project.  
 
d) Enhancement of Information Technology - As part of the judicial reforms strategy, 
the Government will prepare an ICT strategy for information technology. In the first 
phase, the government introduced audio recording and automated physical file tracking 
system in a selected number of courts. Drawing lessons from that initiative, the 
Government will introduce automation through a phased manner. In addition, the project 
Page  3
will also undertake the company registry automation which will improve the business 
climate in the country, reduce the transaction of businesses and facilitate entry and exit 
mechanisms for a company. This component also will further enhance the automation of 
the AG's department by computerizing the library and enhance the LawNet by 
incorporating regulations in the database further increasing access to law.  
 
e) Legislative Reforms for Reduction of Transaction Costs - The ease or difficulty of 
enforcing commercial contracts in Sri Lanka is below satisfactory level.Therefore 
through law revisions and introduction of loose leaf legislation the process of 
amendments and publication of the amendments more efficient.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented throughout Sri Lanka.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Zarafshan H. Khawaja (SASES) 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Based on the scope of the Project the only sub component that may result in potential 
impacts on the environment is Sub Component 3, Infrastructure Improvement. This 
component will finance the construction of a well equipped modern judicial training 
centre, support the proposed decentralization through the Provincial High Courts in four 
selected locations in the Southern, Western and North Western provinces, which may 
include construction of new court houses and related infrastructure and the renovations of 
a
few Court Houses.  
 
Considering the relatively limited scale of construction and renovation works, it is not 
anticipated that there will be significant and/or irreversible adverse environmental and 
Page  4
social impacts. Therefore the proposed operation is classified as Category B. The 
Environmental Safeguards Policy which will require consideration under this project is 
OP/BP 4.01- Environmental Assessment; there is no likelihood that any other safeguard 
policies will be applicable to this Project. 
 
Full Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) will not be needed for the construction 
of new buildings. Sri Lanka has a well established construction industry and the country 
has institutionalized a process for obtaining building approval which ensures that the 
proposed construction follows Building specifications and other relevant regulatory 
requirements if the Urban Development Authority.  Therefore, it is proposed that 
Environmental Management Plans (EMP) based on an environmental analysis of the 
potential impacts identified through an Environmental Information Questionnaire would 
be undertaken for the routine building constructions, instead of EIAs. In the event that 
any land-filling of low lying land and/or land located in environmentally sensitive areas 
is proposed for any building construction a full EIA is a pre-requisite. Considering the 
scattered nature of construction works under the project, it is not expected that there will 
be significant accumulated environmental damage due to project activities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Based on the activities proposed to be financed under the project, potential indirect and/or 
long term impacts on the environment due to anticipated future activities in the project 
area, are not expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As specific civil work activities are yet to be identified, detailed environmental and social 
issues cannot be identified at this stage.  Therefore, an Environmental Safeguards 
Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared based on which safeguards 
assessments will be conducted for the civil works financed under the project. In such 
circumstances, according to OP 4.01, the ESMF will require to identify the 
implementation and institutional arrangements upon which the environmental screening, 
EA review and implementation of mitigation and monitoring plans related to the 
construction work will be carried out. The ESMF has formed the basis for appraising the 
environmental and social aspects of the project. 
 
Considering the relatively limited scale of construction and renovation works, it is not 
anticipated that there will be significant and/or irreversible adverse environmental and 
social impacts. In these circumstances the following safeguard measures are being 
proposed by the Borrower in the ESMF: Environmental Management Plans (EMP) based 
on an environmental analysis of the potential impacts identified through an 
Environmental Information Questionnaire would be undertaken for the routine building 
Page  5
constructions. The preparation and approval of EMPs by IDA will be a pre-requisite for 
fund disbursements for any civil works under this project. In the event that any land-
filling of low lying land and/or land located in environmentally sensitive areas is 
proposed for any building construction a full EIA is a pre-requisite. Construction 
specifications developed by the Institute for Construction Training and Development 
(ICTAD) and the relevant regulation of the Urban Development Authority will be 
followed during the construction/renovation activities. The Borrower shall obtain all 
GOSL approval permits for construction and renovation of buildings prior to fund 
disbursements for the civil works. The EMPs will include specific guidelines for debris 
disposal as well as resource extraction. In order to avoid (encouraging) illegal extraction 
of resources such as sand, clay for bricks and timber, all construction contracts under the 
project will include clauses in the civil works contracts to ensure that such resources are 
obtained from authorized locations and sources licensed by relevant GOSL authorities.  
 
SOCIAL:  Although the project supports infrastructure improvements through the 
construction of a judicial training center and regional courts to decentralize the appellate 
process, agreement has been reached with the Government that only publicly owned land 
free of any squatters or encroachers will be used for these interventions.  No acquisition 
of privately owned land or displacement of people is expected under the project.  The 
Policy on Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12 is not triggered by the project.  
 
As the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) is responsible for coordinating the relevant 
tasks in the Project, they will take the responsibility to procure the necessary expertise to 
complete the Environmental Information Questionnaire and based on its findings, prepare 
EMP for each site.  The PCU will be responsible to ensure that all GOSL approval 
permits for construction/renovation of buildings are obtained prior to any fund 
disbursements for the respective civil works. The construction specifications prepared by 
ICTAD and the EMP will form part of the Conditions of Contract for all civil works 
contracts. Non-compliance with these conditions should be linked to financial penalty 
clauses in the contract as well.Compliance monitoring of the building codes and the EMP 
will be the responsibility of the PCU and the Supervisory Consultants. Compliance will 
also be monitored during IDA supervision missions.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Since the locations of the proposed constructions are not known at this stage, site specific 
stakeholder consultations have not been undertaken. Once the sites are identified and the 
Environmental Management Plans are being developed, all relevant stakeholders will be 
consulted (according to the World Bank guidelines).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/26/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/26/2007 
 
Page  6
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/16/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The ESMF has been disclosed in-country and in IDA?s Public Information Center in 
accordance with BP 17.50 requirements of disclosure. 
 
Considering the nature of activities proposed under Component 3- Infrastructure 
Improvement, the likely impacts on the environment are limited in scale and localized. In 
addition, since most building construction will be within existing court premises, there is 
no necessity for in-country disclosure of the EMPs. In the event that there are any 
affectees identified in the EMPs, such EMPs will be placed for public comment. The 
EMPs will be prepared by the Borrower and will be approved by IDA prior to fund 
disbursement. At present since the construction/renovation sites have not been identified 
as yet, site specific EMPs have not been prepared. However, once the sites have been 
identified, the relevant stakeholders will be consulted during the preparation of the EMPs.  
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
Yes 
Page  7
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sriyani M. Hulugalle 
03/06/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya 
03/02/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Zarafshan H. Khawaja 
03/02/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simon C. Bell 
03/09/2007 
Comments:  Approved 
