Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
APPRAISAL
 
STAGE 
 
Report No.: 
Date prepared/updated:  May 11, 2007 
 
I.  Basic Information 
 
1. Basic Project Data 
 
Country: 
Sri Lanka
 
Project ID:  
P101699
 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
Project Name: 
Renewable Energy for Rural Economic Development 
–
Additional Financing
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mudassar Imran
 
Estimated Appraisal Date:
 May 10, 2007
 
Estimated Board Date: 
June 14, 2007
 
Managing Unit:  
SASSD
 Lending 
Instrument: 
Specific Investment Loan 
(SIL)
 
Sector: 
Renewable Energy (100%)
 
Theme: 
Infrastructure services for private sector development (P); Rural services and 
infrastructure (P); Climate change (P); Participation and civic engagement (P); Other financial and 
private sector development (S)
 
IBRD Amount (US$m.):                       
0.0
 
IDA Amount (US$m.):                         
43.2
 
(includes $3.2 million RERED balance) 
 
GEF Amount (US$m.):                         
1.1 (RERED balance
)
PCF Amount (US$m.):                          
0.0
 
Other financing amounts by source:     
58.2 
 
Government of Sri Lanka 
5.5 
Sub-borrower 29.5 
PCIs 23.2 
TOTAL 58.2 
 
Environmental Category: 
B
Most of the anticipated impacts are local, reversible and are proposed to be mitigated/minimized by 
addressing them through good environment and social management practices as described in the 
Environmental and Social Safeguards Assessment and Management Framework.
 
Is this a transferred project 
Yes [
X
]
No [ ] 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X ] 
    Repeater [ ] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [
X
]
2. Project Objectives: 
 
Sri Lanka’s development objectives for the proposed Project are to (i) increase off-grid rural 
electricity access to promote economic growth and social development, and (ii) diversify and 
expand on-grid power generation through renewable resources.  The Government intends to 
achieve these objectives by enhancing the vibrant renewable energy market established by the 
ESD and the RERED Projects, with emphasis on private sector and community based solutions, 
enabling increased energy access, higher productive consumption of electricity and greater 
39835
Page  2
dependence on indigenous renewable resources for power generation.  This would enable Sri 
Lanka to invigorate its rural economy, empower and build assets of the poor and promote rural 
economic development and well-being, in an environmentally responsible fashion.  
 
While Sri Lanka has made strong progress in terms of promoting private investments in 
renewables and rural energy, and the foundations have been laid for sustainable growth of the 
renewable energy industry in Sri Lanka, the limited availability of long- term investment capital 
to the private sector remains a major constraint. Developments of domestic capital markets that 
will permit private banks to raise all the required capital on their own account seem remote in the 
near and medium term. Therefore, in the absence of certainty about the availability of additional 
financing of the type provided under the RERED Project (after the closing of this project), 
Participating Credit Institutions (PCIs) are expected to either postpone loan approvals for new 
projects, and/or offer shorter term (four year) loans, which will effectively render projects 
unviable. At present the Administrative Unit at DFCC Bank, that implements the Project, has 
imposed a moratorium on approving loans for grid- connected projects due to the full 
commitment of RERED funds for this sub-sector, and these applications are being placed in a 
queue until supplementary funds are sourced.  This has already resulted in a slow down of 
applications for new projects. Any further delay in signaling to the industry the availability of 
additional finance could destroy the momentum built up through the RERED Project. This 
threatens to interrupt the development of the pipeline of future renewable energy investments, 
compromising the GoSL’s objective of improving access to clean, renewable sources of energy.  
 
In line with the objectives of RERED, the additional financing project would continue to address 
the long-term funding constraints of the local capital markets, by providing a maturity period 
that matches the payback period of renewable energy investments (7-9 years).  This would 
facilitate the development of the renewable energy sector thereby contributing to the GoSL’s 
renewable energy development goal.  
 
3. Project Description: 
 
In line with the objectives of the RERED, the Additional Financing Project would facilitate the 
development of the renewable energy sector thereby contributing to the GoSL’s renewable energy 
development goal. The Additional Financing would be used for the implementation of activities 
which would scale-up impact and development effectiveness of the project. It will maintain the 
same project components as RERED further supporting the following six activities: (1) grid-
connected power generation projects from renewable sources of energy - mini-hydro, wind and 
biomass etc; (2) solar photo voltaic for household, commercial and institutional use; (3) 
independent grid systems to further support commercialization of village hydro and other 
community based  systems; (4) energy efficiency and demand side management with credit 
support for further private sector development for the provision of energy efficiency services; (5) 
cross-sectoral energy applications by providing credit support to rural enterprises to realize direct 
and indirect economic benefits of electrification and stimulating demand for electricity services; 
and (6) technical assistance for various components of the project including support for the 
institutional and policy reform agenda of the Government.  An indicative financing plan is as 
follows:  
 
Indicative Financing Plan*
Amounts in US$ million 
 
Component 
US$ m 
Page  3
Indicative 
Costs 
%of 
Total 
IDA 
IDA 
balanc
e
GEF 
balanc
e
Co-
financing*
*
Grid-Connected Hydro, 
Wind and Biomass 
60.0
61.9%
28.0
0.0
0.0
32.0
Solar PV Investments 
30.0
30.9%
11.0
0.0
0.1
18.9
Independent Grid 
Systems 
1.7
1.8%
0.5
0.0
0.8
0.4
Energy Efficiency 
1.0
1.0%
0.5
0.0
0.0
0.5
Cross-sectoral Energy 
Applications *** 
0.5
0.5%
0.0
0.2*
0.0
0.3
Technical Assistance 
3.8
3.9%
0.0
3.0
0.2
0.6
Total 
97.0
100.0%
40.0
3.2
1.1
52.7
Note *: IDA is expected to provide US$ 40 million for the Additional Financing Operation. However, by June 2007, an 
additional unutilized balance of roughly US$ 4.3 million (US$ 1.1 million GEF funds and US$ 3.2 million IDA Credit) 
would also be available from the RERED project which would be utilized over the implementation period of the 
Additional Financing. 
 
Note**: Co-financing from private and community equity, government, commercial banks - See Basic Project Data 
table.  
 
Note***: IDA balance to be utilized for Cross-sectoral Energy Application will be to provide technical assistance 
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis: 
 
The project area essentially covers Sri Lanka and any rural household or enterprise in Sri Lanka is 
a
potential beneficiary. 
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
 
Sumith Pilapitiya, Lead Environmental Specialist 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
The use of renewable energy technologies will yield net positive environmental impacts.  Solar 
home systems (SHS) and village hydro projects will result in the replacement of kerosene and 
other fuels that are currently used for lighting resulting in corresponding reductions in indoor air 
pollution.  The expansion of grid connected mini hydro schemes and the introduction of wind 
power and biomass energy systems would likewise reduce the need for fossil fuel based power 
generation.  The replacement of fossil fuel based power generation plants will reduce emissions 
of SOx, NOx, CO2, and particulates.   This would result in improved air quality, particularly in 
already polluted urban environments, where the likelihood of new fossil fuel based power 
generation plants being located is greater due to infrastructure constraints in Sri Lanka.  Biomass 
energy systems have the added advantage of contributing to the reduction of the agricultural 
waste disposal problem.    
 
The use of photovoltaics for electricity generation is fairly benign from an environmental point of 
view.  The only potential environmental issue with regard to SHS is the disposal of lead acid or 
nickel-cadmium batteries used in SHS.  GOSL has developed standards for recycling of used 
batteries under the on-going IDA financed RERED project.  The grid connected mini hydro as 
well as village hydro projects will be run-of-the river as opposed to storage projects, therefore, 
the long term environmental impacts are considered to be minor.  Potential impacts could be 
associated with partial dewatering of a section of the riverbed from the intake until water is 
returned to the river downstream of the powerhouse and consequent impacts on aquatic life in the 
dewatered section, potential soil erosion caused by flushing flows discharged from sedimentation 
basins and by overflows at the forebays, potential ground instability caused by canal/pipe 
construction, and cutting of trees for use of power poles for village hydro projects.  Commercial 
wind farms could have minor environmental problems, particularly with regard to interference in 
migration patterns of birds and noise caused by the aerodynamic interaction between the wind 
and turbine blades.  The use of biomass for power generation poses the risk of deforestation in the 
process of supply of fuelwood.  The Government has decided that only dedicated fuelwood 
plantations grown on agriculturally marginal lands as well as community home gardens will be 
used to supply fuelwood to biomass energy plants.  While this would reduce the chance of 
deforestation, it also raises issues of current land uses of the identified lands which may involve 
displacement of grazing cattle, wildlife migration routes etc., that need to be addressed in an EA.  
Separate EAs will be conducted on fuelwood plantations.  While biomass energy systems pose a 
significant risk of reasonably high levels of air pollution, it is anticipated that the emissions will 
be less polluting than fossil fuel plants, considering the poor quality of petroleum fuels in Sri 
Lanka.                   
 
As specific sub-project sites are yet to be identified, sub-project specific environmental issues 
cannot be identified at this stage.  The information given above identifies generic environmental 
issues associated with typical renewable energy systems, proposed under this project.  It has been 
agreed with GOSL that the site selection criteria for sub-projects will eliminate any projects that 
would trigger the Natural Habitats Policy.  Based on the experience of the previous IDA financed 
Energy Services Project (ESD) and the on-going RERED Project, it is unlikely that there will be 
any resettlement and/or land acquisition.  In the unlikely event that there is land acquisition 
and/or resettlement in a sub-project the Government has agreed to inform the Bank and ensure 
that the sub-project developers follow the requirements under the Involuntary Resettlement 
Page  5
safeguard policy (OP/BP 4.12) and the National Involuntary Resettlement Policy (NIRP) which is 
in line with the B
ank’s OP/BP 4.12.  As the Government has determined that all biomass for sub-
projects will be harvested from designated fuelwood plantations located in agriculturally marginal 
lands, and the experience in ESD and RERED has shown that the projects have not resulted in 
any deforestation the Forestry safeguard policy (OP/GP 4.36) has not been triggered. Since the 
project will finance only run of the river small hydro power projects of less than 10 MW 
capacities, it is not anticipated that Dam safety will be an issue.  The EA safeguard policy (OP/BP 
4.01) will be triggered under the project and will be fully addressed under the
 
Environmental and 
Social Safeguards Assessment and Management Framework (ESSAMF) that has been prepared, 
based on which project specific EAs will be conducted once sub-projects have been identified.  
This ESAMF is the same as that used for the on-going RERED project, so the implementing 
agency (the AU) and sub-project developers are familiar with its requirements.    
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 
the project area: 
 
Considering the type of sub-projects eligible for financing under the Credit Line (described 
above), it is anticipated that there will be no cumulative adverse impacts.  However, sub-project 
specific EAs will be conducted based on the ESSAMF agreed with GOSL, which will identify 
any cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy and/or due to 
multiple project components, and recommend mitigatory measures to reduce such impacts.  
 
Since sub-project sites are yet to be identified, it is difficult to make predictions about potential 
long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.  Considering the use of 
renewable energy technologies will yield net positive environmental impacts, with only minor 
reversible adverse impacts, in general the sub-projects should not contribute towards cumulative 
adverse impacts due to future developments in the sub project areas.  All development projects in 
Sri Lanka have to go through a “site clearance” approval process and an Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIA) or Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) prior to approval being granted for 
construction.  This process takes cumulative environmental impacts of existing projects into 
account prior to approval being granted for new development activities, therefore, it is not 
anticipated that any potential adverse long term impacts will arise in the sub-project areas due to 
future development activities.     
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts: 
 
The Least Cost Generation Expansion Plan of the Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB) has taken 
environmental impacts into account in the planning model used to identify new power generation 
options.  The plan and the Rural Electrification Policy of the Government of Sri Lanka clearly 
identifies the role for small scale renewable energy in the power development plans for Sri Lanka.  
This decision has been made after considering cost-benefits including environmental impacts of 
various power generation options. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: 
 
All subprojects will undertake project specific EAs based on the ESSAMF developed by GOSL 
for the RERED Project and approved by the Bank in 2002.  The Framework is consistent with the 
World Bank Safeguard Policies and the National Environment Act of Sri Lanka.  The subproject 
proponent will be responsible for preparing the EAs with assistance from consultants.  The EAs 
Page  6
will be reviewed initially by the DFCC Administrative Unit for technical quality and compliance 
with the Framework and then by the Central Environmental Authority (CEA) or the Project 
Clearance Agency (PCA), as designated by the CEA for clearance.  The CEA and PCAs have a 
good record of environmental and social responsibility.  Since similar IEE/EAs have been 
reviewed by the CEA and PCAs in the IDA financed ESD and RERED projects, the agencies 
have over 10 years experience of environmental safeguards management in renewable energy 
projects.  The Bank has experience of satisfactory performance of the CEA and PCAs (with CEA 
guidance), undertaking effective EA assessments of complex projects.  The CEA has the 
responsibility of monitoring EMPs. 
 
In addition, it has been agreed with GOSL that all subproject EAs involving mini-hydro projects 
in excess of 5 MWs, wind energy projects exceeding 10 MWs, all biomass projects and any 
subproject involving land acquisition and/or resettlement will be reviewed and cleared by IDA 
prior to disbursement from the Credit line.   
 
Although there has been no involuntary resettlement under either the ESD or on-going RERED 
Projects, the ESSAMF which was prepared for the RERED project (which will be used for the 
Additional Financing as well) has a section on OP/BP 4.12 and provides detailed guidelines for 
its full implementation.  Although the present Bank Team working on this project has no Social 
Safeguards Specialist, one will be taken on as part of the team as soon as any sub-project requires 
any resettlement. The Involuntary resettlement policy has been triggered as a precaution to alert 
the project stakeholders of its importance in the event of any resettlement.  
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people: 
 
Rural communities who are beneficiaries of the off grid electrification component are the main 
stakeholders, with the local communities, the sub project proponent  and Ceylon Electricity Board 
(CEB) being the main stakeholders for the grid connected component.   
 
Since the off-grid electrification component will be community based, community consultations 
will commence from identification of the sub-project.  Since system maintenance, tariff setting 
etc., will be undertaken by the community, on-going community consultations are in-built into the 
project design.  For the grid connected component, in accordance with the Environmental and 
Social Assessment Framework, the sub-project proponent is required to commence consultations 
with the local community at the project site from the initial scooping stage and during the EA 
preparation process.  Once the EA is prepared, the document has to be placed in the local 
community and in three locations (the sub-project location, the Central Environmental Authority 
and the Local Authority of the area) accessible to the public for  formal review and comment 
prior to the CEA or PCA giving environmental clearance to commence construction of the 
project.   The ESSAMF subject to public disclosure in country in 2002 (preparation for RERED) 
but will once again be placed in the public domain and comments from public consultations will 
be solicited.  
 
Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
2/20/2002 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
2/20/2002 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
2/20/2002 
Page  7
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 
Not Applicable (NA) 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
NA 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
NA 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
NA 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
NA 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
NA 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
NA 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
NA 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
NA 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
NA 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is 
finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) 
report? 
Yes [ X ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector 
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report? 
The Project will be using the 
Environmental and Social Safeguards 
Assessment and Management 
Framework prepared for the RERED 
project and approved by the Regional 
Safeguards Coordinator in 2002.   
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated 
in the credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or 
degradation of critical natural habitats? 
Yes [  ]          No [ X ]          N/A [  ] 
If the project would result in significant conversion or 
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the 
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank? 
Not Applicable 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X  ] 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X  ] 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a 
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager?  Are PMP 
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Not Applicable 
OP/BP 4.11 
–
Physical Cultural Resources
 
Page  8
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural 
property? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X  ] 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the 
potential adverse impacts on physical cultural resources? 
Not Applicable 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework 
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected 
Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or 
Sector Manager review the plan? 
Not Applicable 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design 
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social 
Development Unit? 
Not Applicable 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy 
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been 
prepared? 
Yes [ X ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or 
Sector Manager review and approve the plan/policy 
framework/process framework? 
The ESSAMF has outlined the process 
to be followed in the event that 
involuntary resettlement is necessary.   
OP/BP 4.36 
–
Forests
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues 
and constraints been carried out? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to 
overcome these constraints? 
Not Applicable 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, 
does it include provisions for certification system? 
Not Applicable 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent 
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the 
Bank? 
Not Applicable 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared 
and arrangements been made for public awareness and 
training? 
Not Applicable 
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X ] 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the 
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal 
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Not Applicable 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
Not Applicable 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Not Applicable 
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the 
international aspects of the project, including the procedures 
to be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the 
issue, been prepared 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ X ] 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred 
to in the OP? 
Not Applicable 
Page  9
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the 
World Bank's Infoshop? 
Yes [X  ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public 
place in a form and language that are understandable and 
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes [X  ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included 
in the project cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project 
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed 
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in 
the project legal documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mudassar Imran 
April 20, 2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Sumith Pilapitiya 
April 20, 2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
May 16, 2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Salman Zaheer 
April 25, 2007 
Comments:   
Page  10
