Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/27/2006 
Report No.:  AC2541
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sri Lanka 
Project ID:  P100390 
Project Name:  Sri Lanka: Puttalam Housing Project 
Task Team Leader:  Naresha Duraiswamy 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 18, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: February 6, 2007 
Managing Unit:  SASEI 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Housing construction (47%);Water supply (47%);General public administration 
sector (6%) 
Theme:  Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P);Access to urban services 
and housing (P);Social safety nets (P);Pollution management and environmental health 
(P);Personal and property rights (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
32.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.20
2.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project is intended to provide affordable and improved housing units and 
access to safe water and sanitation to IDPs who have settled down in the Puttalam 
District as a result of being displaced from the North East region due to the civil conflict. 
The project intends to: (i) meet the housing needs of the conflict-affected population in 
Puttalam District, with the caveat that IDPs in Puttalam would be integrated into their 
current location of choice; and (ii) provide drinking water, sanitation for IDPs and 
selected non-IDPs in close proximity of the camps, and (iii) mitigate environmental 
problems including those caused by poor internal roads and drainage systems.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Puttalam Housing Project would have the following components:  
 
a. 
Housing Support Cash Grant - The Project would provide housing support cash 
grants to eligible IDPs to construct permanent houses or upgrade partially built houses in 
141 refugee camps.  The cash grants would be of two categories: (a) Rs.250,000 for the 
Page  2
construction of a permanent house, and (b) Rs.100,000 to upgrade a partially-completed 
house to the level of a completed ?core house?.  IDA funds are proposed for the 
construction of about 5,653 new houses and the completion of 2,232 half-
completed/semi-permanent houses in 141 refugee camps, which would cost about US$ 
16.0 million.  Criteria to identify refugee camps for participation in the project have 
already been developed and used during the project appraisal to rank the refugee camps 
based on social criteria.  Then, environmental criteria were superimposed to sequence the 
4
phases of the construction.  
 
b. 
Environmental Mitigation / Internal Roads ? The Government carried out a 
preliminary Environmental Assessment EA) of 111 out of 141 camps in order to identify 
critical environmental risks.  The assessment report considered poor drainage/flooding as 
one of the main criteria that call for intervention and priority environmental mitigation 
measures.   Flooding can be caused by poor condition of roads and lack of proper 
drainage system.  The report also concluded that instability due to construction on sand 
dunes, lack of solid waste disposal facilities and services, inadequate sanitation facilities 
and water pollution due to excessive use of agricultural chemicals were among the main 
causes of environmental problems. The proposed Puttalam Housing Project has allocated 
approximately US$ 3.4 million for mitigation of priority environmental issues. Road 
works will be limited to ensuring that there will be minimal ponding of water on road 
surfaces and construction of drainage for collection of runoff in camps which flooding is 
reported to be of concerns of its residence.  
 
c. 
Water and Sanitation - The proposed credit would improve IDPs? access to safe 
drinking water and sanitation, and improve the environment.  It would be important to 
ensure the supply of safe drinking water for the IDPs and selected non-IDPs.  It is 
estimated that an amount of US$ 12.6 million would be required to provide water and 
sanitation to a target of 15,400 IDP and over 4,000 non-IDP beneficiaries. The 
Government has completed a concept feasibility study for the provision of clean drinking 
water to be funded under the PPF. Site specific detailed engineering studies will soon 
commence to provide the road map for the implementation.  
 
d. 
Technical Support for Implementation - The complexity of the project, the social 
and environmental issues, and quality and accessibility of water and sanitation in the 
refugee camps in Puttalam require detailed analysis of the situation and close project 
monitoring.  Consequently, an area-based infrastructure plan would be formulated 
through a community consultation process. The project would support technical support 
activities during the project preparation and implementation.  
 
e. 
Administration Support for Implementation - The Ministry of Resettlement would 
have the overall responsibility for project implementation.  It would work closely with 
relevant institutions such as the National Water Supply and Drainage Board, and the 
North West Provincial Road Development Authority. The proposed Credit would support 
the operating costs of the project.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed program would cover 32 GN divisions in a total of 4 Divisional Secretariat 
Divisions in the Puttalam District of Sri Lanka. The project area has a dry and warm 
climate with scarce water resources. Important and sensitive coastal habitats are a key 
natural feature in the area with agriculture and aquaculture forming two of the key land 
use patterns. The program will not finance construction activities within natural habitats, 
declared forest and wildlife areas, therefore, would not have any adverse impact on 
environmentally sensitive areas. It will not support the reconstruction of homes with 
disputed legal title.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASES) 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Social Issues:  
 
Indigenous Peoples. There are no Indigenous Peoples among the project beneficiaries 
who are defined by their displacement from the North in 1990. There do not appear to be 
Indigenous Peoples among the host communities in the affected GH divisions in 
Puttalam.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement. There will be no involuntary resettlement (OP 4.12), under 
PHP.  There will be no land acquisition or involuntary resettlement in the housing 
component since proof of existing land rights, inter alia, is a precondition for eligibility 
for housing grant, and the project does not comprise new settlements or relocation.  
Minor acquisition of government land may be unavoidable in connection with the 
environmental mitigation plans and the provision of water supply to the camps and 
adjacent non-IDP communities. Since the detailed plans for water supply and 
Page  4
environmental mitigation are not known at this stage, an Environmental and Social 
Safeguards Assessment Framework (ESSAF) which provides guidance on the approach 
to be taken during program implementation for the site selection and design of relevant 
subprojects and the planning of mitigation measures has been prepared.  It has been 
agreed with the Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL) that no land acquisition will be 
financed under the credit.  
 
Environmental Issues:  
 
Environmental Assessment: An Environmental and Social Safeguards Assessment 
Framework (ESSAF) has been prepared to provide guidance on the approach to be taken 
for undertaking environmental and social assessments and preparation of Environmental 
Management Plans (EMPs), since the welfare camps to be included in the project will be 
identified on a phased basis during the project period.  Site specific environmental 
profiles and preliminary environmental assessments have been conducted for 111 out of 
the possible 141 welfare camps to be included in the project.  The order of priority of 
welfare camps to be eligible for project assistance has been based on a ranking of social 
vulnerability.  Once camps have been identified on this basis, environmental mitigation 
measures required to make these camps suitable for permanent housing will be identified 
based on the site environmental profiles and preliminary environmental assessments that 
have been conducted.  Detailed EMPs will be prepared for all sites included in the project 
with a priority being given to the welfare camps to be included during the first year, 
which already have environmental profiles and preliminary environmental assessments 
undertaken.  Based on the environmental safeguards work undertaken at this stage, the 
key environmental issues at the housing sites appear to be flooding and drainage, sites 
with sand dunes, some which are still unstable and suitable water quality and quantity 
and sanitation.  
 
Water quality and quantity assessments have been undertaken for each GN division in 
the project area but detailed feasibility studies will be conducted to identify suitable 
sources for water supply to the welfare camps.  Since there is intensive agriculture in the 
Puttalam District, particularly in the Kalpitiya peninsular, there was concern of nitrite 
contamination of groundwater sources.  The preliminary data from the National Water 
Supply and Drainage Board (NWSDB) show that it is not as serious a problem as 
envisioned.  The project will supply all communities with safe water from external 
sources if on-site ground water is contaminated.  The required environmental mitigation 
measures required for flood prevention with proper drainage and guidelines on 
construction of housing and sanitation facilities will be provided to the beneficiary 
community.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Puttalam Housing Project is expected to have a limited negative social impact and 
significant positive impact through provision of improved and permanent housing and 
potable water supply to IDPs  (and water supply to non-IDPs in the host community).  It 
will contribute to the social integration of the IDPs in the Puttalam district and contribute 
Page  5
to increased economic activities and employment opportunities during the 
implementation. Special efforts are put in place to monitor and mitigate potential 
conflicts between IDPs and non-IDPs in the project area, and in the medium to long-term 
the project will contribute to the integration of the IDPs in Puttalam and to reduce 
differences and tensions between IDPs and non-IDPs.  
 
Long term environmental impacts will also be positive since the living conditions of 
IDP communities will be improved significantly under the project as the sites where the 
welfare centers are located will be made livable on a sustainable basis by incorporation of 
environmental mitigation measures, which includes the provision of safe water supply 
and sanitation to all IDPs.  These measures would result in benefits of public health and a 
better living environment for the host communities in the surrounding areas as well.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Since the IDPs have been living in these welfare centers for the last 20+ years, alternative 
site selection will not be explored in general under the project.The EMPs will introduce 
environmental mitigation measures to make these sites livable on a sustainable basis.  
Only in the event that a site of a welfare camp is such that there is no environmental 
mitigation measures that can be feasibly implemented, that alternative land to house the 
IDPs will be explored.  In such a situation, based on voluntary agreement of the 
community, possible relocation will be considered.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As mentioned above, based on the guidelines of the ESSAF, environmental profiles and 
preliminary environmental assessments have been conducted for 111 sites out of a total 
of 141 eligible sites.  Assessments are being conducted on the balance at present. Each 
welfare camp site will be subject to a site specific EMP undertaken before fund 
disbursement for the respective camp, so that all mitigation measures can be identified 
and undertaken with funding under the project.  Since upgrading of housing schemes falls 
below the thresholds requiring environmental assessments as per the National 
Environmental Act and its associated regulations, national level oversight for 
environmental mitigation measures will not be available.  Yet, the North Western 
Provincial Environmental Authority (NWPEA) will monitor the implementation of the 
EMPs.  In addition, there is environmental oversight capacity in the Project 
Implementation Unit.  IDA missions will also review and clear all EMPs for the project.  
Environmental Audits will be conducted at two stages during the project?at mid term and 
at project closure.  
 
The NWPEA has been in operation for over 15 years and has very good technical 
capacity.  The staff have been trained in environmental management through a specially 
designed post graduate level training course funded through an previous IDA project, the 
Environmental Action 1 Project, therefore technical capacity exists for effective 
monitoring of the EMPs.  The Environmental Officer of the PIU also has a post graduate 
degree in Environmental Sciences.   
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Government had commissioned four studies as part of project preparation i.e. a 
UNHCR supervised survey of 141 refugee camps in Puttalam, a Social Assessment, an 
Environmental Assessment and a Water Concept Feasibility Study. The Social 
Assessment and the Environmental Assessment were carried out in 111 of the 141 
refugee camps accounting for 80% of the IDP population. Social and Environmental 
Assessment for the remaining 30 remaining camps will be completed before Jan. 2007.  
 
The PHP will be accompanied by an extensive Communication Campaign with the 
following objectives: 1) to ensure that the objectives, selection mechanisms and 
operations of PHP are understood by implementing partners, the general public, host 
population and beneficiaries, resulting in equity and transparency in implementation of 
the program and minimizing misunderstanding and misinformation about the project. 2) 
to ensure that housing beneficiaries are aware of the implications of accepting the PHP 
Grant , and 3) to ensure that non-IDP communities understand the rationale of the project, 
are aware of the infrastructure and other benefits that the project will bring non-IDPs and 
the various other ongoing projects in the district targeting non-IDPs.  
 
Additionally, throughout the PHP a Continuous Social Impact Assessment will through 
direct interaction with the beneficiary community, will provide an independent 
assessment of the social dimensions of PHP, monitor the implementation of social 
safeguards framework, the conflict potential in relation to non-IDP population of 
Puttalam and the efficiency of the communication campaign. In doing so, the CSIA will 
highlight the risks, challenges, opportunities and problems within the program.  
 
Any small-scale land acquisition which may occur in connection with the 
implementation of the environment mitigation and water supply will involve 
consultations with affected people and development of a mutually agreeable 
compensation framework.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/01/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/18/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/17/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/01/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/01/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/01/2006 
 
Page  7
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Naresha Duraiswamy 
09/29/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya 
09/29/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Asta Olesen 
09/29/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
10/25/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Sonia Hammam 
10/27/2006 
Comments:   
