Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/07/2006 
Report No.:  AC2062
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sri Lanka 
Project ID:  P097329 
Project Name:  Governance and Capacity Building Project 
Task Team Leader:  Ismail Radwan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 17, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 10, 2006 
Managing Unit:  SASFP 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Law and justice (50%);General public administration sector (25%);Central 
government administration (20%);Roads and highways (5%) 
Theme:  Other public sector governance (P);Economic statistics, modeling and 
forecasting (S);Macroeconomic management (S);Administrative and civil service reform 
(S);Law reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
8.00
8.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
15. 
The project objectives are to provide financial resources to support improvements 
in the basic machinery of government including; the Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Census and Statistics, Auditor General's Office and the legal and judicial sector.  A 
challenge fund will also be established to support the broader national growth and reform 
agenda.  
 
16. 
The proposed project will strengthen public sector management in key areas.  
Strengthening capacity in the Ministry of Finance will improve expenditure management, 
planning and budgeting while accountability and transparency in the use of public 
resources will be strengthened through assistance to the Auditor-General's Office.  
Strengthening the capacity of the Department of Census and Statistics will strengthen the 
evidence base for policy planning ensuring that Sri Lanka???s national policies are based 
on accurate and timely statistical information and analysis.  
 
Page  2
17. 
Funding priority technical assistance through the challenge fund will provide the 
executive capacity required to implement the reform agenda.  The implementation of 
economic reforms will improve service delivery, public sector management, increase 
inclusion and reduce public sector intervention in the economy, putting the country on a 
higher growth path.  
 
18. 
The immediate recipients of the project funds will be reform-minded public sector 
agencies that have spent the last year preparing their sectoral upgrading programs to 
improve governance and public sector management.  Indirectly, all Sri Lankans will 
benefit from improved governance that will promote transparency, reduce corruption, 
improve public sector management and reduce the losses of the state owned enterprises 
(SOEs).  Taken together these measures will ensure that public sector finances are better 
targeted on national social and economic priorities.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will be composed of three major sectoral components.  In addition the project 
will establish a strong and effective strategic communications unit and a challenge fund 
to implement ideas that are not foreseen at appraisal or are not sufficiently well 
developed to be included as mainstream components.  
 
1. 
Improving Accounting and Auditing:  
 
2. 
Statistical Capacity Upgrading  
 
3. 
Improvements in the legal and judicial system  
 
The project will also establish a strategic communications unit.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Not applicable.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASES) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  4
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ismail Radwan 
08/07/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simon C. Bell 
 
Comments:   
