Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2429 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/21/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sri Lanka 
Project ID: P100390 
Project Name: Sri Lanka: Puttalam Housing Project 
Task Team Leader: Naresha Duraiswamy 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 11, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 12, 2006 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Housing construction (92%);Roads and highways (6%);General public 
administration sector (2%) 
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P);Access to urban services 
and housing (P);Social safety nets (P);Pollution management and environmental health 
(P);Personal and property rights (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS)  
 
The proposed program is intended to provide affordable and improved housing units to IDPs 
who have settled down in the Puttalam District as a result of being displaced from the North and 
East regions due to the civil conflict. The program will entail a grant to poor families to 
reconstruct their homes given their vulnerability and weak economic position. In addition, the 
proposed programme is intended to support the drinking water, sanitation and internal roads 
needs of selected IDPs and adjacent non-IDP communities with a view to upgrading their living 
standards and for ensuring social integration between IDP and non-IDP communities.    
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS)  
 
Component 1- Housing (US $ 17 million)  
Page  2
The Project will provide permanent houses and upgrade partially built houses for all IDP 
families in selected refugee camps. Nearly 2230 families currently live in partially completed 
houses and 5650 families live in temporary shelter. The housing support cash grant would be of 
two categories: (a) Rs.250,000 for the construction of a permanent house, and (b) Rs.100,000 to 
upgrade a partially-completed house to the level of a completed "core house". Selection of IDP 
camps for housing and infrastructure assistance will be based on criteria that reflect aspects such 
as economic vulnerability, possession of secure land titles by IDPs, environmental suitability of 
site assessed through site EAs, preference to stay permanently in Puttalam, etc.  
 
Component 2- Physical Infrastructure  
 
Roads (US $ 2 million):  The project would finance the construction of 100 kilometers of 
internal roads for the selected IDP and non-IDP settlements. The program may include both new 
roads and improvement of existing roads with shoulder, drainage, and topping. All existing 
internal roads within IDP settlements come under the purview of the local authority and are in a 
state of poor maintenance. The condition of the roads that connect the adjacent non-IDP villages 
is not significantly different. The main objective of the internal road component is to improve the 
road access of both IDP and non-IDP communities, and better integrate the two. Hence, 
resources would be equally apportioned between IDP and non-IDP settlements based on actual 
need.  
 
Water and Sanitation (US $ 7 million): The project will finance drinking water supply and 
sanitation to all IDPs in selected camps as well as non-IDPs in identified sites.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and 
social characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any 
protected areas, or sites or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive 
areas.)  
 
The proposed program would cover 4 Divisional Secretariat Divisions in the Puttalam District 
of Sri Lanka. The project area has a dry and warm climate with scarce water resources. Important 
and sensitive coastal habitats are a key natural feature in the area with agriculture and 
aquaculture forming two of the key land use patterns. The program will not finance construction 
activities within natural habitats, declared forest and wildlife areas, therefore, would not have 
any adverse impact on environmentally sensitive areas. It will not support the reconstruction of 
homes with disputed legal title. The Beneficiaries will need to ensure that the land is legally in 
their name.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The policy and regulatory framework in Sri Lanka provides an adequate basis for the mitigation 
of potential environmental impacts. A brief outline of the framework is given below  
 
1.
Under the Provincial Environmental Act (PEA), implemented by the Provincial 
Environmental Authority of the North Western Provincial Council (under which the Puttalam 
district falls), activities that fall into a prescribed category are required to go through a 
comprehensive environmental screening and planning process (EIA or IEE). Activities that do 
not fall under the prescribed categories can still be requested to undertake an IEE/EIA if the 
Page  3
Provincial Environmental Authority deems it necessary depending on the anticipated impacts. 
Housing reconstruction will not require an IEE/EIA under the PEA prescriptions. However, 
development of new locations for housing may require an IEE/EIA depending on the type and 
extent of land in a given location.  
 
2.
Under the Coast Conservation Act (CCA), development activities undertaken in the coastal 
zone, as defined in the CCA, need to be screened by an IEE/EIA if the Director of the Coast 
Conservation Department deems it necessary.  
 
3.
Under the Forest Ordinance felling of trees in forest reserves are completely prohibited. Tree 
felling for timber is allowed only in designated areas under licensed approval.  
 
4.
Mining of sand and clay are also regulated by the Geological Surveys and Mines Bureau 
(GSMB) where only designated areas are permitted to be used for sand mining. Here again a 
license has to be obtained from the GSMB.  
 
5.
Offshore coral mining is also banned under the Coast Conservation Act.  
 
6.
Under the Local Authority Ordinances, all building plans need to submitted to the local 
authority to obtain approval based on conformation to a specified building code. This code has 
detailed specifications for housing design and septic tank design as well as precautions for 
prevention of ground water pollution from septic tanks.  
 
Although an adequate policy and regulatory framework exists in the country for natural 
resource management and conservation, enforcement of such policies and regulations has been 
weak. The Central Environmental Authority (CEA) which is the key institute for introducing and 
managing the process of IEE/EIA has benefited from many capacity building programmes in the 
past whose expertise and experience is available for all other institutions implementing the 
IEE/EIAs to get assistance from. The Provincial Environmental Authority of the North Western 
Province (NWPEA) is the only provincial authority in the country implementing IEE/EIA 
regulations and has been doing so for nearly a decade. The experience and the expertise of the 
NWPEA is considered adequate to manage the application of IEE/EIA regulations to the 
proposed programme, in the event it becomes a requirement under the provisions of the PEA.  
 
Since the selection of final sites is not yet completed, the project has undertaken the preparation 
of an  Environmental Assessment and Management Framework which will serve as a template 
for undertaking site-specific Environmental Assessments (EA) at a later stage. The framework 
identifies the on-site and off-site environmental issues of the proposed project activities as well 
as general environmental issues of the project area based on which a detailed questionnaire has 
been prepared to screen all selected sites. The environmental assessment for each selected site 
will be outsourced to consultants with adequate experience. Environmental clearance will be 
granted based on the outcome of the exercise. In addition, EA forms will be reviewed and 
cleared by environmental staff of the PIU as well as reviewed by the NWPEA, if necessary, as 
well as randomly reviewed by IDA during supervision.  If the EA questionnaire identifies 
significant environmental issues, a full EIA will be required prior to fund disbursement. 
Monitoring of the implementation of mitigatory measures will be mainly entrusted with the PIU 
staff and the regional officers of the CEA attached to the District and Divisional Administrative 
Offices.  
 
Social Issues:  
Page  4
Indigenous Peoples constitute a very small group in Sri Lankan society and in the districts 
covered by the project.   In all the cases to date where Indigenous Peoples have been among 
project beneficiaries, they have already been culturally so assimilated that they neither identified 
themselves as an 'indigenous group' nor (in spite of specific consultations), differed from the 
surrounding communities in terms of their aspirations regarding house plan and design.  
 
There is no risk of involuntary resettlement since proof of existing land rights, inter alia,  is a 
precondition for eligibility for housing grant, and the project does not comprise new settlements 
or relocation.  Identification of beneficiaries for NEHRP is based upon a complex process 
involving  a comprehensive damage assessment survey as basis for prioritization of villages 
according to the level of housing damage, the number of returnees, vulnerability, physical 
remoteness, ethnic composition, and community demand, followed by selection of the 
beneficiaries based on an eligibility ranking. The main risk in this process relates to maintenance 
of equity across the various communities displaced in the North and North East, and the selection 
process is continuously being monitored regarding these issues.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASES) 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
In terms of housing, the location of construction sites is most crucial in determining the 
consequent environmental impacts. Although site finalization has not yet been carried out as yet, 
broadly, three scenarios could apply; (a) on-site construction (b) construction on adjacent land to 
the IDP camps (c) construction on completely new locations. While it is anticipated that most of 
the houses will be reconstructed at the site of the present dwelling, a smaller proportion of 
houses will be built on newly identified locations.  
 
Exposure to sources of environmental pollution such as agro-chemicals and waste 
discharged by prawn farms can be critical factors affecting suitability of a given locality in the 
project area where permanent housing for IDPs are planned. Frequent exposure to agro-
chemicals spreading through air in areas adjacent to agricultural fields where many IDP 
settlements are located could have serious health implications. Inhalation and direct contact of 
agro-chemicals is known to cause various skin ailments and even more serious conditions that 
could be life threatening if exposed over a long period. However, agricultural activities provide a 
prime source of income for the poor IDPs and being closely located to the fields is certainly an 
advantage. It is perhaps one of the reasons that attracted the displaced communities to the area 
originally despite its harsh physical conditions.  
 
IDP camps that are located in low-lying areas near the lagoon and saltpans or other natural 
wetlands and drainage pathways could potentially face a risk of flooding during the rainy season. 
It has been observed that some of the sites in the Puttalam mainland are badly affected by this 
problem where the soil is largely clayey and hence impermeable. Stagnant water can be a prime 
breeding source of disease causing pests and pathogens and hence poses a health risk for the 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
inhabitants of the area.  
 
One main environmental concern in developing water supply options is the possible 
shortages that can result through over-exploitation of the resource and the resultant long-term 
implications on competition for water between the domestic, agricultural and commercial 
sectors. The project will ensure that water resources management will form an integral 
component of the planning and implementation process of water supply sub-projects so that 
water use related conflicts and shortages will be minimised.  Also see last para of section E 
above.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The main safeguard policy to be triggered under this project is the Environmental 
Assessment Safeguard Policy. Safeguard policy on Natural Habitats will be triggered if new 
locations identified for relocated housing units or settlements will significantly alter natural 
habitats within the area. However, it is not anticipated that there will be any cumulative impact 
due to application of more than one safeguard policy or due to multiple project components.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/20/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  09/29/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Social and environmental Assessments have been carried out for over 100 camps out of 140 
camps.  These studies are required for identification and selection of camps for housing 
programs and will be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Shideh Hadian 
07/14/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
07/17/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Sonia Hammam 
 
Comments:   
