Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/05/2007 
Report No.:  AC2736
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  St. Lucia 
Project ID:  P097141 
Project Name:  OECS (LC) Skills for Inclusive Growth 
Task Team Leader:  Andreas Blom 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 8, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 8, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSHE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Vocational training (60%);Other social services (30%);General public 
administration sector (10%) 
Theme:  Other financial and private sector development (P);Social safety nets 
(P);Vulnerability assessment and monitoring (P);Improving labor markets (P);Education 
for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
3.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.70
0.70 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
1.      
The objective of the first phase of the APL is to assist the Government of St. 
Lucia to increase the employability of youth through private-sector driven training.  
 
2.
The key indicator for this project outcome is:  
 
-
Percent of enrolled youth employed fifteen months after the start of the training.  
 
3.       This objective has three intermediate outcomes with associated lines of action: (i) 
To increase levels of training among unemployed youth through the establishment of a 
competitive training fund that finances private sector-driven training; (ii) To develop an 
improved policy framework for delivering training by enhancing OECS collaboration in 
training, including the occupational standards to increase quality and value of training; 
and (iii) To strengthen institutional capacity to better implement, monitor and plan 
training. The main outcome/output indicators of success for each of those lines of action 
are:  
 
-
Number of trainees enrolling and successfully completing the training program 
and traineeship.  
 
-
Number of Caribbean Vocational Qualification (CVQ) certificates awarded.  
Page  2
-
Percentage of indicators reported on a yearly basis.   
 
3. Project Description 
1.      
The project would consist of three components. Component 1 will finance 
training. Component 2 will support policies to improve the quality of training and 
assistance to youth delivered under Component 1, while Component 3 finances and 
strengthens project management.  
 
Component 1- Skills training for unemployed youth - US$ 3.5 million (67 % of project)  
 
2.
This component will finance the operation and expansion of a Training Fund. 
This fund will subsidize training of around 1,850 unemployed youth and their placement 
in traineeships with private firms to gain on-the-job experience. The National Skills 
Development Center (NSDC) affiliated to the Ministry of Education will implement the 
training fund. On average, the fund will invest around US$1,370 per trainee. The 
Training Fund is competitive and involves to a large extent the private sector in training 
provision, selection of training providers and on-the-job training. In the first year of the 
project, the Training Fund will only fund training within the hospitality sector in order to 
gain experience before scaling up. This sector has the most vacancies and requires only 
modest training equipment to commence training. During the project, training will be 
expanded to other economic sectors with hiring needs. The component consists of two 
subcomponents:  
 
-
Subcomponent 1.1 Skills Training - US$3.4 million (97 % of component)  
 
-
Subcomponent 1.2 Increasing public awareness - US$0.1 million (3 % of 
component)  
 
Component 2- Improving the policy framework for training- US$ 0.62 million (12 % of 
project)  
 
3.
This component will finance activities to improve the policy framework for 
delivering training. This will be done by enhancing OECS collaboration for training to 
reap benefits of economies of scale, introducing occupational standards to increase 
quality and value of training, and developing policy action plans. Activities to be 
financed include consultancies, employers' surveys, minor equipment, and travel. Given 
the substantial fixed costs involved with policy development, the project will seek cost-
sharing with other OECS countries. The component consists of two subcomponents:  
 
-
Subcomponent 2.1 Introduce occupational standards, certification and quality 
assurance - US$0.27 million (44 % of component)  
 
-
Subcomponent 2.2 Development of policy action plans - US$0.35 million (56 % 
of component)  
 
Component 3- Project management and institutional strengthening - US$0.85 million 
(17% of project)  
 
This component will finance activities to improve project management, including 
monitoring and evaluation, and strengthen NSDC and Ministry of Education's 
institutional capacity through two sub-components:  
 
-
Subcomponent 3.1 Project Management and Institutional Strengthening - 
US$0.48 million (57% of component)  
Page  3
-
Subcomponent 3.2 Monitoring and Evaluation - US$0.37 million (43% of 
component)  
 
Further, the project includes contingency funds in the amount of US$0.23 million (4% 
of project).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
OECS (St. Lucia)   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Not applicable.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not applicable.   
 
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andreas Blom 
03/02/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga 
03/02/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga 
03/02/2007 
Comments:  Signed off for Mr. Reidar Kvam 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
03/02/2007 
Comments:   
