                                                                                                     39712

                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                       CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                                        Report No.:



 Date ISDS PreparedIUpdated:April 30,2007

 I. BASIC INFORMATION

 A. Basic Project Data

 Country: Sudan                                    I Project ID:REP101955-LEN-TF054777
                                                   I Additional Proiect ID (ifanvl:
 Project Name: :Improving Livestock production and marketing in Selected Rainfed Areas
 of Central and Eastern Sudan Proiect
 Task Team Leader: Jeeva Perumalpillai-Essex and Thomas Couteaudier
 Estimated Appraisal Date: May 15, 2007              Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2007
 Managing Unit: AFTS2                                Lending Instrument: Emergency Grant
 Sector: Livestock (100%)
 Theme: : Rural ~oliciesand institutions (P): Rural services and infrastructure (S)
 Other financing amounts by source:
          BORROWER                                                       13,000,000.00
          SPECIAL FINANCING (MDTF                                         7,000,000.00
                                                                         20,000,000.00


 Environmental Category: B
 Simplified Processing                Simple [] (Emergency)                   Repeater [ ]
IIs this a transferred project         Yes [ XI                    No [ 1                           I

 B. Project Objectives

 The project's objective is to increase incomes of the rural population dependent on livestock
 production and trade in selected rainfed areas of Central Sudan.

 The project is structured around pilot activities that are designed to address most urgent needs to
 support livestock production and marketing. Once pilot activities are proven successful, they
 could be expanded to other traditional rainfed farming areas of Sudan through repeater projects.

 The project will also provide support to strengthen the capacity of the GNU Ministry of Animal
 Resources and Fisheries in the field of market data collection and processing. This should result
 in better understanding of the sector's constraints and potential, and in turn inform policies to
 support sector development.


 C. Project Description

 The project's objective is to increase incomes of the rural population dependent on livestock
 production and trade in selected rainfed areas of Central and Eastern Sudan. The project is
 structured around pilot activities that are designed to address most urgent needs to support
 livestock production and marketing. This project will demonstrate different ways to deliver
 services and improve livelihoods of livestock producers. Key indicators of project progress
 include:

         Number of sub-projects supporting livelihoods depending on livestock
         Reduction of casualties resulting from land access-related conflicts
         Number of vaccinations delivered by private vets
         Increase in animals traded in markets rehabilitated under the project

Project Componerzts: In order to achieve the project developnlent objectives there will be
4 components.


Cornpotlent 1: Livestock Development Investment Furzd (US$ 12.9 million; phase 1:
USS4.3 milliorz,phase 2: US$ 8.6 million)

The investment fund will provide matching grants to finance activities and technical assistance
demanded by community groups that are related to increasing productivity and sales of livestock.

To be eligible subprojects will have to demonstrate that they are demand-driven, i.e. designed and
implemented by cohesive community-based groups or organizations, that they are economically,
socially, technically and environmentally sustainable. Examples of subproject include water point
rehabilitation, rangeland development, stock route demarcation, sheep fattening, advisory
services for improving herds etc.

Comporzerzt 2: Community-Partnerships to Resolve Land Access Based Cotzjlicts (US$ 1.5
million; plrase 1: US$ 0.65 milliorr,phase 2: US$ 0.85 million)

Though conflict is prevalent in most areas targeted by the project, conflict intensity is high, with
severe consequences in States of Eastern Sudan. Under phase one, the component will focus on
the Localities of Roseires (Blue Nile) and Sinja (Sennar). These Localities border the Dinder
Natural Park (DNP), a vast protected biodiversity area. Because large tracts of land in the
environs of the park have been allocated for semi-mechanized rain-fed farming or irrigation,
pastoralists increasingly bring their animals into the park to graze. This has created tension
between communities and put intense pressure on the park's resources.

Institutions and organisations will be contracted to provide advisory services to help communities
(a) identify root causes of conflict over land, (b) identify conflict mitigation measures and (c)
jointly manage and protect natural resources. This would be achieved through engaging pastoral,
farming communities and DNP authorities in dialogue to build trust, and raising awareness about
land issues. Provision of technical assistance will also be made to strengthen the capacity of local
customary and government institutions responsible for conflict prevention and arbitration. Under
phase 2, the coniponent will be expanded to other conflict-affected localities.

Cortzponerzt 3: Pilot Interverrtiorrs (US$ 2.2 million; plrase 1: US$ 0.65 million, plrase 2:
US$1.55 million)

The objective for this component is to test two pilot activities: the privatization of animal health
services and improvement of market infrastructure. It is expected that these pilot activities would
improve services to producers and in turn augment their income.

Componerit 4: Support for Project Implenzetztatiorz arzd I~zstitutiorzalDevelopment (US$ 3.45
milliorz;phase 1: USS1.55 millioiz,phase 2: US$1.9 million)

Given the pilot nature of the program and execution in four states, a Project Coordination Unit
(PCU) will be set up in MARF; it will coordinate project activities, and coordinate the project
with other donor-funded interventions. The PCU will be supported by two Project

[mplementation Units (PIUs), to be established in the State Ministries of Agriculture, Animal
Resources and Irrigation (SMAARI), of Blue Nile, in Damazeen, and North Kordofan, in El
Obeid.

Technical assistance and equipment will be provided for the Marketing Department of the MARF
Directorate, Economics and Planning to develop a market information database which will be of
easy access to producers and other sector stakeholders. Technical assistance will be provided for
studies, including the preparation of a livestock population estimate for Sudan (including
Southern Sudan). This activity will strengthen and broaden the IGAD-funded Livestock and
Marketing Information System.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis

Due to the size of the sector and the numerous issues at stake, MARF has identified two areas in
Central and Eastern Sudan to pilot activities to enhance livestock production and marketing. The
livestock systems in these areas are representative of the diversity of Sudan's livestock systems,
and of the socio economic background in which they operate.

Blue Nile State, parts of Sinnar and White Nile States are among the poorest regions in Sudan,
where tensions and conflicts over land are recurrent. The social structure is very heterogeneous,
and the customary institutions weakened by decades of civil wars. Allocation of land for semi-
mechanized farming is believed to be the main origin of the conflicts resulting in blocking
traditional seasonal migration routes. These states are crossed by cattle from Southern Sudan en
route to terminal livestock markets in Khartoum State.

A substantial number of sheep for export and domestic markets are produced and traded in North
Kordofan State. There is increasing pressure on land and water due to competition between
sedentary and transhumant populations, pressure exerted by displaced populations from Darfur,
and poor support services provided by local government. As a result, rural communities in the
state spend up to 60 percent of their revenues to buy water during the dry season, and rangeland
areas are diminishing. The disease burden is heavy because the capacity of the public and private
sectors to deliver animal health services is limited.

Six localities have been selected as follows, which may be refined based on further consultations
with the states:

         in North Kordofan State: ,the localities of Gheibeish, En Nuhud and Abu Zabed;
         in Blue Nile State, the locality of Roseires;
         in Sinnar State, Sinja Locality; and
         in White Nile State, Jabaleein Locality

Localities in the four target states were selected based on the following criteria: (a) important
livestock populations (based on estimates), and (b) high frequency and intensity of conflict
between transhumant livestock producers and sedentary farmers over land and water.


E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

This project entails the renovation of old buildings (project implementation offices), market
places, and support the development of livestock production-related infrastructure such as water
points, and stock routes. It triggers both the Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) and
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) safeguards policies if new lands are to be acquired and if
there would be any resettlement. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)

and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been chosen as mitigation instruments because
at this stage of project preparation, the sites and locations of sub-projects are not yet known. OP
4.01 also requires a Medical and Veterinary Waste Management Plan (MVWMP) to ensure the
effective collection and disposal of veterinary waste.

It is expected that all national GNUIMDTF-financed projects in North Sudan will be brought
under one umbrella set of safeguards instruments. With this perspective:

         Two MDTF projects (CDF and NETREP) already have, or will soon have, developed
         environmental guidelines. A more general ESMF will be prepared for other MDTF-
         financed projects that raise safeguards concerns.

         An RPF for the CDF has been prepared. This RPF will be generalized by the NIDTF for
         use by other MDTF-financed projects that raise safeguards concerns. The WB has
         prepared a land acquisition assessment tool for interim use until the RPF is finalized; this
         allows CDF to proceed with sub-projects that do not require involuntary land acquisition.
         This land acquisition assessment will be adapted to and used by this project while the
         RPF is being generalized for use by this project and others.

         Under the MDTF Health project, an outline Medical Waste Management Plan (MWMP)
         was prepared, and a more detailed one will be prepared. The MWMP would be
         comprised of practical measures for adequately managing medical waste in Northern
         Sudan, training and capacity building for implementing those measures, and an
         implementation budget. It could be adapted for use by this project to include veterinary
         waste.

Although some relevant legislation is in place, capacity to implement ESMF, RPF and MVWMP
provisions is weak within MARF and it is doubtful that the Project implementation structure as
designed will have the necessary expertise to fulfill safeguards requirements. In view of limited
capacity, a Safeguards Management Committee (SMC) will be created for training, capacity
building and coordination among the participating ministries. The Higher Council for
Environment and Natural Resources (HCENR) will coordinate the SMC which would be
comprised of nominated Safeguards Officers from each ministrylproject, plus a representative
from the Ministry of Finance.

MARF and the States of North Kordofan, Blue Nile, White Nile and Sennar will appoint a
Safeguards Officer to be members of the SMC. To ensure that safeguards concerns are adequately
addressed throughout the life of the project, the project will finance ongoing technical assistance
and training by local and regional consultants of these Safeguards Officers, in coordination with
the other National GovernmentIMDTF-supported projects, through the SMC.

The ESMF, RPF and MVWMP will be completed, approved and disclosed by the Government
and the Project Coordinator within six months of Project Effectiveness.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

    Mr. John Boyle (AFTS1)       - Senior Environmental Specialist and Mohammed Ben-Achour
    (AFTS1) (Social Safeguards Specialist)

    It is proposed to transfer future safeguards review and clearance functions to the Sector
    Manager.

 11. SAFEGUARD POLlCIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                                                                      L
 Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project
                                                                                                    No
 Environmental Assessment (OPIBPIGP 4.01)                                     1  [XI                [I
 Civil works may need environmental management plans to
 avoid creating adverse impacts, and veterinary waste will
,require management.

 Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                                   [I               ' [XI
 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                       111                [XI
1Cultural Property (OPN 1 1.03, being revised as OP 4.1 1)                       [I                 1x1
 Lnvoluntary Resettlement (OPIBP 4.12)                                        1 [XI              I  [I
 Project infrastructures, and the demarcation of stock routes, may require involuntary land
1acquisition or restriction of access to resources.
1Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10)                                                 1 111              I   [XI                 I
 Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                           1: 1                1x1
 Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)                                                    1: 1                [XI
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBPIGP 7.60)~                                    111                 [XI
1Projects on International Waterways (OPIBPIGP 7.50)                          1  I:]             1  1x1                  1


 111. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

 A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
      would be prepared: NIA. There will be a decision meeting before appraisal when the PAD
      stage ISDS will be prepared.

 B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
      ISDS:      NIA

 C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
      The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: The
      project will adopt and begin to implement the Northern Sudan MDTF safeguards instruments
      (ESMF and RPF) within six months of effectiveness. The SMU has agreed to accept transfer
      of the safeguard responsibilities.




 * By supporting the proposedproject, the Batlk does not inrend toprejudice thefit~aldetertnination of theparries'
 clainls011the dispu~edareas
 I Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at

 the InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to
 potentially affected persons.

  IV. APPROVALS

Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leader:           Name Jeeva Perumalpillai-Essex and    Date:
                                Thomas Couteaudier   -$&/         04130,2007
Approved by:
                                                              q
Regional Safeguards                                                ate:
Coordinator:
  Comments:
Acting Sector Manager:      Name Berhane Manna                    Date:
                                                                  0413012007
  Comments:

