Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/11/2006 
Report No.:  AC2339
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sudan 
Project ID:  P098483 
Project Name:  Sudan Multi-donor Trust Fund for Decentralized Health System 
Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Verdon S. Staines 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 4, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 30, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Child health (P);Other communicable diseases (P);Health system performance 
(P);Nutrition and food security (P);Population and reproductive health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
47.00 
 SPECIAL 
FINANCING 
23.00
70.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
To improve the capacities, knowledge and experience of health authorities in four target 
states concerning effective strategies for financing and developing basic health services 
and improving access to these services by underserved populations.   
 
3. Project Description 
This emergency project will provide the health authorities in the four target states with 
knowledge and experience of different strategies for expanding and improving basic 
health services, particularly for underserved populations.  The project will support 
technical assistance and capacity building to lay the groundwork for sustainable financing 
and development of the decentralized health care system.  Depending on different 
contexts within each target state, strategies for improving and expanding service delivery 
will include injecting resources into existing underfinanced public sector health services, 
contracting non-governmental organizations (NGOs) or private firms to support service 
delivery, and providing high-impact health interventions directly to households.  The 
project will also start reconstructing and developing key inputs to the PHC system in the 
four states, investing in state and local health administration capacity, infrastructure and 
Page  2
equipment.  The project will support technical assistance to improve knowledge and 
allow the government to assess options for addressing important systemic issues, 
particularly sustainable financing of PHC services under the decentralized system.  Other 
important areas for technical assistance and studies are pharmaceutical supply and human 
resources for health.  Special attention will be given to building capacities in monitoring 
and evaluation.  Developing the health system and improving access to basic health 
services are long-term endeavors and the project will support the initial steps, through 
pilot experiences, technical assistance, studies, and capacity-building, in order to lay the 
groundwork for sustainable reform.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Along with some technical assistance activities at the level of the Federal Ministry of 
Health, the project targets the conflict-affected and poor states of Southern Kordofan, 
Blue Nile, Kassala, and Red Sea, covering a population of approximately 5.1 million.  
These states have health indicators consistently lower than Northern Sudan averages.  
Two of these states encompass the Three Areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Rehabilitation and construction of health facilities carry risks of limited environmental 
impacts, while their operation involves generation of medical waste (OP/BP 4.01).  New 
siting of health facilities or expansion of existing facilities may carry the possibility of 
land acquisition and resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).  Access to health services differs 
significantly by gender in some project areas.  There are no large scale and/or irreversible 
impacts foreseen.   
 
Page  3
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives will be explored during project implementation and the identification and 
preparation of specific investments.  These may include, for example, alternate scales and 
locations of new facilities, technologies employed, and ways of dealing with medical 
waste.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) have been chosen as mitigation instruments because at this 
stage of project preparation, the sites and locations of project investments are not yet 
known.  It is expected that all national Government/MDTF-financed projects in North 
Sudan will be brought under one umbrella set of safeguards instruments.  In this case, 
sections of the umbrella ESMF and RPF will respond to the specificities of the health 
sector.  In addition, and specific to this project, a Medical Waste Management Plan 
(MWMP) will be developed to ensure the effective collection and disposal of hazardous 
medical waste.  The ESMF, RPF and MWMP will be completed, approved and disclosed 
by the Government and the Project Coordinator within six months of project 
effectiveness.  
 
During project preparation, consultants have been engaged to undertake environmental, 
social and gender assessments in the target states.  Although some relevant legislation is 
in place, the Government has low capacity to adequately address safeguards concerns. 
Safeguards Officers will be appointed in the Federal and target State Ministries of Health 
and will be members of a Safeguards Management Committee (SMC) for all National 
Government/MDTF-supported projects.  To ensure that safeguards concerns are 
adequately addressed throughout the life of the project, the project will finance ongoing 
technical assistance and training by local and regional consultants of these Safeguards 
Officers, in coordination with the other National Government/MDTF-supported projects, 
through the SMC.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are communities, their representatives, and community-based and non-
governmental organizations in the four target states, including in the Three Areas.  
Project preparation includes state-level planning and consultation involving all 
stakeholders in the states.  Concurrent environmental, social and gender assessments by 
international and local consultants is designed to ensure that relevant concerns are 
reflected in project design and activities at the same time as fostering ownership of the 
main findings of the assessments.   
 
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/28/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/08/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/21/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/28/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/08/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/21/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Since this is an emergency operation, the ESMF, RPF and MWMP are to be completed, 
approved and disclosed by the Government and the Project Coordinator within six 
months of project effectiveness.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
Yes 
Page  5
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Verdon S. Staines 
05/11/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John A. Boyle 
05/11/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
05/11/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Sarah Keener 
05/11/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura Frigenti 
05/11/2006 
Comments:   
