Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/09/2006 
Report No.:  AC2027
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sudan 
Project ID:  P095081 
Project Name:  SD- Emergency Transport and Infrastructure Development Project - 
MDTF 
Task Team Leader:  George A. Banjo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 19, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 12, 2005 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Other rural development (P);Other urban development (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
527.00 
 SPECIAL 
FINANCING 
250.00
777.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to rehabilitate and develop critical national and 
rural feeder roads and transport infrastructure, improve critical urban infrastructure in the 
major towns that form the national and state capital of Southern Sudan (i.e. Juba, Wau, 
Malakal, Rumbek, Aweil, Warap, Yei, Yambio,Torit, Bor and Bentiu) and build capacity 
for planning, construction and sustainable operation, maintenance and management of the 
infrastructure in Southern Sudan.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project has three components implemented in three phases:  
 
Component 1: Roads and Transport Development. This component provides for the 
phased repair, rehabilitation, reconstruction and maintenance of high priority national and 
rural feeder roads to all weather gravel or paved standard.  
 
Page  2
Phase1: Activities under this phase consist of: (i) emergency accessibility improvements 
of about 100 Km of tracks and seasonal roads to provide all weather road access, the 
maintenance of about 820 km of already improved roads and de-mining of the roads to be 
improved, all activities being part of Phase 3 of the ERRP, (ii) road upgrading to all 
weather gravel standard  -
 about 250 km of roads under a ‘turnkey’ contract within which 
the contractor will carry out works relating to right of way clearance, de-mining, road 
building and road maintenance, the latter for a period of about 4 years.  
 
Phase 2: This phase will consist of: (i) emergency accessibility improvements of about 
253 Km of tracks and seasonal roads to provide all weather road access, the maintenance 
of about 1000 km of already improved roads, and de-mining of the roads to be improved, 
all activities being part of Phase 3 of the ERRP; (ii) road upgrading to all weather gravel 
standard - about 875 km of roads under an OPBRC contract within which the contractor 
will carry out works relating to right of way clearance, de-mining, road building and road 
maintenance, the latter for a period of about 4 years; and (iii) road upgrading to paved 
standard - about 272 Km of gravel roads to paved surfaced road.  
 
Phase 3: Activities under this phase will include (i) road upgrading to paved road 
standard - the upgrading of 325 Km of roads from gravel to paved surfaced road; and (ii) 
construction of priority feeder roads.  
 
Component 2: Basic Urban Infrastructure Improvements. This component will provide 
for rehabilitation of basic urban infrastructure and services (priority government/public 
administrative buildings and houses, water supply, sanitation, urban roads and drainage 
and power supply) in the 11 towns that form the national and state capitals of Southern 
Sudan, namely, Juba, Wau, Malakal, Rumbek, Aweil, Warap, Yei, Yambio, Torit, Bor 
and Bentiu; and establishment of a town planning and land administration institute in 
Juba phased as follows:  
 
Phase 1: Juba immediate infrastructure rehabilitation.  This phase will consist of 
immediate rehabilitation of basic infrastructure and services in Juba to allow it function  
involving: (i) rehabilitation of priority Government/Public Administrative Buildings and 
Houses, Hospital Infrastructure and provision of prefabricated Accommodation; (ii) 
rehabilitation of water supply system of Juba including installation of distribution 
network and installation of packaged water treatment plants in strategic locations; (iii) 
rehabilitation/installation of liquid and solid waste management   systems (collection, 
treatment and disposal); (iv) rehabilitation and improvement to the network of 60 km of 
urban roads in Juba to asphalt standard including the drainage system and street lighting; 
and (v) augmentation of power supply for Juba by 5 MW, and improvement to the 
distribution system.  
 
Phase 2: Immediate infrastructure rehabilitation in the remaining Ten State Capitals 
(US$60.0million). This cost includes those needed for design and works supervision. 
Activities under this phase include implementation of immediate rehabilitation of basic 
infrastructure and services in the ten state capitals (Wau, Malakal, Rumbek, Aweil, 
Warap, Yei, Yambio, Torit, Bor and Bentiu) on the basis of the scoping and design to be 
Page  3
carried out under Phase 1 and establishment of a town planning and land administration 
institute.  
 
Phase 3:  Immediate infrastructure rehabilitation in the remaining ten State Capitals 
(US$49,572,000 million). It includes cost of works design and supervision. Under this 
Phase, continued rehabilitation and expansion of basic infrastructure and services in the 
GOSS capital Juba and the state capitals will be carried out focusing on consolidation of 
the immediate rehabilitation works undertaken and preparation of sector investment 
programs to address the short and medium term needs in urban infrastructure and service 
expansion.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Development and Capacity Building: This component 
provides for institutional capacity building (Technical Assistance and policy studies) and 
program implementation, including costs associated with oversight and management of 
program implementation (including Technical Assistance support team and supervision 
of works), monitoring and evaluation and the preparation of activities for implementation 
in the different phases of SETIDP.  
 
Phase 1: Activities under this component during this phase includes (i) supervision of 
the roads to be constructed under Component 1; (ii) provision of TA & policy support to 
the MTR and MLHPU; (iii) conduct of baseline survey for the establishment of a 
monitoring and evaluation framework; (iv) formulation of an Information, Education, & 
Communication (IEC) strategy; (v) provision of consultancy services to carry out 
feasibility, Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF), individual 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), and Social Impact Assessment (SIA) studies 
and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), as well as, detailed design and/or design 
review for road works to be included under Phases 2 and 3; (vi) formulation of feeder 
roads development strategy and plan; (vii) preparatory activities for scoping of the 
infrastructure rehabilitation in the remaining  State capitals as was done for Juba; (viii) 
study for housing development and financing; and (ix) preparation of a regional 
development plan.  
 
Phase 2: This phase includes (i) provision of TA & policy support to the MTR and 
MLHPU; (ii) supervision of the roads to be constructed under Component 1; (iii) 
provisions for monitoring and evaluation; and (iii) the provision of needed consultancy 
services including that to carry out a river crossing studies.  
 
Phase 3: Under this phase, provision is made for financing of activities relating to (i) 
supervision of road to be constructed under Component 1; (ii) road maintenance and 
development and detail preparation of projects to be implemented under non-emergency 
procedures; and (iii) preparation of sector policies and investment programs to address 
the short and medium term needs in urban infrastructure and service expansion.   
 
Page  4
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project components likely to generate environmental and social impacts occur in 
urban and rural settings, the latter being characterized as predominantly agricultural and 
degraded land. Drainage and soil erosion issues will receive special attention along with 
protection of vegetative cover and water bodies.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Colin P. Rees (ECSSD) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Project components likely to generate environmental and social impacts include:  national 
and rural road rehabilitation/maintenance and critical urban infrastructure in the major 
towns of Southern Sudan. Based upon available information, the impacts are likely to be 
minor to moderate in scale, local in extent and readily assessed, mitigated and managed.  
 
The national/rural road rehabilitation/maintenance component under the first and second 
phases of the Project follows existing alignments save for some minor changes that are 
not considered likely to generate significant environmental or social impacts.  The third 
phase involves the construction of new priority feeder roads in agricultural/degraded 
land.  
 
The urban infrastructure rehabilitation component includes a broader array of sectoral 
activities covering: sanitation (solid waste management, semi-liquid waste management 
and wastewater management), water supply, roads and drainage, and power supply.  All 
of these activities provide substantial environmental improvements and particular 
attention will be given to: sustained interventions for improving water quality at the 
treatment plant, e.g., Juba, and through control of liquid wastes entering the groundwater 
(thereby avoiding faecal contamination of groundwater used by hospitals), rivers and 
Page  5
streams conveying contaminated flows upstream of the water treatment plant intake 
(samples of water intake at the water treatment plant indicate high levels of faecal 
contamination requiring chlorination of the water supply).  For Juba, a clean-up operation 
for spilled oil wastes at the power station and their containment and disposal is also 
included in the project. The selected roads for rehabilitation in the selected towns are not 
anticipated to generate significant adverse impacts on the environment or individuals or 
communities. Nonetheless, as a precaution an RPF for the whole project is being 
prepared separately from the ESMF and RAPs will be undertaken as needed during 
implementation.  The Resettlement Instrument is under preparation, will be available 
within six (6) months.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No adverse impacts envisioned for the road or urban infrastructure rehabilitation 
components; construction of new feeder roads will be subject to environmental and social 
assessments and appropriate mitigation measures adopted to avoid possible indirect/long 
term impacts.  No displacement of individuals or communities is anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Rehabilitated roads will follow existing alignments save for very minor departures; these 
will be subject to environmental and social analyses, including evaluation of available 
alternatives. A comprehensive evaluation will be undertaken of the environmental/social 
impacts of alternative alignments of the new feeder roads component.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Mitigation measures will be stipulated as part of ESMF/EMP requirements, including 
their reflection in the project Operational Manual and contract documents.  
 
Draft environmental guidelines for the road sector per se prepared by the Bank are now 
under review by the Ministry of Environment, Wildlife Conservation and Tourism and by 
USAID, the latter presently undertaking a Programmatic Environmental Assessment for 
the Road Rehabilitation Activities in Southern Sudan.  This will provide an example for 
other sectors and help gain ownership for the application of environmental and social 
safeguards to development activities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
To date, project preparation has involved limited interviews with a range of stakeholders 
including civil society organizations. This has identified a number of post conflict issues 
such as lack of current government institutions, procedures, and legally defined rights; 
continuing conflicts in some areas; grievances arising from perceived lack of 
inclusiveness and equity.  These issues have the potential to undermine project activities 
and affect infrastructure development. Social risks largely arising from differential access 
Page  6
to benefits, traditional rights and entitlements, adequacy of targeting mechanisms, and 
varying public perception of the project benefits will be addressed at three levels:  
 
a) 
First through continuous monitoring of agreed political/social indicators in the 
project areas by the PMT and, at the specific project activity level (e.g. road contract) 
engagement of a community officer who will maintain close contact with population in 
the affected area and collect and report on the indicators as appropriate.  Additionally, a 
lawyer to be employed by PMT will address legal issues concerning right of way and 
issues arising from ambiguities in jurisdiction and regulatory matters in the wealth and 
power sharing arrangements;  
 
b)
Second, there will be put in place appropriate criteria and processes for selection 
of road and other infrastructure works, which include considerations of equity in 
regional/geographical distribution and amongst the diverse communities to be benefited; 
and  
 
c) 
Third, an information, education and communication strategy for the project will 
be developed and implemented by the communication responsible in the PMT to ensure 
good public awareness of project activities and impacts.  These aspects will be detailed 
during appraisal in such a manner as to be gender responsive.  
 
The project will coordinate with other agencies regarding on-going and planned 
HIV/AIDS education and outreach mitigation activities supported by other agencies and 
institutions.  These would be directed at persons living along the trade corridors, the 
trucking industry, river transporters and construction crews.  Guidelines will be provided 
to build HIV/AIDS mitigation and prevention measures into the designs and 
implementation of project elements.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/12/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/26/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/26/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
05/31/2006  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/12/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/26/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/31/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  7
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr George A. Banjo 
02/21/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Colin P. Rees 
02/21/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
02/21/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
02/21/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
02/21/2006 
Comments:   
Page  8
