Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2038 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/14/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sudan 
Project ID: P094476 
Project Name: Community Development Fund 
Task Team Leader: Bassam Ramadan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 12, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 10, 2005 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (100%) 
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
20.00 
 SPECIAL 
FINANCING 
30.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the Project is to meet urgent community-driven recovery and development 
needs in the war-affected and underdeveloped areas of North Sudan by providing social and 
economic services and infrastructure.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1.  Community Development Subprojects  
 
This component would serve to address pro-poor community development priorities as laid out 
in the peace protocols, with particular emphasis on access and quality of basic education, health 
and water services. The component would target areas with low relevant per capita indicators 
and gender inequity to improve the access and, over time, quality of basic social services.  It will 
build and renovate basic education and health facilities, promote adult literacy and child 
immunization campaigns, launch rapid vocational training programs for school-drop-outs, 
facilitate the creation of youth centers, launch revolving textbook projects and other social 
services directed at the poor. Programs to facilitate the social integration and inclusion of 
Page  2
vulnerable groups such as elderly, disabled, women head of households and children victims of 
violence, AIDS victims, drug addicts, war-crippled victims, unemployed youths, etc., will also 
be emphasized. Gender and conflict-sensitive analysis will guide the allocation of resources 
among these vulnerable groups. This component would also concentrate on the provision of 
small rural infrastructure including access and rural roads and environmental protection activities 
including community potable water, wells and spring protection, small wastewater treatment 
schemes that use appropriate technologies, improved solid waste collection, treatment and 
disposal and reforestation and protection of natural sites. Communities and the organizations that 
represent them would take the lead in implementation under this window. Localities and other 
development partners, UN agencies and the private sector, would support communities in this 
process.  This community-level window could also serve to support the return and reintegration 
process (particularly related to social services).  The maximum size of a typical subproject under 
this component is $100,000 equivalent.  All subproject proposals have to satisfy specific 
selection and el
igibility criteria as stipulated in the project’s Operational Manual (OM).   A key 
part of the OM will focus on selecting investments where enabling conditions exist that will lead 
to the desired outcomes such as improved maternal mortality rates, or higher educational level 
for example.   These enabling conditions include working in areas where women can 
meaningfully participate in the selection and conception of projects (for example through 
participation on committees), and benefit from such sub-projects.   Given the context of past 
conflict, such conditions could also include working in areas and on projects which are not likely 
to stimulate new conflict, or to have benefits uniquely captured exclusively by specific groups.  
 
Component 2. 
Capacity Building, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Project Management  
 
Training, technical assistance and capacity building would be provided to localities, NGOs and 
local Community-Based Organizations (CBOs), to improve their technical skills in the 
identification, planning, programming, management and delivery of social subprojects.  In 
addition, this component would establish the eligibility of target localities to receive funds from 
the project through conducting a training program aimed at building their capacity in the areas of 
project management (e.g., transparency, accountability, financial management, procurement), 
and community participation and empowerment (e.g., participatory planning process and 
inclusion of marginalized segments of the population in decision-making).  Once the project 
validates the attainment by these localities of the above Minimum Qualifying Criteria (MQC), 
they will be eligible for receiving funds under the project, which they would then channel to 
service providers for the benefit of the target beneficiary communities using NGOs, CBOs, 
private sector, and social sector ministries. The selection of the LIU Manager externally with 
skills in participatory and inclusive development will ensure that the project unit established 
within the Locality has the requisite expertise in inclusive and participatory development 
processes, skills not typically available within the Locality staff.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Geographically, the Project will cover all Northern states and will coordinate closely with other 
major donor-funded community development projects (e.g. EU) to ensure harmonization of 
procedures and implementation mechanisms. The Project will be phased over several years, with 
a
series of successive three-year projects.  Phase I (Years 1-3) will start in the following states: 
Page  3
Blue Nile; Kassala, South Kordofan and North Kordofan.  The Project will target ten localities 
selected according to urgent needs in these priority states.  These are:  
 
o
South Kordofan State: Abu Gebiha, AL Rashad and Kailak localities  
 
o
North Kordofan State: Sodari, Jabrah and Wad Banda localities.  
 
o
Blue Nile State: 
AL Roseries and ED’ Damazeen localities  
 
o
Kassala State: Kassala rural and Hamaish Koraib localities  
 
A
social and conflict analysis (SCA) will provide detailed information and stakeholder analysis 
of the project areas.   Preliminary data collected show that the localities are large, and ethnically 
diverse with different histories of conflict.   The total estimated population in the five states is 
over 5 million.   The population of the localities included is more difficult to ascertain given 
recent re-classification of certain localities.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
This will be addressed under the project to assure effective implementation of all safeguards. In 
particular, capacity building is to be provided for the PIU and other key stakeholders.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Colin P. Rees (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
No significant adverse environmental impacts are anticipated under the CDF. Investments 
under Component 1: “Community Development Subprojects” are small-scale infrastructure 
improvements and rehabilitation and are not expected to have major adverse environmental 
impacts as they would be limited in scope. The proposed project will not fund any new major 
construction, and no subproject involving involuntary acquisition of land or other assets or 
resettlement will be financed.CDF is expected to have substantial beneficial impacts on the 
environment as it would improve basic social and economic infrastructure for the communities.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The risk of involuntary resettlement is very low given the nature of the investments, and the 
criteria in the OM that projects involving such resettlement would not be eligible. However 
because of the past conflicts over water or land use and access, and the current state of flux of 
Government land policy the project will complete a Resettlement Policy Framework which is 
tailored to the low level of risk, and which focuses on providing guidelines for any voluntary 
resettlement or use under the project. As is the case with other demand driven projects, the 
Operational Manual will include procedures for appraising the environmental and social impacts 
of any proposed subproject and for identifying the triggers for the RPF to be implemented.  On 
the social side, the OM would include guidelines on a land assessment for each sub-project that 
would identify whether the RPF would be triggered through a checklist.   The OM would also 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
include guidelines on how to deal with voluntary resettlement or land use, and would indicate 
when the RFP would be applied.   If a subproject is found to include substantial environmental or 
social impacts, further procedures are included to address them or to alter the design of the 
subproject.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/03/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
EA and other relevant studies are to be completed by July 30, 2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Bassam Ramadan 
02/06/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
02/06/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mourad Ezzine 
02/06/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
