Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2060 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/06/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sudan 
Project ID: P097962 
Project Name: Multidonor Rehabilitation Education Project 
Task Team Leader: Mourad Ezzine 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 5, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: February 27, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
101.70 
 SPECIAL 
FINANCING 
51.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
152.70 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The p
roject development objective is: “Primary school students, Internal Displaced Peoples 
(IDPs), demobilized soldiers, and other non-traditional learners have improved access to 
enhanced quality of education, development of life skills, and basic occupational skill training".   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
In order to achieve the Government of Southern Sudan (GoSS) target objectives to increase the 
gross enrollment rate (GER) from the current level of 22% to 52% by 2010; enroll 15%of out of 
school youths in alternate education; and to increase girls enrolment from 11% to 35%, it is 
estimated that an additional 25,000 teachers will be required in addition to the upgrading of the 
existing cadre. In order to address this requirement, the Ministry of Education, Science and 
Technology (MoEST) has developed a strategy and orientation program for the orientation, 
upgrading and certification of newly recruited teachers. Implementation of this strategy is 
beyond the current capacity of the four Regional Teacher Training Institutes, and inconsistent 
with the GoSS strategy to devolve service delivery from the central to the county level. In order 
to meet the need for teacher training and upgrading, while also adding to the capacity to deliver 
Page  2
Alternate Learning Programs, Component 1 of the project will provide resources for the 
construction of approximately 20 County Teacher Training Centers (CTTCs). The purpose of 
these centers will be (i) to support the development of administrative, management, and 
pedagogical capacity to coordinate and deliver education services at the county level; (ii) to jump 
start teacher training at the county level in order to respond to the in-service training 
requirements associated with anticipated recruitment and upgrading demands, including those for 
accelerated learning; (iii) to initiate accelerated/alternate education programs at the county level; 
and (iii) to strengthen the capacity of the county level administration to support the development 
and delivery of education services at the Payam level.  
 
Each center will include classrooms, administrative offices and a resource center equipped with 
texts, teacher guides, and computers. Each center will have a water point and provision for waste 
management. Provision will be made for learner accommodation using tents or other temporary 
arrangements. Selection of sites for CTTCs will be based on criteria of population distribution 
and equity. In order to ensure cost efficiency, proximity to the proposed new road network will 
also be considered to be important criteria.  
 
Component 2. A Responsive Fund for the Provision of Alternate Education and/or Skill 
Development for Non-Formal Learners.  
 
Three decades of civil war have fundamentally fractured the structure of society in Sudan. An 
estimated 3 million people have been internally displaced through conflict, famine or poverty. 
Females have been denied access to education as a result of the need to undertake household 
chores and responsibilities; the effect of cultural attitudes beliefs; and, the absence of appropriate 
school infrastructure and facilities. Other non-traditional learner groups include overage children, 
demobilized soldiers, and nomads. In order to address the urgency to provide educational 
opportunity that would assist these groups to integrate more effectively into a post conflict 
society, MoEST has developed a series of Alternate Education Programs designed to meet their 
respective learning needs. Recognizing that these populations are dispersed and mobile, a 
flexible response to the provision of education opportunities, as opposed to a structured or 
systemic response, will need to be adopted for many years.  The purpose of Component 2 of the 
project is to provide a pool of resources targeted at demobilized
 soldiers, IDP’s, overage 
children, females and other non-formal learners wishing to access educational opportunity. These 
resources would be made available on a responsive basis to NGOs, UN agencies, private sector, 
or other providers to deliver education services against clearly defined criteria developed by 
MoEST and partners. It is envisaged that the proposed services would include: (i) development 
of literacy and numeracy; (ii) post-literacy accelerated learning opportunities; (iii) short-term 
occupational skill development including rehabilitation of the Juba Training Center; and (iv) life-
skills development including the issue of AIDS. While program delivery would be undertaken 
through external providers in order to achieve the desired level of flexibility and responsiveness, 
the responsibility for maintaining program content, quality, and auditing the achievement of 
learning outcomes would remain with MoEST.  
 
Component 3. Enhancement of the National Level Capacity in Curriculum  Development, 
Establishment and Administration of Examinations and, the Assessment of Learning 
Achievement.  
Page  3
MoEST, in collaboration with external partners has undertaken redevelopment of curricula for 
core subjects in Grades 1-4. Work is nearing completion of core subject curriculum development 
for Grades 5-8. Curriculum and learning resource materials have yet to be developed for non-
core primary subjects and all secondary level subjects. A parallel need exists to develop teacher 
guides for all subjects. While MoEST has established a Curriculum Development Center with a 
mandate to undertake this work, the center is in need of additional capacity to meet the 
requirements on the ground. Similarly, a center for Examinations and Learning Assessment has 
been established but has yet to be staffed. Component 3 of the project would provide resources 
for technical assistance, training, and procurement in support of (i) preparation of Teachers 
Guides for core Primary level subjects; (ii) expanding the supply of textbooks at the primary 
level; (iii) further development of curricula and teacher guides at the secondary level; (iv) 
enhancement of textbook authoring skills; (v) printing of additional textbooks; (vi) professional 
development for the core staff of the Examinations and Learning Assessment Center; and, (vii) 
development of learning assessment tools for the primary and secondary level.  
 
Component 4. Professional Development for Senior Managers at the Central, State and County 
Level.  
 
The governance model for education in South Sudan is still emerging. It is apparent however 
that policy, planning and macro-level resource allocation will remain the responsibility of the 
central government, with coordination responsibilities being assigned to the state level and 
service delivery to the county level. While a broadly based policy framework for the sector has 
been developed in collaboration with external partners, the overall capacity to undertake sector 
management and development remains very fragile. Urgent needs have been identified for the 
development of skills and experience in education policy formulation, leadership, education 
management, education system financing, administration and other specialized areas of 
education system development. Component 4 of the project includes the provision of resources 
to support professional development for senior managers at the central, state and county level, 
together with resources for technical assistance to support the development of operational, 
planning and administrative procedures. Activities are expected to include: (i) study tours; (ii) 
short term professional upgrading; (iii) procedure development relating to critical areas of 
education system development; (iv) convening policy forums; and (v) delivery of workshops on 
system development. Resources provided under this component would also support further 
development of the EMIS as a foundational tool for policy analysis and formulation.  
 
Component 5. Rehabilitation of School Level Infrastructure  
 
Building on the work of the school survey currently in progress, Component 5 of the project 
will commence with a rapid assessment of the rehabilitation requirements of schools in former 
garrison towns and war-affected areas.  Based on this assessment a pool of resources would be 
made available for access at the State level to rehabilitate the instructional facilities of individual 
schools. These resources would be vested in a fund administered by the MoEST against criteria 
to be determined.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Southern Sudan   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  4
To address safeguards capacity constraints, the Ministry of Environment, Wildlife Conservation 
and Tourism (MOEWCT) plans to coordinate an MDTF Safeguards Management Committee, 
comprised of Safeguards Officers from each ministry benefiting from the MDTF.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental issues are expected only with the construction of new, and renovation of old, 
buildings such as schools, training centers, and offices (e.g. safe water supply, sanitation, waste 
disposal).   These will be addressed through the implementation of an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The construction of new, and renovation of old, buildings such as schools, training centers, 
and offices may require land acquisition, and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will 
address potential compensation requirements.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/21/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
ESMF and RPF will be disclosed in the country on 11/22/2006 and at the Infoshop on 
11/29/2006.  
 
This project will be transferred to the SM for future safeguards clearances.  The SMU has 
agreed to accept transfer of the safeguards responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mourad Ezzine 
03/06/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
03/06/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura Frigenti 
03/06/2006 
Comments:   
