Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1869 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/18/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sudan 
Project ID: P095081 
Project Name: SD- Emergency Transport and Infra. Dev. Proj. MDTF 
Task Team Leader: George A. Banjo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 19, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 12, 2005 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Other rural development (P);Other urban development (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
340.00 
 SPECIAL 
FINANCING 
130.00
470.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to rehabilitate and develop critical road and transport 
infrastructure, improve critical urban infrastructure in the major towns (i.e. Juba, Wau, Malakal, 
Rumbek, Aweil, Warap, Yei, Yambio, Torit, Bor and Bentiu) of Southern Sudan and build 
capacity for planning, construction and sustainable operations, maintenance and management of 
the infrastructure.  
 
This project will focus on: (i) bringing roads that have been repaired (by WFP and others) under 
a
routine maintenance contract; (ii) upgrading of about 1,500 kilometres of roads to all weather 
engineered standard including completion of WFP Phase 2 activities; (iii)  provision and 
maintenance of basic urban infrastructure (roads, water and sanitation, solid waste and 
electricity) in 11 capitals (i.e. Juba, Wau, Malakal, Rumbek, Aweil, Warap, Yei, Yambio, Torit, 
Bor and Bentiu); and (iv) institutional development and capacity building and preparation of 
future projects including feasibility studies, design and preparation of tender documents for 
Page  2
upgrading to paved standard of the Nadapal to Juba and Kaya to Rumbek road corridors. This 
project and its components are consistent with and drawn from the JAM INAR.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will have three components namely (i) roads and transport development; 
(ii) provision of basic urban infrastructure in Juba the national capital and the 10 state capitals; 
and (iii) institution development and capacity building.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The major towns of Southern Sudan:  Juba, Wau, Malakal, Rumbek, Aweil, Warap, Yei, 
Yambio, Torit, Bor and Bentiu.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The three components of the first two phases of the program involve road maintenance and 
upgrading, improvement of urban services covering roads, water and sanitation, solid waste, 
power supply and rehabilitation of key buildings and capacity building for project planning and 
management.  Based upon available information, potential environmental and social impacts of 
these phases are likely to be moderate in scale, local in extent and easily identified, mitigated and 
monitored. The third phase of the program involves the development of new roads as well as 
support to ancillary services as cited above. While activities proposed under phases 1 and 2 
would be categorized as B, the new road development proposed in phase three would render the 
entire program Category A.  
 
A
number of agencies/departments will be responsible for the application of the Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to its own subprojects.  Within each department or 
agency, a Safeguards Focal Point will be identified with specific responsibility for overseeing the 
implementation of the Framework. As part of the capacity building provided for implementation 
of proposed operations, the Safeguards Focal Points and relevant staff of the concerned 
Ministries will also receive training in the application of environmental and social safeguards. To 
assist in this capacity building, and to provide subsequent guidance and review of the application 
of the Framework, the Government of National Unity (GNU) and the Government of South 
Sudan (GOSS) will contract specialist social and environmental services.  During supervision of 
these operations, the World Bank will assess the implementation of the Framework, and if 
required will recommend appropriate adjustments.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Colin P. Rees (QAG) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The three components of the first two phases of the project involve road maintenance and 
upgrading, improvement of urban services covering roads, water and sanitation, solid waste, 
power supply and capacity building for project planning and management.  Based upon available 
information, poten
tial environmental and social impacts of these phases are likely to be moderate 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
in scale, local in extent, easily identified, and readily mitigated and monitored. The third phase of 
the project involves the development of new roads as well as support to ancillary services as 
cited above. Accordingly, the program is expected to trigger safeguards policies on 
environmental assessment (OP 4.01), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12) and is classified as 
environmental impact category A. An Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) will be prepared which, in accordance emergency operations processed under OP 8.50, 
will be completed by the Borrower, reviewed by the Bank and disclosed in the country and 
Infoshop within 6 months of effectiveness.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The building of roads could involve a land take, which could cause the relocation of people 
to environments where their productive skills may be less applicable and the competition for 
resources greater; community institutions and social networks are weakened; kin groups are 
dispersed; and cultural identity, traditional authority, and the potential for mutual help are 
diminished or lost.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/19/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared which, in 
accordance emergency operations processed under OP 8.50, will be completed by the 
Borrower, reviewed by the Bank and disclosed in the country and Infoshop within 6 months 
of effectiveness.  The Framework will incorporate policies, regulations and guidelines for the 
selection and design of sub-projects and the planning and management of mitigation 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
measures, monitoring and institutional responsibilities. As necessary, individual 
Environmental Assessments (EAs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared. 
The potential for land acquisition for all physical works will be assessed during the Project 
Appraisal to determine whether a Resettlement Policy Framework and/or Resettlement 
Action Plans (RAPs) will be necessary.  If so, these will be completed by the Borrower, 
reviewed by the Bank and disclosed in the country and InfoShop within 6 months of 
effectiveness as per the guidelines on processing emergency operations under OP 8.50.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr George A. Banjo 
01/10/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
01/10/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Alain L. Labeau 
01/10/2006 
Comments:  1.  This is not an IDA lending & does not have to go to the Board. 
2.  Project was appraised & approved by the Donor's Oversight Committee in 12/2005. 
3.  ISDS was resubmitted on 01/10/06. 
