Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/20/2007 
Report No.:  AC3046
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sudan 
Project ID:  P101955 
Project Name:  Improving Livestock Production and Marketing Project - A Pilot 
Task Team Leader:  Jeeva A. Perumalpillai-Essex 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date:  
Managing Unit:  AFTS2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Animal production (100%) 
Theme:  Other rural development (P) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
12.00 
 
Multi-donor Trust Fund for North Sudan 
8.00
20.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project’s objective is to improve livestock production and marketing in selected 
rainfed areas of Central and Eastern Sudan. The project is designed and structured around 
pilot activities that address priority needs in support of livestock production and 
marketing. This project will demonstrate different ways to deliver services and improve 
pastoralists’ livelihoods.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is designed and structured around pilot activities that address priority needs 
to support livestock production and marketing. Once pilot activities are proven 
successful, they could be expanded to other traditional rainfed farming areas of Sudan 
through repeater projects.  
 
The project will also provide support to strengthen the capacity of the GNU Ministry of 
Animal Resources and Fisheries in the field of market data collection and processing. 
This should result in better understanding of the sector’s constraints and potential, and in 
turn inform policies to support sector development.  
 
Page  2
Project Components:  In order to achieve the project development objectives, there will 
be three project components.  
 
Component 1: Livestock Development Investment Fund (US$ 13.1 million; Phase 1: 
US$ 4.6 million, phase 2: US$ 8.5 million)  
 
The investment fund will provide matching grants to finance activities and technical 
assistance demanded by pastoral communities that are related to increasing productivity 
and sales of livestock. To be eligible, subprojects will have to demonstrate that they are 
demand-driven, i.e. designed and implemented by cohesive community-based groups or 
organizations, and that they are economically, socially, technically and environmentally 
sustainable. Examples of subprojects include water point rehabilitation, rangeland 
development, stock route demarcation, livestock fattening, advisory services for 
improving herds etc.  
 
Technical Assistance will be provided to mobilize pastoral communities, stimulate the 
formation of self-help groups (e.g. savings and credit groups) and reinforce existing ones, 
and to identify and design priority livestock-development subprojects. Training will be 
provided for relevant local authorities (e.g. locality range and pasture management, 
livestock extension services, State Water Corporation) to support implementation and 
supervision of the subprojects.  
 
The MDTF National Community Development Fund (CDF) is active in Blue Nile 
(including Roseires Locality) and is expanding to North Kordofan; it empowers 
communities to develop core social services with the support of local government. While 
the project would build on experience and systems developed under the CDF, it will 
primarily support livelihood enhancement interventions, hence complementing the CDF. 
The project will take into consideration the existence of enabling conditions and 
synergies with other development interventions: coordination with IFAD projects in 
greater Kordofan and the EC funded-SPCRP in Blue Nile will be ensured to avoid 
duplication, harmonize approaches and maximize impact (See Annex 2).  
 
Component 2: Privatization of Animal Health Services and Markets (US$ 2.2 million; 
phase 1: US$ 0.7 million, phase 2: US$ 1.5 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to test two pilot activities: the privatization of animal 
health services and improvement of livestock markets and marketing. It is expected that 
these pilot activities will improve services to producers and in turn augment their income.  
 
Privatization of Animal Health Services : This pilot program will support provision of 
animal health and vaccination services by the private sector in all nine localities of North 
Kordofan, and reinforce the regulatory and supervisory capacity of locality and state 
veterinary services therein. However, because of the piloting nature of this intervention, 
the privatization process will be gradual starting in two or three localities in phase one.  
 
Page  3
Technical assistance will be provided to assess the prevailing policy and legal 
framework for animal health service provision, propose changes where necessary, and to 
design a privatization strategy. Registered private animal health service providers will be 
contracted to deliver vaccination and other animal health services. The project will 
provide the providers with training and business start-up resources. Start-up resources 
will cover costs such as for transport, vaccines, drugs, refrigeration etc. State and locality 
veterinary services will be provided with training to monitor the work of the private 
veterinary service providers.  
 
Improvement of Livestock Markets and Marketing: This pilot program will finance 
upgrading of five livestock markets in the four states. The following criteria will be used 
to select markets for  rehabilitation: (a) markets owned by localities or states (i.e. not to 
the private sector), (b) markets have high economic relevance (high number of livestock 
traded or great potential), (c) localities or states agreeable to subcontracting market 
operations and management to the private sector.  
 
Technical assistance will be provided to the four states and the selected localities to 
prepare tenders for market management. Private sector and communities will receive 
technical assistance to support bid preparation and operating /managing markets (market 
development and management plan). The project will finance civil works and equipment 
to improve market infrastructure. Training (including study tours) will be provided to 
selected market operators to efficiently manage markets. The project will also finance 
training and equipment for locality staff to deliver inspection services.  
 
An NGOs will be recruited to mobilize livestock owner/trader groups and train them on 
market price analysis, group marketing, and animal health requirements. Basic 
communication equipment to disseminate market prices and information will be provided 
to the livestock marketing groups so formed.  
 
Component 3: Project Implementation and Studies (US$ 4.7 million; phase 1: US$ 2.4 
million, phase 2: US$ 2.3 million)  
 
Given the pilot nature of the program and implementation in four states, a Project 
Coordination Unit (PCU) will be set up in MARF in Khartoum to coordinate all project 
activities. The PCU will be supported by two Project Implementation Units (PIUs), to be 
established in the State Ministries of Agriculture, Animal Resources and Irrigation 
(SMAARI), one at Sinnar (Sinnar State) and the other at El Obeid (North Kordofan).  
 
Technical assistance and equipment will be provided for the Marketing Department of 
the MARF Directorate of Economics and Planning to develop a market information 
database that is easily accessible to producers and other sector stakeholders. Technical 
assistance will be provided for studies, including the preparation of a livestock population 
census for Sudan (including Southern Sudan). This activity will strengthen and broaden 
the IGAD-funded Livestock and Marketing Information System.  
 
Page  4
This component will also fund a study/mapping exercise to assess factors contributing to 
conflict among the pastoralists and the sedentary farmers. The objective of the study is to 
provide an understanding of the key constraints to “rights-based” access to land and 
equitable sharing of natural resources. The study will consider the multiple faces of the 
causes of and the plausible solutions to natural resource-based conflict (e.g. mechanized 
farming and policy reform, access to land, cultural behaviour and life style, improvement 
of livestock, livelihood diversification options, livestock ranches and natural resource 
management and environmental constraints) and a suite of factors impacting pastoral 
livelihoods.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Due to the size of the sector and the numerous issues at stake, MARF has identified two 
areas in Central and Eastern Sudan to pilot activities to enhance livestock production and 
marketing. The livestock systems in these areas are representative of the diversity of 
Sudan’s livestock systems, and of the socio economic background in which they operate.  
 
Blue Nile State, parts of Sinnar and White Nile States are among the poorest regions in 
Sudan, where tensions and conflicts over land are recurrent. The social structure is very 
heterogeneous, and the customary institutions weakened by decades of civil wars. 
Allocation of land for semi-mechanized farming is believed to be the main origin of the 
conflicts resulting in blocking traditional seasonal migration routes. These states are 
crossed by cattle from Southern Sudan en route to terminal livestock markets in 
Khartoum State.  
 
A
substantial number of sheep for export and domestic markets are produced and traded 
in North Kordofan State. There is increasing pressure on land and water due to 
competition between sedentary and transhumant populations, pressure exerted by 
displaced populations from Darfur, and poor support services provided by local 
government. As a result, rural communities in the state spend up to 60 percent of their 
revenues to buy water during the dry season, and rangeland areas are diminishing. The 
disease burden is heavy because the capacity of the public and private sectors to deliver 
animal health services is limited.  
 
Six localities have been selected as follows, which may be refined based on further 
consultations with the states:  
 
-in North Kordofan State: , the localities of Gheibeish, En Nuhud and Abu Zabed;  
 
-in Blue Nile State, the locality of Roseires;  
 
-in Sinnar State, Singa locality; and  
 
-in White Nile State, Gabaleein locality  
 
Localities in the four target states were selected based on the following criteria: (a) 
important livestock populations (based on estimates), and (b) high frequency and 
intensity of conflict between transhumant livestock producers and sedentary farmers over 
land and water.   
Page  5
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
This project entails the renovation of old buildings (project implementation offices), 
market places, and the development of livestock production-related infrastructure such as 
water points, and stock routes. It triggers both the Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) 
and Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) safeguards policies if new lands are to be 
acquired and if there would be any resettlement. An Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have 
been chosen as mitigation instruments because at this stage of project preparation, the 
exact sites and locations of subprojects are not yet known. OP 4.01 also requires a 
Medical and Veterinary Waste Management Plan (MVWMP) to ensure the effective 
collection and disposal of veterinary waste.  
 
It is expected that all national GNU/MDTF-financed projects in North Sudan will be 
brought under one umbrella set of safeguards instruments. With this perspective:  
 
The MDTF CDF project has developed environmental guidelines, and NETREP will. A 
more general ESMF is required for other MDTF-financed projects that raise safeguards 
concerns. The WB will prepare TOR for this safeguards instrument for consideration by 
the GNU and MDTF.  
 
The CDF has prepared an RPF that can be generalized by the MDTF for use by other 
MDTF-financed projects that raise social safeguards concerns. The WB also prepared a 
land acquisition tool for interim use by the CDF while the RPF was being finalized. This 
tool allowed CDF to proceed with sub-projects that do not require involuntary land 
acquisition, and can be adopted by other CDF projects.  
Page  6
Under the MDTF Health project, TOR for the preparation of a Medical Waste 
Management Plan (MWMP) is being written for use by the GNU Ministry of Health. The 
MWMP would be comprised of practical measures for adequately managing medical 
waste in Northern Sudan, training and capacity building for implementing those 
measures, and an implementation budget. It could be adapted for use by this project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Although some relevant legislation is in place, capacity to implement ESMF, RPF and 
MVWMP provisions is weak within MARF and it is doubtful that the Project 
implementation structure as designed will have the necessary expertise to fulfil 
safeguards requirements. This same situation prevails in other MDTF implementing 
agencies.  In view of this limited capacity, a Safeguards Management Committee (SMC) 
will be created for training, capacity building and coordination among the participating 
ministries. The Higher Council for Environment and Natural Resources (HCENR) will 
coordinate the SMC which would be comprised of nominated Safeguards Officers from 
each ministry/project, plus a representative from the Ministry of Finance.  
 
MARF and the four project states will each appoint a Safeguards Officer to the SMC. 
To ensure that safeguards concerns are adequately addressed throughout the life of the 
project, the project will finance ongoing technical assistance and training by local and 
regional consultants of these Safeguards Officers, in coordination with the other National 
Government/MDTF-supported projects, through the SMC.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The ESMF, RPF and MVWMP will be completed, approved and disclosed by the 
Government and the Project Coordinator within six months of Project Effectiveness.  
 
Implementation of the ESMF and RPF for subprojects will involve local consultations to 
avoid or minimize adverse environmental and social impacts.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Page  7
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/05/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/30/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/17/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/05/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/30/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/17/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
All safeguard documents will be completed, approved and disclosed within six months of 
Project Effectiveness.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
No 
Page  8
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Jeeva A. Perumalpillai-Essex 
06/20/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John A. Boyle 
06/20/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
06/20/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
06/20/2007 
Comments:   
