Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/05/2006 
Report No.:  AC2061
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sudan 
Project ID:  P097962 
Project Name:  Multidonor Rehabilitation Education Project 
Task Team Leader:  Mourad Ezzine 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 5, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: February 27, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General education sector (100%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
101.70 
 SPECIAL 
FINANCING 
51.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
152.70 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is: “Primary school students, Internally Displaced 
People (IDP’s), demobilized soldiers, and other non-traditional learners have improved 
access to enhanced quality of education, development of life skills, and basic 
occupational skill training.”   
 
3. Project Description 
In order to achieve the Government of Southern Sudan (GoSS) target objectives to 
increase the gross enrollment rate (GER) from the current level of 22% to 52% by 2010; 
enroll 15%of out of school youths in alternate education; and to increase girls enrolment 
from 11% to 35%, it is estimated that an additional 25,000 teachers will be required in 
addition to the upgrading of the existing cadre. In order to address this requirement, the 
Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (MoEST) has developed a strategy and 
orientation program for the orientation, upgrading and certification of newly recruited 
teachers. Implementation of this strategy is beyond the current capacity of the four 
Regional Teacher Training Institutes, and inconsistent with the GoSS strategy to devolve 
service delivery from the central to the county level. In order to meet the need for teacher 
training and upgrading, while also adding to the capacity to deliver Alternate Learning 
Page  2
Programs, Component 1 of the project will provide resources for the construction of 
approximately 20 County Teacher Training Centers (CTTCs). The purpose of these 
centers will be (i) to support the development of administrative, management, and 
pedagogical capacity to coordinate and deliver education services at the county level; (ii) 
to jump start teacher training at the county level in order to respond to the in-service 
training requirements associated with anticipated recruitment and upgrading demands, 
including those for accelerated learning; (iii) to initiate accelerated/alternate education 
programs at the county level; and (iii) to strengthen the capacity of the county level 
administration to support the development and delivery of education services at the 
Payam level.  
 
Each center will include classrooms, administrative offices and a resource center 
equipped with texts, teacher guides, and computers. Each center will have a water point 
and provision for waste management. Provision will be made for learner accommodation 
using tents or other temporary arrangements. Selection of sites for CTTCs will be based 
on criteria of population distribution and equity. In order to ensure cost efficiency, 
proximity to the proposed new road network will also be considered to be important 
criteria.  
 
Component 2. A Responsive Fund for the Provision of Alternate Education and/or Skill 
Development for Non-Formal Learners.  
 
Three decades of civil war have fundamentally fractured the structure of society in 
Sudan. An estimated 3 million people have been internally displaced through conflict, 
famine or poverty. Females have been denied access to education as a result of the need 
to undertake household chores and responsibilities; the effect of cultural attitudes beliefs; 
and, the absence of appropriate school infrastructure and facilities. Other non-traditional 
learner groups include overage children, demobilized soldiers, and nomads. In order to 
address the urgency to provide educational opportunity that would assist these groups to 
integrate more effectively into a post conflict society, MoEST has developed a series of 
Alternate Education Programs designed to meet their respective learning needs. 
Recognizing that these populations are dispersed and mobile, a flexible response to the 
provision of education opportunities, as opposed to a structured or systemic response, 
will need to be adopted for many years.  The purpose of Component 2 of the project is to 
provide a pool of resources targeted at demobilized soldiers, IDP’s, overage children, 
females and other non-formal learners wishing to access educational opportunity. These 
resources would be made available on a responsive basis to NGOs, UN agencies, private 
sector, or other providers to deliver education services against clearly defined criteria 
developed by MoEST and partners. It is envisaged that the proposed services would 
include: (i) development of literacy and numeracy; (ii) post-literacy accelerated learning 
opportunities; (iii) short-term occupational skill development including rehabilitation of 
the Juba Training Center; and (iv) life-skills development including the issue of AIDS. 
While program delivery would be undertaken through external providers in order to 
achieve the desired level of flexibility and responsiveness, the responsibility for 
maintaining program content, quality, and auditing the achievement of learning outcomes 
would remain with MoEST.  
 
Page  3
Component 3. Enhancement of the National Level Capacity in Curriculum  
Development, Establishment and Administration of Examinations and, the Assessment of 
Learning Achievement.  
 
MoEST, in collaboration with external partners has undertaken redevelopment of 
curricula for core subjects in Grades 1-4. Work is nearing completion of core subject 
curriculum development for Grades 5-8. Curriculum and learning resource materials have 
yet to be developed for non-core primary subjects and all secondary level subjects. A 
parallel need exists to develop teacher guides for all subjects. While MoEST has 
established a Curriculum Development Center with a mandate to undertake this work, the 
center is in need of additional capacity to meet the requirements on the ground. Similarly, 
a
center for Examinations and Learning Assessment has been established but has yet to 
be staffed. Component 3 of the project would provide resources for technical assistance, 
training, and procurement in support of (i) preparation of Teachers Guides for core 
Primary level subjects; (ii) expanding the supply of textbooks at the primary level; (iii) 
further development of curricula and teacher guides at the secondary level; (iv) 
enhancement of textbook authoring skills; (v) printing of additional textbooks; (vi) 
professional development for the core staff of the Examinations and Learning 
Assessment Center; and, (vii) development of learning assessment tools for the primary 
and secondary level.  
 
Component 4. Professional Development for Senior Managers at the Central, State and 
County Level.  
 
The governance model for education in South Sudan is still emerging. It is apparent 
however that policy, planning and macro-level resource allocation will remain the 
responsibility of the central government, with coordination responsibilities being 
assigned to the state level and service delivery to the county level. While a broadly based 
policy framework for the sector has been developed in collaboration with external 
partners, the overall capacity to undertake sector management and development remains 
very fragile. Urgent needs have been identified for the development of skills and 
experience in education policy formulation, leadership, education management, education 
system financing, administration and other specialized areas of education system 
development. Component 4 of the project includes the provision of resources to support 
professional development for senior managers at the central, state and county level, 
together with resources for technical assistance to support the development of 
operational, planning and administrative procedures. Activities are expected to include: 
(i) study tours; (ii) short term professional upgrading; (iii) procedure development 
relating to critical areas of education system development; (iv) convening policy forums; 
and (v) delivery of workshops on system development. Resources provided under this 
component would also support further development of the EMIS as a foundational tool 
for policy analysis and formulation.  
 
Component 5. Rehabilitation of School Level Infrastructure  
 
Building on the work of the school survey currently in progress, Component 5 of the 
project will commence with a rapid assessment of the rehabilitation requirements of 
schools in former garrison towns and war-affected areas.  Based on this assessment a 
pool of resources would be made available for access at the State level to rehabilitate the 
Page  4
instructional facilities of individual schools. These resources would be vested in a fund 
administered by the MoEST against criteria to be determined.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Southern Sudan   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental issues are expected only with the construction of new, and renovation of 
old, buildings such as schools, training centers, and offices (e.g. safe water supply, 
sanitation, waste disposal).   These will be addressed through the implementation of an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).  
 
The construction of new, and renovation of old, buildings such as schools, training 
centers, and offices may require land acquisition, and a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) will address potential compensation requirements.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives will be considered in the course of identifying project investments.   
 
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Virtually non-existent.  It is planned that the ESMF and RPF will be applicable to all 
MDTF projects, initially education, health and roads.  To address safeguards capacity 
constraints, the Ministry of Environment, Wildlife Conservation and Tourism 
(MOEWCT) has agreed to coordinate an MDTF Safeguards Management Committee, 
comprised of Safeguards Officers from each ministry benefiting from the MDTF.  The 
MOEWCT will not have subproject approval authority.  However, each Safeguards 
Officer will have the authority to determine, in consultation with the coordinator, whether 
the site is free of safeguards issues and whether additional mitigation measures are 
needed.  The Committee will be supported by a regionally recruited advisor specialized in 
World Bank Safeguards over the project period (three years).  The advisor will monitor 
the implementation of the safeguard procedures, provide training and advice to the SMC 
as needed, and will report to the benefiting ministries and to the MTDF Administrator.  
This arrangement will support not only continuous performance improvement for the 
Safeguards Officers and implementation of the ESMF and RPF, but also policy, 
regulatory and institutional strengthening for the MOEWCT to support environmentally 
sustainable growth and resource management in Southern Sudan.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Since the project is being prepared under OP8.50 (Emergency Recovery Assistance), 
both the ESMF and RPF will be completed, approved and disclosed by the Government 
and the MDTF Administrator within six months of project effectiveness.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/22/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/29/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/22/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/29/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mourad Ezzine 
04/05/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John A. Boyle 
04/05/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
04/05/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
04/05/2006 
Comments:  Doing a single ESMF and RPF for all the MDTF projects is a good idea. 
