Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/14/2006 
Report No.:  AC2100
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sudan 
Project ID:  P094476 
Project Name:  Community Development Fund 
Task Team Leader:  Bassam Ramadan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 12, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 10, 2005 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General education sector (100%) 
Theme:  Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
20.00 
 SPECIAL 
FINANCING 
30.00
50.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Project is to meet urgent community-driven recovery and 
development needs in the war-affected and underdeveloped areas of North Sudan by 
providing social and economic services and infrastructure.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1.  Community Development Subprojects  
 
This component would serve to address pro-poor community development priorities as 
laid out in the peace protocols, with particular emphasis on access and quality of basic 
education, health and water services. The component would target areas with low 
relevant per capita indicators and gender inequity to improve the access and, over time, 
quality of basic social services.  It will build and renovate basic education and health 
facilities, promote adult literacy and child immunization campaigns, launch rapid 
vocational training programs for school-drop-outs, facilitate the creation of youth centers, 
launch revolving textbook projects and other social services directed at the poor. 
Programs to facilitate the social integration and inclusion of vulnerable groups such as 
elderly, disabled, women head of households and children victims of violence, AIDS 
Page  2
victims, drug addicts, war-crippled victims, unemployed youths, etc., will also be 
emphasized. Gender and conflict-sensitive analysis will guide the allocation of resources 
among these vulnerable groups. This component would also concentrate on the provision 
of small rural infrastructure including access and rural roads and environmental 
protection activities including community potable water, wells and spring protection, 
small wastewater treatment schemes that use appropriate technologies, improved solid 
waste collection, treatment and disposal and reforestation and protection of natural sites. 
Communities and the organizations that represent them would take the lead in 
implementation under this window. Localities and other development partners, UN 
agencies and the private sector, would support communities in this process.  This 
community-level window could also serve to support the return and reintegration process 
(particularly related to social services).  The maximum size of a typical subproject under 
this component is $100,000 equivalent.  All subproject proposals have to satisfy specific 
selection and eligibility criteria as stipulated in the project’s Operational Manual (OM).   
A
key part of the OM will focus on selecting investments where enabling conditions exist 
that will lead to the desired outcomes such as improved maternal mortality rates, or 
higher educational level for example.   These enabling conditions include working in 
areas where women can meaningfully participate in the selection and conception of 
projects (for example through participation on committees), and benefit from such sub-
projects.   Given the context of past conflict, such conditions could also include working 
in areas and on projects that are not likely to stimulate new conflict, or to have benefits 
uniquely captured exclusively by specific groups.  
 
Component 2. 
Capacity Building, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Project 
Management  
 
Training, technical assistance and capacity building would be provided to localities, 
NGOs and local Community-Based Organizations (CBOs), to improve their technical 
skills in the identification, planning, programming, management and delivery of social 
subprojects.  In addition, this component would establish the eligibility of target localities 
to receive funds from the project through conducting a training program aimed at 
building their capacity in the areas of project management (e.g., transparency, 
accountability, financial management, procurement), and community participation and 
empowerment (e.g., participatory planning process and inclusion of marginalized 
segments of the population in decision-making).  Once the project validates the 
attainment by these localities of the above Minimum Qualifying Criteria (MQC), they 
will be eligible for receiving funds under the project, which they would then channel to 
service providers for the benefit of the target beneficiary communities using NGOs, 
CBOs, private sector, and social sector ministries. The selection of the LIU Manager 
externally with skills in participatory and inclusive development will ensure that the 
project unit established within the Locality has the requisite expertise in inclusive and 
participatory development processes, skills not typically available within the Locality 
staff.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Geographically, the Project will cover all Northern states and will coordinate closely with 
other major donor-funded community development projects (e.g. EU) to ensure 
harmonization of procedures and implementation mechanisms. The Project will be 
phased over several years, with a series of successive three-year projects.  Phase I (Years 
1-3) will start in the following states: Blue Nile; Kassala, South Kordofan and North 
Kordofan.  The Project will target ten localities selected according to urgent needs in 
these priority states.  These are:  
 
o
South Kordofan State: Abu Gebiha, AL Rashad and Kailak localities  
 
o
North Kordofan State: Sodari, Jabrah and Wad Banda localities.  
 
o
Blue Nile State: 
AL Roseries and ED’ Damazeen localities  
 
o
Kassala State: Kassala rural and Hamaish Koraib localities.  
 
A
social and conflict analysis (SCA) is providing detailed information and stakeholder 
analysis of the project areas.   Preliminary data collected show that the localities are 
large, and ethnically diverse with different histories of conflict.   The total estimated 
population in the five states is over 5 million.   The population of the localities included is 
more difficult to ascertain given recent re-classification of certain localities.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Colin P. Rees (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project triggers OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment.  The Community Development 
Subprojects component may have potential negative environmental impacts and social 
risks related to construction for improving and/or rehabilitating community social and 
economic infrastructure.  Under this component, the project would finance the 
rehabilitation of schools, health and cultural facilities, community potable water supply, 
small wastewater disposal schemes, as well as irrigation and drainage schemes. Given the 
Page  4
small scale of these community subprojects, predicted negative environmental impacts 
are unlikely to be significant, irreversible or large in scale.  Potential negative impacts 
will be mainly related to construction activities including disruption of traffic pattern, 
interference with other infrastructures, disrupted access to residential and/or other 
buildings, change in the landscape (loss of vegetation), noise nuisance, air pollution due 
to dust formation, safety hazard from construction activities and inappropriate disposal of 
excavated materials and construction debris. Appropriate mitigation measures and their 
management are to be addressed under environmental guidelines for the project (included 
in the Operational Manual) and provisions in contractors’documents for implementation.  
 
The type of social impact and social risk will depend on the sub-project type. The risk of 
involuntary resettlement is very low given the nature of the investments, and the criteria 
in the OM that projects involving such resettlement would not be eligible. However, the 
sub-projects may require small scale land acquisition or temporary restriction of use.   
The sub-projects do include water points and irrigation, and care would need to be taken 
to ensure that access and use rights are not denied to specific groups, and that ownership 
of assets is clear.In particular, because of the past conflicts over water or land use and 
access, and the current state of flux of Government land policy the project will complete 
a
Resettlement Policy Framework which is tailored to the low level of risk, and which 
focuses on providing guidelines for any voluntary resettlement or land acquisition or use 
under the project including addressing compensation requirements. As is the case with 
other demand driven projects, the Operational Manual will include procedures for 
appraising the environmental and social impacts of any proposed subproject and for 
identifying the triggers for the RPF to be implemented.  On the social side, the OM would 
include guidelines on a land assessment for each sub-project which would identify 
whether the RPF would be triggered through a checklist.   The OM would also include 
guidelines on how to deal with voluntary resettlement or land use, and would indicate 
when the RFP would be applied. If a subproject is found to include substantial 
environmental or social impacts, further procedures are included to address them or to 
alter the design of the subproject.  
 
The OM will describe in detail how subprojects will be evaluated and monitored to 
ensure that environmental and social safeguards are enforced and in compliance with 
World Bank policies. Environmental screening criteria will be included in the selection of 
subprojects, and adequate mitigation measures will be incorporated in the contract 
agreements so that all anticipated environmental impacts are avoided or minimized.  
Training for LIU staff on World Bank social and environmental safeguards will be 
carried out to inform project and other relevant parties of the nature and importance of 
safeguards to sustainable development.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long-term negative impacts are expected at this stage.  Possible positive 
environmental and social impacts include provision of adequate water quantities and 
qualities, protection of water resources from contamination, improved access of poor 
Page  5
people to health and social services, improved employment opportunities for long-term 
unemployed, etc.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
For environmental and social safeguards,   screening measures stipulated in the ESMF 
will be incorporated in the OM for the project.  However, given the current state of flux 
of land policies, the post conflict situation, and the fact that not all sub-projects have been 
appraised, the project team determined that it would be prudent to complete a RPF.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Since the project is being prepared under OP8.50 (Emergency Recovery Assistance), 
both the ESMF and RPF will be completed, approved and disclosed by the Government 
and the MDTF Administrator within six months of project effectiveness.   In coordination 
with other Bank projects in Sudan and within 6 months of effectiveness  a review will be 
undertaken of the environmental legal and regulatory framework for assessing the 
environmental impacts of subprojects, including the mechanisms and responsibilities for 
environmental screening and review of EA results.  The project will provide capacity 
building for the PIU and other concerned stakeholders to ensure that subprojects are 
properly evaluated and meet the environmental requirements of appropriate national and 
local authorities and are consistent with Bank safeguards.  
 
Guidelines for Environmental Assessment will be prepared and included in the Project 
OM.  Subprojects submitted for financing will be screened for potential environmental 
and social impacts and will be subject to an environmental review according to the 
environmental guidelines and to a land assessment to determine whether the RPF is 
triggered.  This environmental review would identify potential environmental issues that 
might arise from proposed subprojects.  Based upon the review, the applicant may be 
asked to prepare an Environmental Assessment or an Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) to ensure that all negative impacts are properly mitigated and monitored.    If the 
land assessment triggers the RPF and involuntary resettlement, then the guidelines of the 
RPF would be followed and a RAP would be prepared.  
 
The environmental guidelines will include details of environmental review procedures, 
institutional arrangements for environment as well as legal requirements. Any subproject, 
as a condition of approval, will be required to meet all environmental requirements and 
have in place all necessary approvals, licenses and certificates as required by the 
government authorities.  
 
Environmental Guidelines Manual (EGM) is being developed, and will be disclosed in 
Sudan and at the Info Shop in the World Bank within 6 months from the date of Grant 
effectiveness (i.e. no later than Sept. 30, 2006).  The Bank will review the draft EGM and 
confirm its relevance to and appropriateness for the project before it is finalized and 
disclosed.   
 
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders of the project include the MFNE, Ministry of Federal Government, 
targeted localities, NGOs and CBOs and community members.   All project areas include 
pastoralists, urban dwellers, agro-pastoralists, nomadic tribes, and internally displaced 
persons either in groups or dispersed who do not intend to return home and who therefore 
will be included in eligible projects and in consultation arrangements if and where they 
are affected.  
 
Consultations will be held to facilitate stakeholder involvement and awareness at all 
levels of project implementation and to ensure that the information required for decision 
making is available to all interested parties. In particular, given the importance of 
inclusive project development and selection in a post-conflict situation, the locality 
implementation units will be headed by an externally recruited specialist with skills in 
inclusive and participatory development processes.   In addition, locality level steering 
committees will include representatives of NGOs.  The completion of a detailed 
stakeholder analysis in the Social and Conflict Assessment will further guide the 
appropriate structure and participants to ensure that the steering committees are fair and 
representative.   The Social and Conflict Assessment is being carried out by an 
independent group of researchers with links to both northern and southern groups.  The 
technical, financial, environmental and social issues associated with the project will be 
discussed in meetings with representatives of the Localities, NGOs and various other 
stakeholders.  
 
During the implementation of the project, wide participation and consultation at the 
central level will be ensured through the Project Steering Committee.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/30/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/30/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/30/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/30/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/30/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/30/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  7
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
No 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
No 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Bassam Ramadan 
02/06/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Colin P. Rees 
02/06/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Sarah Keener 
02/06/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
02/06/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mourad Ezzine 
02/06/2006 
Comments:   
