Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2158 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/02/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sudan 
Project ID: P098483 
Project Name: Sudan Multi-donor Trust Fund for Health in Northern Sudan 
Task Team Leader: Verdon S. Staines 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 1, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 16, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTH3 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Child health (P);Other communicable diseases (P);Health system performance 
(P);Nutrition and food security (P);Population and reproductive health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
47.00 
 SPECIAL 
FINANCING 
23.00
70.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
To improve access to and utilization of basic health services by the population in targeted 
underserved and direct conflict-affected states through development of the decentralized health 
system.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will support activities to develop capacities of the Federal Ministry of Health 
(FMOH) and state ministries of health in the four target states.  Investment in human resources, 
infrastructure, equipment, and support to basic service delivery will focus on the four target 
states, covering a population of approximately 5 million.  The project will aim:  
 
i) To improve the capacities of the federal and state ministries of health in the areas of 
management, systems, health financing, sector policy development and planning, and monitoring 
and evaluation. This is a necessity ensure that anticipated increased fiscal resources are 
effectively translated into greater and more equitable support for basic health services, and to 
effectively monitor the results of increased spending;  
Page  2
ii) To support the local health system and improve service delivery, integrating primary and 
first-referral health services under a single financing and management structures at the locality 
level  
 
iii) To support improvement in the availability and quality of basic health services, including 
interventions to combat priority diseases, particularly malaria and tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS;  
 
iv) To develop key health service inputs, investing in health human resources, infrastructure 
and equipment;  
 
v)
To improve household access to and demand for services through outreach and community- 
and household-based interventions, and reducing financial barriers to care while pilot-testing 
innovative financing mechanisms.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will target the conflict-affected and poor states of Southern Kordofan, Blue Nile, 
Kassala, and Red Sea, covering a population of approximately 5 million.  These states include 
the Three Areas and have health indicators consistently lower than Northern Sudan averages.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The National government of Sudan has some capacity for developing and implementing 
safeguard policies; this needs to be further assessed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTS1) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
To be determined at Appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
To be determined at Appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/27/2006 
Page  3
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The EA will be launched after effectiveness and should be completed by end of October 
2006.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Verdon S. Staines 
05/01/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/01/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura Frigenti 
05/01/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
