Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2439 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/26/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tajikistan 
Project ID: P101592 
Project Name: Dushanbe Water Supply Rehabilitation Project 
Task Team Leader: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: October 30, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (100%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives of the parent Dushanbe Water Supply Project were to improve the 
safety, reliability, efficiency and financial viability of water supply services in Dushanbe.  The 
development objective would be achieved through: (a) strategic rehabilitation and efficient 
improvement of existing facilities in critical condition; (b) institutional strengthening of the 
utility Dushanbe Vodokanal State Unitary Enterprise (DVK) through a performance-based 
service contract (SC) with an internationally experienced water utility operator; and (c) 
strengthening of DVK?s financial capacity through improved financial management and 
commercial practices. These development objectives are consistent with the proposed project for 
additional financing, and therefore will not be revised   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The main aim of the proposed Water Supply Rehabilitation Project is to enable DVK to continue 
with the rehabilitation of the Dushanbe water supply system, and allow it to scale up current 
activities and thereby improve sustainability.  The additional financing will contribute towards 
meeting the huge investment needs of the Dushanbe water supply system, which are estimated to 
be in the region of US$150 million.  Continued repair and rehabilitation of the system is in line 
with the priorities of GOT and DVK, who recognize the importance of improved water supply 
Page  2
for Dushanbe in poverty reduction as well as health and environmental problems.  The Project 
would comprise five main components: (a) installation of sodium hypo-chlorine equipment for 
disinfection of water (US$1.5 million); (b) additional procurement of equipment to complement 
ongoing works, in particular, network rehabilitation, water meters, district metering, and 
extension of the contract with the international operator (US$1.5 million); (c) consumables and 
materials including chlorine and coagulants (US$0.3 million); (d) cleaning and rehabilitation of 
28 reservoirs and rehabilitation of 3rd level pumping stations for these reservoirs (US$1.2 
million); and (e) audits and operational expenditures and consultant services (US$   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be carried out in the Dushanbe Water System network.  The areas for 
rehabilitation are around the Dushanbe area, and the reservoirs and pumping stations to be 
rehabilitated are on DVK property   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
A
review of the potential environmental and social impacts and appropriate mitigation measures 
was carried out during the preparation of the original project, and the project was classified as 
Category B for environmental impacts.  Appropriate mitigation measures were prepared and 
have been used throughout the implementation of the project, and the project has not had any 
environmental, social or other safeguard problems.  The Borrower's institutional capacity to 
address safeguard problems is therefore satisfactory.  Activities proposed under the 
Rehabilitation Project are neither expected to change the environmental categorization of the 
project (Category B), nor to trigger any new safeguard policies that would be beyond the 
Borrower's capacity to manage   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Sana Kh.H. Agha Al Nimer (MNSIF) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An EMP was prepared for the original project.  This EMP will be updated, and will be re-
issued in the country before appraisal in September 2006.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
Page  3
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  09/07/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
review of current safeguards and adequacy in meeting the safeguard requirements for the 
additional project will be carried out by appraisal.  The project will not require the 
preparation of a PAD, (only a Project Paper) since it is being prepared under OP/BP 13.  20 
(Additional Financing)   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jonathan S. Kamkwalala 
07/11/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
07/18/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
07/25/2006 
Comments:  This repeater project is very low risk for safeguards, having a successful history in the 
original project. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
