Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/31/2006 
Report No.:  AC2572
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tajikistan 
Project ID:  P101592 
Project Name:  Dushanbe Water Supply Rehabilitation Project - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Jonathan S. Kamkwalala 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: December 19, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (100%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.70
0.70 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The original development objectives were to improve the safety, reliability, efficiency 
and financial viability of water supply services in Dushanbe.  The development 
objectives would be achieved through: (a) strategic rehabilitation and efficiency 
improvements of existing facilities; (b) institutional strengthening of DVK through a 
performance-based service contract with an internationally experienced water utility 
operator; and (c) strengthening of DVK's financial capacity through improved financial 
management and commercial practices.  The project design and implementation 
arrangements are also proposed to remain the same.  The key activities, which comprise 
rehabilitation of the network and improvement in water quality, were included, albeit on 
a
smaller scale, under the original project.   
 
3. Project Description 
The main aim of the proposed additional financing for the Water Supply Rehabilitation 
Project is to enable DVK to continue with the rehabilitation of the Dushanbe water 
supply system, and allow it to scale up current activities and thereby improve 
sustainability. Continued repair and rehabilitation of the system is in line with the 
priorities of GOT and DVK, who recognize the importance of improved water supply for 
Dushanbe in poverty reduction as well as health and environmental problems.  The 
Project would comprise five main components (totaling US$5.7 million):  
Page  2
Component 1:  Equipment Component (US$1.5 million of which IDA US $ 1.3 million 
and GOT US$0.2 million): installation of sodium hypo-chlorine equipment for 
disinfection of water.   The proposed equipment, which involves the on-site generation of 
hypo-chlorite for water treatment is a more reliable process, and will eliminate the use of 
more hazardous and unreliable materials such as liquid or gaseous chlorine.  
 
Component 2. Civil Works and Capital Repair Component:  (US$1.2 million of which 
IDA US$1.1 million and GOT US$0.1 million): rehabilitation of rapid sand filters at the 
Napornaya Water Treatment Plant.  This component will continue with the rehabilitation 
completed at this treatment plant under the current project.  The proposed replacement 
and rehabilitation of the rapid sand filters will complement the rehabilitation of the 
sedimentation ponds, and will allow for full treatment of water supply, and , and increase 
the amount of  treated water to the city by 70,000 cubic meters.  
 
Component 3:  System Rehabilitation, Booster Stations, and Metering:  (US$2.0 million 
of which IDA US$1.8 million and GOT US$0.2 million):  additional procurement of 
equipment to complement ongoing works, in particular, rehabilitation of about 60 booster 
stations, serving about 80,000 consumers, water meters, district metering.  The 
rehabilitation of booster stations will continue work started under the on-going project, in 
which 39 booster stations were rehabilitated.  This will reduce the erratic water supply to 
residents of the city caused by equipment failure, in particular those that live in high rise 
apartments  
 
Component 4. Provision of Technical Assistance to DVK:  (US$0.8 million of which 
IDA US$0.7 million and GOT US$0.1 million) for improved institutional and financial 
management, including appointment of consultants for utility management, financial 
management and accounting, water distribution network zoning and leak detection, as 
well as the financing of audit services.  
 
Component 5: Assistance with Project Management: (US$0.2 million of which IDA 
US$0.1 million and GOT US$01. million).  This will consist mainly the financing of 
Operating Costs for the operation of the PCU.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be located in parts of Dushanbe City in Tajikistan.  The areas for 
rehabilitation are around the Dushanbe area. The chlorination stations will be installed on 
DVK property, while the repairs to the sand filters will also be on DVK property   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Sanyu Sarah Senkatuka Lutalo (ECSIE) 
Ms Sana Kh.H. Agha Al Nimer (MNSIF) 
Ms Anna Cestari (YPP) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no safeguard risks on this project, which is a an additional financing project.  
The proposed project does not raise the original category of the project, which was rated 
B.  The impacts are expected to be positive.  During the implementation of the parent 
project, there were no environmental or social safeguard issues identified.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no long term impacts to future activities.  Most impacts are short term, (noise, 
dust during construction, etc)   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project focuses on rehabilitation of existing assets, and the proposed project activities 
represent the most feasible option from an environmental perspective.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Under the on-going project, all activities have to be approved by the State Ecological 
Expertise and the Ministry of Environment and Forestry of the Republic of Tajikistan.  
These arrangement will continue under the revised project.  The capacity of the 
Borrower's agencies, including the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) and DVK in 
addressing environmental issues is considered to be satisfactory.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main stakeholders include the Ministries of Environment and Forest Protection, 
Nature Protection and Water Industry, Central Geological Board of Tajikistan, and Public 
Ecological Organization (UNEPCOM) who have all endorsed the revised EMMP.  Public 
disclosure involved sending the EMMP to stakeholders, and obtaining clearances, as well 
Page  4
as a stakeholder consultation workshop held on October 30, 2006 in which NGOs and 
other stakeholders reviewed the EMMP, provided comments and endorsed it.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/30/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/30/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/31/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Disclosure was conducted through NGO consultations   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jonathan S. Kamkwalala 
10/24/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Sana Kh.H. Agha Al Nimer 
10/24/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
10/30/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
10/30/2006 
Comments:  Cleared 
