Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/30/2007 
Report No.:  AC2506
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tajikistan 
Project ID:  P098889 
Project Name:  Cotton Sector Recovery and Poverty Reduction Project 
Task Team Leader:  Bekzod Shamsiev 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 8, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (30%);Crops (20%);Agro-industry 
(20%);Agricultural marketing and trade (20%);Other domestic and international trade 
(10%) 
Theme:  Export development and competitiveness (P);Rural markets (S);Rural policies 
and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve the livelihood of cotton farmers and 
create the conditions for sustainable growth of cotton production in selected, low income 
areas of Tajikistan, through: debt resolution, an improved policy environment, and 
increased cotton output and profitability.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will be financed by a SDR 10.07 m (US$ 15.00 m) International 
Development Association (IDA) Credit and will consists of four components. The first 
two components focus on debt resolution and government capacity to formulate and 
monitor policy; and the third - on building farmer capacity to engage in processing and 
marketing activities. The forth component will provide assistance in project management 
and monitoring.  
 
Component A.  Debt Resolution/Debt Conversion. Debt resolution will be implemented 
at farm level, on a case-by-case basis. The aim is to develop a debt resolution process that 
is transparent, equitable, and easy for producers to understand; and which does not 
Page  2
compromise the ability of efficient producers to raise productivity and incomes, and to 
invest. Secondly the component will provide assistance in debt conversion.  
 
Component B. Support for Policy Reform. The project will appoint a senior policy 
adviser to work with designated counterparts in the Independent Commission and the 
President?s Office, to strengthen policy analysis and to advise on policy reform. To 
further strengthen capacity and guide reform, this component will conduct an annual 
analysis of the impact of policy decisions and project activity on farm productivity, farm 
incomes and cotton processing efficiency. Component C. Cotton Supply Chain 
Development. Producers will be provided with the financial resources and knowledge 
needed to engage directly and actively in the ownership and management of cotton 
ginning and farm input supply. There will be three separate sub-components ? cotton 
ginnery joint ventures; cotton seed supply through providing modern seed processing 
equipment and farm support through public awareness programs and farmer extension 
Programs.  While the sub-component will not directly finance new ginneries, it will 
promote foreign direct investment in ginneries in selected districts, and demonstrate the 
impact of increased competition on producer incentives.  
 
Component D. Project Management Unit. A Project Management Unit (PMU) will be 
set up in the Office of the President, to facilitate interaction with the State Advisor on 
Economic Policy who has been appointed as the project counterpart. The PMU will be 
responsible for project management, including procurement and financial management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Policy reforms will be supported at national level while other project components will be 
implemented in selected districts of Khatlon region, which accounts for the highest share 
(60%) of cotton production in Tajikistan and has the highest incidence of rural poverty 
(75% of rural people below the poverty line). The selected districts will represent about 
thirty percent of the region?s cotton output.  
 
Khatlon region, including the selected project rayons (Farkhor, Bohtar, Kumsangir, 
Kubodyn, Yavan, Vaksh, Shaartuz), is located in South Tajikistan and is one of the most 
populated region of the country. It has a territory of 24.8 thous. sq.km and covers two 
agro-climatic areas ? Vakhsh and Kulyab, which are characterized by high temperatures 
and long-term frost-free period.  
 
Khatlon region has a population of 2.3 million people of which the vast majority live in 
rural areas (1.9 million people). The population density is the highest in the country, with 
92.5 people/sq km.  The region also has the largest portion of irrigated lands in the 
country, approximately - about 45 percent. The region?s industry is presented by 165 
enterprises with a production ratio of 25.8% of the total industrial production of the 
republic. The region hosts a few large industrial complexes: the Vakhsh Azot Fertilizer 
plant, the Yavan chemical enterprise, as well as a complex for chemical herbicide 
entombment.  
 
Due to deforestation, improper irrigation and excessive use of agricultural lands 
combined with unregulated chemical inputs the region?s land resources are affected by 
Page  3
salinization, wind/water erosion and water logging. Most of the irrigation and drainage 
infrastructure is in danger of collapse. The system now manifests a rapid deterioration in 
operating efficiency of pumping stations, increased losses in the main canals and low 
water use efficiency at the field level. The lack of adequate drainage has exacerbated the 
problem of rising water table and secondary salinization necessitating expensive 
emergency interventions. As a result, about 15 percent of irrigated lands are over-
saturated every year.  It concentrates salts, drawn up from lower in the soil profile, in the 
plants' rooting zone.  
 
The region suffers also from inadequate industrial and domestic solid waste collection 
and dumping infrastructure, and contaminated drinking water.  The results of recent water 
quality analysis show an alarming level of chemical and bacteriological contaminants 
(47.3 percent and 54.7 percent, respectively) in samples of water used for drinking and 
irrigation. The heavy dependence on agriculture in Khatlon, and the subsequent exposure 
to chemicals involved in farming, has a negative impact on health in the region.  In 
addition, the incidence of disease is significantly higher in areas of irrigated agriculture 
where water consumption for the local population comes primarily from ditches in the 
village.  
 
The region has 14 cotton ginning factories that also have an impact on the environment 
mostly in terms of air pollution. Cotton ginning generates dust both within and beyond 
the plant. Some practices and dust control-equipment are in place, but do not seem to be 
effective. Dust concentration inside the plants are not known, but both plant workers and 
the neighboring populations may be exposed to ambient air characterized by relatively 
high concentration of dust, especially in the immediate surroundings of the plants.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Activities under the project are not expected to generate significant adverse 
environmental effects as they are focusing largely on cotton sector reforms, capacity 
building in debt resolution and improved access to financial resources and knowledge 
needed to engage directly in the ownership and management of cotton ginning and farm 
input supply. The project will not involve any major construction requiring resettlement 
or land acquisition, nor invest in the construction of dams, new canals or head works that 
would allow increased water abstraction from main sources. Revitalization of the 
country's cotton sector and increase of its contribution to farm income will stimulate the 
expansion of cotton production. Such expansion may have mostly positive environmental 
impacts. The positive effects might be associated with more efficient water and land 
usage due to increased awareness on more environmentally sound agricultural practices.  
Indirect adverse environmental impacts might be associated with the following: (a) 
potential increase in use/overuse of waters, (b) increase of chemical fertilizers, pesticides, 
herbicides and other chemicals use; (c) increase operation of ginning plants and 
associated occupational hazards.  
 
With regard to the social safeguards the project will is expected to have only positive 
impacts. By resolving the debt problem and reforming the policies that have caused it, by 
removing the debt which has become the major impediment to farm privatization, and 
strengthening the knowledge and skills of rural people the project would provide an 
environment that would: (a) increase farmers incomes and cotton sector profitability; (b) 
create a new active generation of small-scale intermediaries in farm input supply and 
cotton marketing; providing an alternative to collective farmer activity as a means to 
address marketing deficiencies; and (c) reduce the rural poverty in the project area.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
An increase in cotton production due to improved financial situation of dekhans and 
promoted policy reforms in the sector might have a series of negative indirect impacts 
due to the factors mentioned above. The increased water usage might provoke further 
salinization, irrigation erosion, and water logging, while the residues of the chemicals 
may affect wild fauna, and surrounding environment. These chemicals can also cause 
bodily harm, if farmers are not taught on their proper handling. Similarly, the operation 
of ginning plants could expose workers to substance and dust emission as we11 as 
occupational hazards.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project team has analyzed several alternatives in the project design, including ?Zero 
alternative?. It was concluded that the impact of not carrying out the project would lead 
to the following negative results: (a) A continuation in the trend of decreasing water 
availability at the water user level; (b) Land degradation an decrease in land productivity; 
Page  5
(c) Increased water logging in some locations; (d) Increased soil salinization in some 
locations; (e) increased water and soil pollution due to inappropriate use of 
agrochemicals; (f) Environmental pollution by cotton ginning plants operation and 
inadequate labor safety; and (g) Increased poverty of rural population and migrations 
from rural areas.  
 
With regard to proposed mitigation measures it was decided that they should be based 
on a series of activities comprising not only large public awareness campaign, 
information dissemination activities as well as demonstrational activities at the national 
and local levels. Thus, the EMP contains capacity building and training activities in all 
sectors that might be affected by the project activities.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As required under World Bank Safeguard Policies and Procedures, an Environmental 
Assessment (EA) was carried out by an independent local consultant. The consultant 
prepared an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), which includes steps to mitigate 
any potential impacts identified, together with the respective monitoring plan, budgets, 
responsibility, and schedules of execution. Potential adverse impacts will be mitigated 
primarily through capacity building and avoidance rather than compensatory actions after 
the fact. In this regard the EMP proposes to implement the following: (a) Public 
awareness program on water management to demonstrate modem irrigation and drainage 
technologies of on-farm water management; (b) Community program on sustainable land 
use practices, including information about full implications of mono-culture on soil 
fertility, land degradation and quality and quantity of crops in the cotton sub-sector; (c) 
Pest Management Program that would emphasis best practices and promotion of 
Integrated Pest Management in the sector . Trainings will be provided for farmers and 
farmers association, and organized information dissemination campaigns through media, 
publishing relevant guides and other information materials.  
 
With regard to potential impacts of cotton ginning factories the EMP also proposes few 
capacity building activities that would include: (a) Training on ISO 14000 and 
environmental management plans for cotton ginning factories; (b) Training of the 
factories staff on environmental, health and safety requirements and measures for 
mitigating potential harmful impacts; and (c) Training for environmental inspectors on 
environmental monitoring and enforcement of  the existing national regulations to ensure 
full compliance of factories with safety requirements; waste disposal and emission 
standards. Concerning the proposed new or upgrading new gins the EMP stipulates in the 
case the investor will choose to rehabilitate the existing cotton ginning plant an 
Environmental audit will be carried out, taking into consideration the Bank?s rules and 
procedures in this regard. The results of such audits will be a special Environmental 
Action Plan for improving environmental performance of the plants, to be implemented 
by the investor in due time. In the case of a construction of a new plant, the investor will 
be required to develop an internal EMP, taking into account all of the requirements of the 
project EMP that can effectively implement the necessary mitigating measures. The EMP 
for new cotton ginning plants is subject of the State Ecological Expertise and should be 
Page  6
approved by the State Committee for Environmental Protection and Forestry. The ginning 
plant EMPs should contain also an internal Health and Safety Management System to 
ensure that all workers of the ginning plants will be adequately protected against any 
environmental and occupational hazards and that they use safe working practices. In 
order to ensure that the investor implements these measures an independent verification 
will be conducted upon completion of the works that the investor is meeting all its 
obligations to protect the environment and health and safety of employees.  
 
The country has in place the system of Ecological Inspection which is responsible for 
enforcing the safeguards policies recommendations. While most of ecological inspectors 
at the district level have the basic knowledge concerning all aspects of usage of 
agrochemicals, land and water management, there is a need for a series of training 
activities for them on the peculiarities of the environmental requirements for cotton 
ginning plants operation as well as for pest management For that purpose the project 
would support preparation of training materials, as well as of guidelines and other 
supporting materials, and training on-the-job.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
All stakeholders were fully consulted. During the environmental auditing of the cotton 
ginning plants that was carried out in July ? September 2006, field visits were carried out 
by the local environmental consultant. Meetings were held with the representatives from 
the State Committee for Environmental Protection and Forestry, Ministry of Agriculture, 
as well as with the representatives from rayonal administration, village councils, and 
local population. The consultant has visited 7 ginning plants from the total of 14 in the 
selected districts and have carried out interviews with about 70 people, including 
personnel from the ginning plants (managers, engineers, environmental specialists, 
maintenance personnel), as well as representatives from local population living next to 
ginning plants, private entrepreneurs, ecological inspectors, as well as local 
administrations. With regard to pest management the consultant has also consulted 
closely with the main stakeholder groups including the National Plant Protection Service, 
representatives from Ministry of Agriculture, State Committee for Environmental 
Protection and Forestry, Ecological Inspectorate, district agriculture and environmental 
authorities. The consultations have also included meetings with farmer groups at the 
village level. The major concerns expressed by the stakeholders were taken into 
consideration and included in the final version of the EMP. The EA was carried out over 
a
period, of three months and the draft final EA as well as EMP were presented at a 
stakeholders' workshop on September 22, 2006 and was endorsed by the participants 
without major objections. Before the workshop the draft documents were disclosed for 
the broad public by posting them on the State Committee for Environmental Protection 
and Forestry and Aaurhus Convention Center web sites on September 15, 2006.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Page  7
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/25/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/15/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/25/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Bekzod Shamsiev 
01/25/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea 
01/25/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Asyl Undeland 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
01/25/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
01/25/2007 
Comments:   
