Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/27/2007 
Report No.:  AC3030
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tanzania 
Project ID:  P101645 
Project Name:  TZ-Energy Development & Access Expansion 
Task Team Leader:  Pankaj Gupta 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P092154 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 27, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (70%);General energy sector (20%);Renewable energy (10%) 
Theme:  Analysis of economic growth (P);Other urban development (P);Rural services 
and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
105.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
6.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified) 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project aspires to improve the quality and efficiency of the electricity service 
provision in Tanzania and to establish a sustainable basis for energy access expansion. 
The project is consistent with the latest Joint Assistance Strategy (2007-2010) by 
specifically supporting the goals of the Government's National Strategy for Growth and 
Reduction of Poverty - MKUKUTA. The objectives of this project are also consistent 
with the Investment Framework for Clean Energy and Development and its goal of 
accelerating investments aimed at increasing energy access in developing countries, 
especially in Sub-Saharan Africa, while reducing global carbon emissions. Progress 
towards achieving the project objectives will be measured by the following indicators:  
 
-
Improvement in TANESCO's operational efficiency- in terms of reduced system 
losses- technical (both transmission and distribution) and commercial (in terms of 
improved billing and collections and reduced non technical losses) in targeted investment 
areas ;  
Page  2
-
Improved quality of supply in targeted investment areas in terms of improved voltage 
profile and enhanced supply availability of power.  
 
-
Reduction in transmission and distribution losses ;  
 
-
Number of new consumers connected to grid electricity ;  
 
-
Number of new off-grid electricity users ;  
 
-
Number of off-grid investment transactions implemented by REA and identified in a 
pipeline.  
 
The project is also designed to support a global environmental objective to abate 
greenhouse gas emissions through use of renewable energy in rural areas for provision of 
electricity.  The key performance indicators in this respect would be:  
 
-
Number of MW of renewable energy installed for generation of electricity to the grid ; 
and  
 
-
Avoided carbon dioxide emissions .   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A will comprise urgent investments in Tanesco's transmission and 
distribution networks in Dar-es-Salaam, Arusha and Kilimanjaro.  TANESCO has 
identified urgent T&D investments of over US$150 million for key urban areas and 
bidding packages are under preparation for about US$ 50 million of identified 
investments.  The investments will include adding, replacing or upgrading transmission 
and distribution lines and substations and medium and low voltage equipment, meters, 
spare parts and tools. Component A of about US$86 million will be implemented by 
TANESCO.  
 
Component B will support an institutional set-up for the newly established Rural Energy 
Agency (REA) and develop, test and demonstrate new electrification approaches, which 
could be easily scaled-up.  As Tanesco's current financial health do not allow sustainable 
expansion of grid into rural areas, the component will focus on a development of scalable 
offgrid alternatives, developed in the areas where grid expansion is not an economically 
feasible option in medium term (10 years and more). The project will also assist MEM 
and REA to develop a robust access scale-up strategy, which would effectively combine 
both grid and offgrid alternatives, with a syndicated, sector-wide approach. Follow-up 
projects from IDA or other Donors could then finance its implementation.  This 
component has three sub-components (i) Small Power Generation and Distribution 
(SPGD), including grid-connected renewable generation projects and technologically 
neutral mini-grids, (ii) Sustainable Solar Market Packages (SSMP), covering remote 
dispersed population, bundling institutional and household PV electrification, and (iii) 
Technical Assistance (TA) to all offgrid electrification stakeholders (Government, private 
sector, NGOs, users) including support preparation of the comprehensive electricity 
access expansion strategy (both on-grid and off-grid), and options available to secure 
financing for such a strategy.  
 
Component C will support the technical assistance envisaged under the restructured 
Songo Songo project (Cr. 3569) and potentially to be provided by JICA under a five year 
capacity building program. Technical assistance would be provided for a training needs 
Page  3
assessment for TANESCO with subsequent selected capacity building implementation. 
The component would also finance legal/technical/financial advisory support for the next 
least cost generation IPP.  Subject to sufficient funds (to be determined during the 
appraisal) the component could finance the preparation of a comprehensive access 
expansion strategy and preparation of new investment packages (grid and offgrid).  
 
Table 1 below provides a summary of the proposed project components.  
 
Proposed Project Components  -----  Financing (US$ Million)  
 
Component A - Grid upgrade and expansion...  IDA 85.8  GEF 0  
 
Component B1 - Offgrid electrification.....  IDA 15.00  GEF 3.5  
 
Component B2 - Technical Assistance re. offgrid electrification....  IDA 1.00 GEF 3.00  
 
Component C - Sectoral Technical Assistance - MEM &  
 
TANESCO................... IDA 3.2   GEF 0.00  
 
Total: IDA 105 
   GEF 6.5   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Urban and rural areas throughout Tanzania.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (AFTTR) 
Ms Naima A Hasci (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental  
 
Page  4
The project is in Category B for environmental assessment.  With much of the 
transmission and distribution system work to be carried out in or parallel to existing 
rights of way and at existing substations, and with access roads already existing at nearly 
all locations, potential negative impacts of Component A are not extensive.  Vegetation 
clearing is identified as the most significant activity that could cause environmental 
impacts, including soil erosion and air pollution from burning.  No undisturbed natural 
habitat will be affected. No rare or endangered biota have been found in the affected area.  
The EIA recommends minimizing clearing and prompt revegetation of disturbed sites, 
including equipment and materials storage areas and borrow pits, upon completion of 
activities.  Impacts on soil erosion, surface water quality, air quality, noise, and solid 
waste management will be local and of short duration, and they can be readily mitigated 
through adherence to good construction practices.  PCB contamination was confirmed in 
transformers at two of the substations to be upgraded, and this will require special 
handling, storage and disposal.  
 
The ESMF lists the potential adverse environmental impacts of Component B as:  
degradation of land, water quality, and natural habitat caused by poorly-planned locations 
for infrastructure; poor performance of contractors in implementing mitigating measures; 
inattention to maintenance during operation of electric systems; and greenhouse gas 
emissions that will vary depending on the choice of technology.  Adverse social impacts 
other than land acquisition and resettlement described above may arise from inadequate 
stakeholder participation in choices of technology and served areas, and exclusion of 
vulnerable groups from project benefits.  The ESMF contains detailed checklists and 
generic mitigation measures to ensure that the potential impacts are addressed in 
environmental assessments and management plans of proposed subprojects.  
 
The GEF-supported element of Component B to promote use of renewable energy 
sources in rural electrification contributes global environmental benefits in by controlling 
greenhouse gas production.  Availability of electricity may alleviate some of the pressure 
on Tanzanian forest resources by reducing demand for fuelwood and charcoal as the 
primary energy sources.  
 
Social  
 
The project design is intended to contribute to the social and economic development of 
the affected areas and of the country as a whole.  Under component A there will be 
displacement of people and land acquisition.  The real scope of these impacts are 
unknown, and consequently a Resettlement  Policy Action Framework  has been prepared 
under IDA credit (no. 3569) and mitigation measures established according to the Bank?s 
policy.  Other significant social impacts of Component A include the temporary 
disruption of agricultural activities in the ROW outside of Dar es Salaam (assuming that 
cultivation will be permitted to resume after construction is complete) and of small 
businesses in Dar es Salaam. The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) expresses 
concern about a possible influx of workers from other localities, bringing the risks of 
social conflict and of the spread of HIV/AIDS and other STDs.  With regard to physical 
cultural property, it is anticipated that there will limited impacts.  The project will 
Page  5
develop mitigation measure to safeguard any chance findings.  It's already known that 
based on the project design a small number of burial sites along the right of way will be 
affected.  The plan is to avoid these sites by adjusting the pylons.  
 
In the longer run, the project will contribute to improvements in availability and 
reliability of power to support economic growth and employment opportunities. Some 
important positive impacts expected from Component B, for instance, are improvements 
in employment opportunity, income and quality of life in rural and peri-urban 
households, directly through expanded access to electricity and indirectly through more 
effective delivery of education, health and other services.  In this regard, the project will 
undertake further stakeholder consultations and social impact assessment to ascertain that 
the implementation and design process are participatory, inclusive and take into account,  
early on, the views and needs of  the beneficiaries, particularly the poor and the 
vulnerable.  In addition to these positive projects impacts, under component A there will 
be other, albeit, short-term positive impacts during the construction period; such as: (i) 
employment opportunities for skilled and unskilled labor during construction, and (ii) 
opportunities to provide goods and services required for the project.  
 
To ensure the effective implementation of the Bank's social fiduciary policies a 
Resettlement Policy Frameworks have been completed for both the Component A and B, 
and the Resettlement Action Plan for the Component A is under preparation and will be 
implemented before construction begins. The Resettlement Policy Framework for the 
Component B mainly covers land acquisition issues.  Although the actual people 
displacement under the Component B is unlikely, the Framework also provides for this 
eventuality.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project 
area are foreseen.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To examine the project impacts various safeguard documents, covering environmental 
and social safeguards have been prepared as discussed below.  
 
Environmental  
 
Environmental assessment documents for Component A were completed in 2005 in 
connection with the Songo Songo Gas Development and Power Generation Project.  
They consist of "Environmental Impact Assessment:  Reinforcement and Upgrade of Dar 
es Salaam, Kilimanjaro and Arusha Transmission and Distribution System" and 
Page  6
"Environmental Audit of 18 Substations."  Since the specific locations of Component  B 
investments will be determined during project implementation, its environmental 
document is an "Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)", also 
prepared in 2005 but in connection with the Energizing Rural Transformation Project.  
The ESMF includes measures for compliance with OP 4.04 and 4.37 in case any 
Component B investments should trigger them.  TANESCO carried out field 
reconnaissance in 2007 for the purpose of updating the environmental assessment 
findings. The  EIA, and Environmental Audit, have been disclosed at Tanesco offices in 
Dar es Salaam, Moshi and Arusha, Tanesco website, NEMC library, MEM library, Ardhi 
library, regional public, with announcements in English and Kiswahili newspapers. The 
ESMF for the Component B has been disclosed in MEM library, MEM web-site and 
NEMC library.  Given that some of the documents have been disclosed over two years 
ago, they will be re-disclosed locally, with new announcements in English and Kiswahili 
newspapers.  All documents have been disclosed in the InfoShop.  
 
Social  
 
The project design is intended to contribute to the social and economic development of 
the affected areas and of the country as a whole.  This project is rated as category B and 
triggers two of the Bank's social fiduciary policies; OP 4.12 and OP 4.11. The project 
will be undertaking necessary design changes to avoid negative impacts and in the cases, 
where this is not possible, mitigation measures will be developed in line with the Bank's 
above-mentioned policies.  Since the scope of land acquisition is unknown, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework is being used (IDA credit no. 3569) and mitigation 
measures established according to the Bank's policy. To ensure the effective 
implementation of the Bank's social fiduciary policies a Resettlement Action Plan with 
adequate stakeholder consultations and relevant impact assessments will be prepared and 
implemented under the sub-projects, before construction begins. To assess the 
effectiveness of the implementation of the resettlement plans a socio-economic baseline 
survey will be conducted and resettlement impact assessment audits will be undertaken as 
part of the social fiduciary requirements.  With respect to cultural property, the baseline 
studies will be used to establish the number of sites affected and procedures for salvaging 
chance finds will be followed in collaboration with the Director of Antiquities, before 
clearing of the wayleave and other works commence. Contractors will follow the policy 
and avoid disturbance on such sites as far as possible and inform workers of known sites.  
 
The RPF and RAP for the Component A have been disclosed at Tanesco offices in Dar 
es Salaam, Moshi and Arusha, Tanesco website, NEMC library, MEM library, Ardhi 
library, regional public, with announcements in English and Kiswahili newspapers. The 
RPF for the Component B has been disclosed in MEM library, MEM web-site and 
NEMC library.  Given that some of the documents have been disclosed over two years 
ago, they will be re-disclosed locally, with new announcements in English and Kiswahili 
newspapers.  All documents have been disclosed in the InfoShop.  
 
Implementation  
 
Page  7
The implementing agency for the recommendation of the Environment Audit is 
TANESCO.  TANESCO management has committed itself to taking the corrective 
measures recommended in the audit, budgeting for them in the company's business plan.  
TANESCO and its contractors are the agencies primarily responsible for implementing 
the RPF and the Mitigation Plan for Component A that is presented in Chapter 8 of the 
EIA, and for this reason it will be important that TANESCO field personnel be familiar 
with the Plan and that construction contracts be specific regarding contractor 
responsibilities for impact prevention and mitigation and penalties for noncompliance.  
District and local government authorities are identified as having some responsibility for 
ROW maintenance (primarily preventing unauthorized activities), public safety, and 
collaboration on prevention of impacts at burial sites and shrines. Contractors and 
TANESCO (directly or by consultants) have the majority of the monitoring 
responsibilities, except for overall compliance with environmental regulations and certain 
other specialized monitoring and reporting activities that are assigned to NEMC.  The 
total cost of mitigation measures not included in construction contracts is estimated at 
US$32,000.  The total cost of monitoring other than for implementation of the RAP is 
estimated at US$32,000 as well.  TANESCO is adequately staffed for environmental 
management but will require a social scientist to assist it in supervising implementation 
of the RPFs and the preparation and implementation of any RAPs that are required.  
Contractors and TANESCO (directly or by consultants) have the majority of the 
monitoring responsibilities, except for overall compliance with environmental regulations 
and certain other specialized monitoring and reporting activities that are assigned to 
NEMC.  The cost of mitigation measures not included in construction contracts will be 
borne by TANESCO, and the cost of monitoring will be supported by NEMC's operating 
budget.  
 
MEM has overall responsibility for implementation of the ESMF for Component B. 
NEMC will be responsible for review and clearance of ESIAs for subprojects for which 
they are required prior to licensing and financing, for training district staff to carry out 
monitoring, and for periodic oversight to ensure compliance with Tanzanian law and 
regulations and World Bank operational policies. Districts, through District 
Environmental Coordinators, are responsible for review and clearance of ESMPs for 
subprojects not requiring ESIAs prior to licensing and financing, for regular monitoring 
through all phases of each subproject, for submission of monitoring reports to NEMC, 
and for compliance with directives from NEMC and MEM.  The capacity of districts to 
undertake this work needs to be strengthened through training by NEMC.  Subproject 
operators are responsible for: compliance with national law and regulations, World Bank 
directives, and the ESMF; implementing all required mitigation and monitoring measures 
identified in their respective ESIAs and/or ESMPs; self-monitoring; providing adequate 
budgets to sustain mitigation and monitoring activities; and compliance with any 
directives issued by MEM, NEMC and the Districts.  EWURA is the licensing authority; 
it will not issue licenses to operators until NEMC or the District Environmental 
Coordinator issues environmental and social clearance.  REA, which manages the Rural 
Energy Fund, will not disburse funds to an operator until EWURA has issued a 
license.The review and monitoring functions, including the monitoring of EIA 
implementation will be undertaken and budgeted as part of the normal functions of 
Page  8
NEMC and the district offices.  The project is exploring the provision of about 
US$250,000 for capacity-building (to MEM with NEMC as the beneficiary) in the form 
of training for groups of potential providers and for groups of District Environmental 
Coordinators with priority given to Coordinators from on those districts in which the 
project is going to be active.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are citizens and businesses that are present and potential consumers 
of electric power in Tanzania, persons that live on or derive income or subsistence from 
lands that may be acquired, cleared, or restricted in use for the project, local and district 
governments, and concerned environmental NGOs and consumer groups.  Tanesco's 
information center and the Ministry of Energy and Minerals website, with 
announcements in English and Kiswahili newspapers.  
 
In accordance with Bank policies, the project components involve extensive 
communication and consultation with the Tanzanian public both in the directly affected 
communities in the resettlement areas as well as at large.  The project is being covered in 
the print, radio and TV media. Specific activities include:  (a) involvement and extensive 
communication and consultation with those households affected by the project; (b) 
development of brochures prepared in Swahili and widely distributed to people affected 
by the project and the general public; (c) notices for meetings to local leaders and media 
such as radio, TV, and newspapers (both in English and Swahili); (d) numerous meetings 
to discuss concerns with communities in along the wayleave, and at the resettlement 
areas; (e) visits by senior Government officials at the project sites;  including meeting 
local residents and listening to their questions and concerns; (f) several seminars with 
Government leaders, local leaders and Members of Parliament; (g)  a radio program by 
the National Radio Station (Radio Tanzania Dar es Salaam) informing the public of 
major project issues. These radio programs will be re-established during the 
implementation stage of the project.  
 
In spite of the project's already high profile in Tanzania, when the construction phase 
begins, the plan is to communicate effectively with all stakeholders and project affected 
people so that there is accurate information about the project available to all interested 
parties. The communication strategy and plan will utilize various tools to communicate 
information on the project, including press releases and newsletters, media interviews 
with PAPs, MEM and contractor staff, meetings with groups such as Members of 
Parliament or service clubs, project brochures and fact sheets, annual reports, videos, 
posters, and the MEM and TANESCO website. Community level activities will be an 
essential element of the project?s communication strategy and provide important 
information to the public, to non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and to government 
agencies. Community liaison provides the opportunity for affected members of the public 
to identify their support and concerns, provides a forum for communication with project 
proponents and regulatory bodies, and facilitates anticipation of and management of 
project issues.   
 
Page  9
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/15/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/28/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/26/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/10/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/28/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/26/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  10
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
As some of the documents were disclosed two years ago, in the framework of the Songo 
Songo projects, they will be re-disclosed in the country under the TEDAP project.  
 
-----------------------------------------------------------  
 
N.B. Due to the lack of space under Section  above "B. Disclosure Requirements Date", 
please note addititional information regarding disclosure dates:  
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:  
 
Date of receipt by the Bank  
 
EIA Component A (under Songo Songo Project): 12/15/2005  
 
ESMF Component B : 07/25/2007  
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure  
 
EIA Component A (under Songo Songo Project): 12/28/2005  
 
ESMF Component B: 07/26/2007  
 
Date of submission to InfoShop  
 
EIA component A (re-disclosed unter TEDAP): 03/26/2007  
 
ESMF component B: 08/03/2007  
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:  
 
Date of receipt by the Bank  
 
RAP Kilimanjaro Arusha (under Songo Songo): 12/10/2005  
 
RFP Dar es Salaam (under Songo Songo): 03/21/2006  
 
RPF component B: 07/25/2007  
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure  
 
RAP Kilimanjaro Arusha (under Songo Songo Project): 12/28/2005  
 
RFP Dar es Salaam (under Songo Songo Project): 3/28/2006  
 
Date of Submission to Infoshop  
 
RAP Kilimanjaro Arusha and RFP Dar es Salaam (re-disclosed under TEDAP): 
03/26/2007  
 
RPF Component B: 08/3/2007   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Page  11
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  12
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pankaj Gupta 
09/27/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
09/27/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Naima A Hasci 
09/27/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
09/27/2007 
Comments:   
