Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2303 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/10/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tanzania 
Project ID: P099231 
Project Name: Financial Sector Project 
Task Team Leader: Ravi Ruparel 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 19, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTFS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Banking (40%);Capital markets (20%);Non-compulsory pensions, insurance and 
contractual savings (20%);Micro- and SME finance (10%);Payment systems, securities 
clearance and settlement (10%) 
Theme: Vulnerability assessment and monitoring (P);Analysis of economic growth 
(P);Small and medium enterprise support (S);Rural markets (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00 
 
UK: BRITISH DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DFID)5.00
7.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to increase the soundness and competitiveness of the 
financial sector and improve access by small savers and micro entrepreneurs to the formal 
financial system. The FSP is a repeater project to the Second Financial Institutions Development 
Project (FIDP II) which is due to close on June 30, 2006.  
 
Two of the key performance indicators for FIDP II have already been achieved. These are 
increasing the share of deposits in private banks to total deposits and reducing the non-
performing assets in the banking system. The FSP will have a new set of key performance 
indicators for the development objective.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
FIDP II had two main components namely Bank Restructuring and Financial Infrastructure 
Strengthening. Of the Bank Restructuring activities the privatization of NBC and NMB have 
been completed while the restructuring/privatization of TPB, PBZ, and TIB are on-going. While 
significant progress has been made in the Financial Infrastructure Strengthening activities (bank 
supervision, payments systems, credit reference bureau, contractual savings, and capital markets 
and securities authority) there is a need to supplement and deepen most of the reforms already 
carried out under the FIDP II so as to enhance the impact of its development objectives.  
 
The FSP will provide support primarily for the completion and scale up of activities begun 
under FIDP II. In addition, the FSP will also support some new activities on increase to long 
term financing.  
 
(i) Component 1: Strengthening the Banking Sector.  Enhancing the soundness and efficiency 
of the banking system through strengthening the capacity of banking supervision, establishing 
the framework for operation of credit information bureau, and promoting a well-funded and 
properly managed Deposit Insurance Fund. This component will also focus on improving 
financial accountability and transparency including support to the anti-money laundering efforts 
and the implementation of international financial reporting standards (IFRS).  
 
(ii) Component 2: Developing Financial Markets.  Developing financial markets with vibrant 
primary and secondary markets supported by appropriate and secure settlements system and 
robust oversight.  
 
(iii) Component 3: Reforming the Pension Sector.  Promoting an efficient and competitive 
pension sector supported by appropriate legal and regulatory structures and proper investment 
guidelines in order to ensure that it is responsive to market demands.  
 
(iv) Component 4: Strengthening the Insurance Industry.  Promoting an efficient, sound, and 
competitive insurance industry with different products and wider outreach and market based 
investment policies.  
 
(v) Component 5: Facilitating the provision of Long Term Development Finance. . Improving 
availability and access to long term financing for enterprises, infrastructure, and housing.  
 
(vi)Component 6: Strengthening Micro and Rural Finance. This component will focus on 
establishment of a viable and sustainable microfinance industry with wider outreach operating 
under an enabling legal and regulatory framework. The program will provide technical assistance 
to disseminate the regulations and supervisory framework for microfinance institutions and 
SACCOs; build the capacities of regulatory and supervisory authorities to undertake the required 
roles and responsibilities in order for the framework to work effectively and efficiently; and 
strengthen the capacity of MFIs and SACCOs so that they can be profitable and sustainable 
institutions. The program will also support the strengthening of umbrella organizations for MFIs 
and SACCOs and the creation of networks and apex institutions for SACCOs.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be located in Urban and semi Urban areas in Tanzania   
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Not Applicable   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/12/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
This is a technical assistance project for the financial sector and will not have any direct or 
indirect environmental impact. The proposed additional activities do not raise the 
environmental category of the project nor trigger any new safeguard policies nor involve any 
exceptions to Bank policies.  The environmental category of the project is [C]   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ravi Ruparel 
05/10/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/10/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Antony Thompson 
05/10/2006 
Comments:   
