Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/16/2006 
Report No.:  
36271
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tanzania 
Project ID:  P085752 
Project Name:  Tanzania Agricultural Sector Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Robert Townsend 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 14, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTS2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural extension and research (40%);General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (30%);Irrigation and drainage (20%);Agricultural marketing and trade 
(10%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
90.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
8.00 
 
INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT 
36.00 
 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
17.50
61.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The program has two complementary objectives: (i) to enable farmers to have better 
access to and use of agricultural knowledge, technologies, and infrastructure; all of which 
contribute to higher productivity, profitability, and farm incomes; and (iii) to promote 
agricultural private investment based on an improved regulatory and policy environment.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has two main components. The components are aligned to the Government's 
national and local level budget, planning and prioritization process. The sub-components 
of the local government support are aligned to the block grant transfer system of 
Government, while the national level sub-components are aligned to the key technical 
themes of the Agricultural Sector Development Program (ASDP). A brief description is 
provided below, which focuses on Development Partner support through the ASDP 
Basket Fund with more detail in Annex 4 of the Project Appraisal Document.  
 
Page  2
1. Local Level Support (US$91.0 million of which IDA will finance US$55.9 million)  
 
2.
National Level Support (US$52.5 million of which IDA will finance US$34.1 
million)  
 
Component 1: Local Level Support. This component will primarily support achievement 
of the first project objective listed above through improvements of Local Government 
Authority capacity to plan, support and co-ordinate agricultural services and investments 
in a more efficient, participatory and sustainable manner. Support will be provided to 
develop and implement District Agricultural Development Plans (DADPs), including 
increasing farmer influence in resource allocation decisions for services and investments; 
progressing agricultural services reform and improving the quality of public expenditure. 
In addition support to achieving the second project objective will be provided through 
improvements in the local regulatory environment for economic activity in agriculture, 
particularly local level taxation. The component has three sub-components aligned with 
the local level block grant system of the Government of Tanzania: (i) local agricultural 
investments, (ii) local agricultural services, and (iii) local agricultural capacity building 
and reform. The component will finance advisory services, training, and infrastructure, 
including small scale  irrigation development at district level. Access to resources by 
local government authorities will be linked to performance on local level planning and 
implementation, agricultural services reform, the quality of local investments, and the 
local policy and regulatory environment. With regard to irrigation, the component will 
pilot through the District Irrigation Development Fund (DIDF) the competitive funding 
mechanisms proposed to provide supplemental support for small scale local level 
irrigation, including the establishment of appropriate identification, screening and 
ranking mechanisms. Based on the US$91 million committed to this component from the 
Development Partner Basket Fund, and the percentage allocated for local agricultural 
investments through the District Agricultural Development Grants (DADGs) and DIDF 
grants, the irrigation expansion is estimated to be up to 10,000 ha in National and 
International Basins, dependent on the demand driven prioritization of investments at 
district level. As indicated in the riparian notification, the total water abstraction from 
International Basins is estimated to be 66.4 million cubic metres in the high case 
scenario. Small scale irrigation is viewed as schemes of up to 500 hectares, as per the 
Government?s National Irrigation Master Plan Document.  
 
Component 2: National Level Support: This component will support achievement of 
both project objectives. The first objective will be supported through improvements to the 
relevance and responsiveness of the agricultural research system including greater 
linkages with extension. The second objective will be supported through improvements to 
the national level policy environment, and through developing mechanisms for greater 
public-private partnerships. Support will be provided to reform agricultural services, 
primarily research and extension; to improve the overall sector policy framework; to 
carry out preparatory work and investment in national level irrigation through public-
private partnerships; to simulate market development; and to improve food security and 
sector co-ordination. The sub-components are: (i) agricultural services; (ii) irrigation 
development; (iii) market development; (iv) food security; and (v) co-ordination, 
monitoring and evaluation. This component will finance agricultural services, 
Page  3
consultancies, training, and infrastructure. With regard to irrigation, the Development 
Partner Basket Fund will support 1.4 percent of the proposed national level expenditures 
for National Irrigation Development Fund (NIDF) related irrigation activities, as 
presented in the Government document. The activities to be financed from the 
Development Partner Basket Fund for this sub-component are due diligence preparatory 
work for small, medium and large scale infrastructure investments in National and 
International Basins, including the participatory development and operationalization of 
appropriate identification, screening and ranking mechanisms for national level irrigation 
investments; support for technical designs, studies, environmental impact assessments, 
such as the Strategic Environment Assessment; capacity strengthening; awareness raising 
activities; and improvment of the policy environment for public-private partnerships. 
Upon the completion of this preparatory work, the Development Partner Basket Fund will 
additionally finance physical infrastructure investments in irrigation at the national level 
in National Water Basins only, through public-private partnerships. The financing 
allocated for these activities in the Development Partner Basket Fund translates into a 
combined approximation of 3,000 hectares of irrigation. This assumes that US$1 of 
public investment leverages US$3 of private investment, and on the estimate that 
US$3million is allocated for national level irrigation investments through the 
Development Partner Basket Fund. This translates into a total investment of 
US$12million, which at US$4,000 per hectares would result in 3,000 hectares of 
irrigation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project activities will be located throughout Tanzania. However, the spatial coverage 
of the project will be determined during program implementation through LGA 
performance. Other considerations will be given to ongoing development partner support. 
The program will initially provide a minimum base flow of resources across the local and 
zonal national level, while providing intensive support for districts and services which 
qualify for additional block grant transfers.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The environmental and social impacts of the project will come from the implementation 
of sub-projects contained in the DADPs of the qualifying districts that will receive 
financing through the DADGs and DIDF, and also from the national level investments 
from public-private partnerships in irrigation though the NIDF.  
 
Many of the adverse impacts associated with the DADPs would be low intensity, minor 
and site specific impacts and relatively straightforward to manage by the beneficiaries, 
assisted and primarily monitored by their local institutions. These anticipated impacts are 
likely to be associated with point and non-pollution of water sources, soil erosion, and 
increased loss of soil fertility, cultivation of marginal lands and other land use conflicts, 
and other issues from increased use of agricultural inputs.  
 
Adverse impacts associated with large, medium, and even small scale irrigation schemes 
between 50 and 500 ha could potentially be more severe. These types of schemes may 
give rise to public health concerns, increase in water stress of the renewable water 
sources, deteriorate water quality and potentially involve significant loss of land. 
However, past experience in Tanzania with irrigation development shows that a total of 
6,000-7,000 hectares annually has been developed. A total of up to 10,000 hectares is 
expected to be developed by 2010/11 under the DADGs and DIDF support through the 
Development Partner Basket Fund as a high case scenario. Additionally, a further 3,000 
hectares of national level irrigation in national basins could potentially be developed 
through public-private partnerships with the resources allocated to the NIDF from the 
Development Partner Basket Fund. As indicated in the riparian notification, of the above 
total investments, the total water abstraction from international basins is estimated to be 
66.4 million m3 in the high case scenario. These investments would require significant 
support to strengthen capacities at the National, District and Zonal levels.  
 
Screening these proposed activities as a whole against the Government of Tanzania's 
(GoT) own requirements and that of the World Bank, the GoT and the Bank task team 
worked carefully during preparation of this project, to ensure the potential social and 
environmental adverse impacts were understood and carefully planned for their effective 
management during implementation.  
 
Some investments may lead to land acquisition (e.g. for trial plots and irrigation). It is 
expected that in most cases this will not lead to physical relocation, loss of assets and/or 
access to assets by individuals or communities. In the minority of cases where socio-
economic impacts result from the land acquisition needs of these investments, the banks 
Involuntary Resettlement OP4.12 and the GoTs own laws and requirements would be 
complied with.   
 
Page  5
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Tanzania's National Environment Policy identifies the following as the critical 
environmental problems facing the country today: land degradation, lack of accessible, 
good quality water for both urban and rural inhabitants; environmental pollution (e.g. 
water contamination); loss of biodiversity, habitat and wetlands; deterioration of aquatic 
systems; and deforestation.  
 
During preparation of this project, the immediate and root causes of these problems 
were reviewed and are understood. For instance, an immediate cause of land degradation 
in Tanzania is inappropriate agricultural practices leading to decreased soil quality and 
erosion. With regards public health aspects of water contamination, an immediate cause 
is increased breeding ground for mosquitos, in water weed infested areas and irrigation 
canals. In addition, some of the root causes associated with land degradation in Tanzania 
are associated population pressure in arable areas, unsustainable land use practices, 
topography (uneven relief, high stream flow velocities), unpredictable and varied rainfall 
patterns and climate variability, and lack of systematic implementation of EIA for 
infrastructure projects due to lack of financial and human resources.  Root causes of 
water contamination are more generally due to lack of enforcement of environmental 
regulations and laws, monitoring, poor or lack of health care systems, poor drainage 
designs and lack of maintenance of irrigation systems.  
 
Any project activities that have the potential opportunity to make these matters worse 
either in the short, medium, or long term would be addressed appropriately as part of the 
safeguards measures designed in the ASDP, or they will not be eligible for funding under 
the project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
As stated earlier, sub projects will be identified during implementation. Alternatives for 
sub project and NIDF investment design and locations will be considered and as part of 
the ASDPs environmental and social screening procedures.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has taken all the necessary steps to comply with the triggered World Bank 
Safeguards Policies. The triggered policies are:  
 
-
OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment  
 
-
OP 4.09 Pest Management  
 
-
OD 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement  
 
-
OP 4.37 Safety of Dams  
 
-
OP 7.50 Projects on International Waters  
 
In compliance with OP4.01, the Environment Assessment (EA) category assigned to the 
project is Category B. Since the local authorities that would qualify for these investments 
Page  6
will become known only during implementation of the project, in compliance with the 
requirements of OP4.01, the GoT has prepared a stand alone Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) to ensure the environmental and social issues 
associated with this project are adequately analyzed and understood, and that all 
associated adverse impacts are captured through screening, effectively mitigated and 
monitored and that the institutional capacity to ensure this happens is maintained and 
supported financially through the project. The ESMF discusses the mechanism through 
which all investments when they become known, will be managed.  
 
Screening process for DADP Sub-projects and NIDF investments: The ESMF provision 
will apply to both national level irrigation investments financed by the Development 
Partner Basket Fund through the NIDF as well as Sub-projects financed at the District 
level under the DADPs. Under the ESMF, the environmental and social management 
process for DADP Sub-projects and NIDF investments essentially includes the following 
steps:  
 
1) The first step in the process begins at the start of the planning cycle for the 
preparation of the DADPs. The potential sub project or NIDF investment owner, 
implementer or operator assigns an Environmental Category for their sub project type, 
using the criteria below. This group can either be the District Agricultural and Livestock 
Development Officer or the farmer group for the sub project, or MAFC of a private sector 
investor for the NIDF investments. But in either case they will be assisted by the District 
Environmental Coordinator's, or private service provider and in the case of farmer groups 
further assistance can be sought from the advisory services of the ASDP. The following 
is a list of sub project types that may be considered for inclusion in the DADPs and NIDF 
investments.  
 
For irrigation schemes above 300ha, the potential major environment and social 
concerns are water pollution and water quality, water extraction and water rights, land 
loss and resettlement, natural habitats, species loss, land degradation, dam safety, and 
significant construction issues such as spoil disposal management. This subproject 
environmental category is A. Although DADP Sub-projects will not exceed 500ha, NIDF 
investments may be over 500ha.  
 
For irrigation schemes between 50 ha and 300ha, the potential major environment and 
social concerns are water pollution and water quality, water extraction and water rights, 
land loss and resettlement, natural habitats, species loss, land degradation, and significant 
construction issues such as spoil disposal management. This sub project environmental 
category is a B*.  
 
For irrigation schemes less than 50 ha and with no resettlement, the potential major 
environment and social concerns are land degradation, water pollution. This sub project 
environmental category is a B**/C.  
 
Other types of sub projects such as water harvesting, small watershed management, 
ground water charging, etc. The potential environment and social concerns are soil 
Page  7
erosion, and water source contamination. This may involve significant construction issues 
such as spoil disposal management. This sub project environmental category is a B.  
 
________________________________________  
 
*
Resettlement is also likely to be a factor for most sub projects or NIDF investments 
involving land acquisition or restriction for new irrigation sites or extension of existing 
sites.  
 
** Although most irrigation sub projects are expected to be within the 50 to 300ha range 
and therefore fall within a Category B, it is possible that some may require the use of 
dams and involve water storage/reservoir. This could include the impoundment of large 
relatively flat areas. As such, these areas could remove land from cultivation and possibly 
result in involuntary resettlement. In such cases, the sub project (or NIDF investment, as 
the case may be) would fall into a Category A.  
 
*** Any DADP sub-project or NIDF investment with resettlement will be Category B, 
at a minimum, even if they are less than 50 ha irrigation or small market.  
 
The Environmental Category for the project as a whole is B. Not to be confused with the 
sub project categories.  
 
________________________________________  
 
2) The second step is to determine which of the World Bank's safeguards policies may 
be triggered by the sub-projects and NIDF investments and what the requirements are to 
comply with the triggered policy. This requires the sub project or the NIDF investment 
owner/implementer/operator to use the Safeguards Tables in Annex A of the ESMF. 
Further information on these policies is available on the Bank's website, www. 
worldbank.org. If any of the Bank safeguards policies are triggered by a sub project or 
NIDF investment, the owner/implementer/operator will modify the design, 
implementation, operation, maintenance and decommissioning phases to ensure that the 
sub-project satisfies the requirements of that particular policy.  
 
3) The third step is for the owner/implementer/operator to prepare a comprehensive sub 
project or NIDF investment Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) 
including an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (Annex C of the 
ESMF contains guidelines on how to prepare and ESMP). Additionally, for situations 
where OP 4.12 apply, the Owner/Implementer/Operator will prepare a Resettlement 
Action Plan (RAP) consistent with the separately disclosed RPF. For situations where 
OP4.37 applies, the owner/implementer/operator will prepare a Dam Safety Measures 
Report and similarly where Pest management issues apply, the use of the IPMP is 
mandated. Annex H of the ESMF has specific guidelines for the assessment and 
preparation of the Dam Safety Measures Report. Annex B of the ESMF contains an 
example of comprehensive terms of reference for the ESIA. For Category C sub projects, 
or NIDF investments the owner/implementer/operator is only required to prepare an 
ESMP. Annex C of the ESMF contains guidelines for the preparation of an ESMP for 
Category C sub-projects or NIDF investments and what the ESMP in Category A or B 
Page  8
sub project or NIDF investment ESIAs should also contain. According to Tanzanian Law 
and World Bank OP4.01, Public Consultation is required as part of the ESIA and/or 
ESMP process. Annex F of the ESMF has a generic guide to an acceptable public 
consultation process.  
 
4) The fourth step is for the operators to submit their ESIA and or ESMP to the required 
authority as specified. The ESIA for Category A and B sub-projects and NIDF 
investments will be reviewed and cleared by the NEMC. The ESMP for Category C sub-
projects and NIDF investments are to be reviewed and cleared by the respective Regional 
Environmental Engineers/Specialist, with assistance of Zonal Irrigation Engineers as 
required. Annex G of the ESMF contains a generic Environmental and Social Appraisal 
Form to be used by the National Environment Management Council and the Regional and 
Zonal technical staff, to provide uniform guidance to their review process and to notify 
the District Councils of their decision before final approval and funding is made. The first 
set of cleared ESIA?s for Category A and B sub-projects and NIDF investments would 
also have to be reviewed and cleared by the World Bank, to ensure compliance with its 
safeguards policies. The World Bank reserves the right to not allow funds under the 
ASDP be applied to sub projects that do not meet the requirements of its safeguards 
policies. This is stated explicitly in the ESMF.  
 
In addition, since the overall project objective will contribute to increasing agricultural 
productivity which could lead to an increase in the use of agricultural inputs, including 
the use of pesticide, the GoT, in compliance with the Pest Management OP4.09, even 
though the project will only finance the purchase of these chemicals for demonstration 
trial plots, has prepared an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP), to ensure the 
desired management of these inputs is achieved. Additionally, since involuntary 
resettlement cannot be ruled out, the GoT has also prepared a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF), to address the needs of those who may be affected by the land 
acquisition needs of the project.  
 
Finally in compliance with Safety of Dams OP4.37, the GoT has integrated the dam 
safety requirements into the ESMF for situations where it may apply. The use of the 
IPMP and the RPF has also been fully integrated into the ESMF, as described in steps 
above, to ensure a truly integrated safeguards management approach. The World Bank 
has reviewed the ESMF, RPF and IPMP prepared by the GOT, made comments and have 
had these documents revised accordingly. The World Bank has approved and cleared 
these documents, and they have since been disclosed locally in Tanzania and at the 
Infoshop.  
 
With regards to compliance with Projects on International Waterways, OP7.50, the GoT 
officially asked the World Bank to issue on its behalf, the necessary notifications to 
riparian countries. The notification letters were thus duly sent out by the World Bank on 
April 4, 2006, to the Ministers of Finance of Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo, 
Egypt, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, Republic of Congo, Rwanda, Sudan, Uganda and 
Zambia and any due responses will be noted by the World Bank, if and when they are 
received.  
Page  9
The ESMF provision will apply to national level investments financed by the 
Development Partner Basket Fund through the NIDF. These provisions include: (i) 
irrigation investments will only be undertaken in National Basins; (ii) investments will be 
screened by the NIDF committee; and (iii) ESIA's, ESMP's, RAP's, Dam Safety, and 
IPMP measures will be reviewed and cleared by the relevant National Level ministries, 
with support from their corresponding line regional and district offices as appropriate.  
 
The GoT have also agreed to prepare a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) of 
the National Irrigation Master Plan during implementation. The intensity, extent and 
scale of the adverse environmental impacts will be examined by the Strategic 
Environmental Assessment, which will be undertaken in the first year of implementation 
of the Project. The recommendations of the SEA with regards to water quality and 
quantity and other impacts, cumulative and otherwise, will inform subsequent planning 
decisions for the location and scale of irrigation investments, alternatives, mitigation 
measures and monitoring activiteis.  
 
In terms of capacity of the GoT to implement these measures, the ESMF has designed a 
suitable training program which it has costed at US$400,000 to address these needs at the 
local and national levels, and the ESMF also contains a tangible EAMP with an 
additional cost of US$400,000 to implement and a budget of US$250,000, for the review 
of subproject and NIDF investment EIA's and ESMP's.  
 
The GoT has over the many years been engaged with the World Bank in many projects 
and they are familiar with the Bank?s requirements in this regard. The Task Team is 
confident that with these measures in place and with regular supervision, the GoT has 
more than the required capacity to successful address the safeguards issues designed into 
this project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the line ministries responsible for agricultural, the Environment, 
Local Development and decentralization, the National Environment Management 
Council, Regional and Local Governments, and the Farmer Associations and individual 
farmers.  
 
The consultative process has been and will continue to be an on-going process. During 
preparation missions, the Bank met and discussed with the key stakeholders on many 
occasions. Field visits were conducted to the likely districts and visits where held with 
farmers in their field. These discussions informed the design of this project in general, but 
more particularly the safeguards mechanism described above. Also, during preparation of 
the ESMF and RPF, consultations also were held with farmers, were the program was 
explained to them and they were given the opportunity to express their views.  
 
By design, the preparation of the DADPs, can only occur in a consultative process with 
local communities, and at that time also, the ESMF and its requirements will be 
Page  10
discussed. This will give potentially affected people the opportunity to have their voices 
heard as the project investments will be proposed as part of the development of the 
DADPs.  
 
Also, the preparation of the SEA will be done in consultative process with the NEMC, 
the National Water Basin Authorities, the irrigation department, farmer groups and other 
stakeholders. The SEA draft would be discussed with these stakeholders and their views 
would be taken into account in preparation of the final draft SEA.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/05/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/09/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/11/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/05/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/09/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/10/2005 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/05/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/09/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/10/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
Page  11
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  12
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert Townsend 
05/16/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr James Orehmie Monday 
05/16/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
05/16/2006 
Comments:  This ISDS is an update of the version sent to the InfoShop on 4/18/06 and reflects an 
expansion in the scope of irrigation activities to be financing under the national level component. 
