Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2593 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/19/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tanzania 
Project ID: P101645 
Project Name: Energy Development and Access Expansion 
Task Team Leader: Pankaj Gupta 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P092154 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 14, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: September 27, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (70%);General energy sector (20%);Renewable energy (10%) 
Theme: Analysis of economic growth (P);Other urban development (P);Rural services 
and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
105.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
6.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
15.00 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified) 
10.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
25.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objectives will be to (i) improve the quality and efficiency of the 
provision of electric service, and to (ii) establish a sustainable basis for access expansion.  To 
that extent, the project will have a grid and an offgrid component;  
 
The project is consistent with the latest Joint Assistance Strategy (2007-2010) of March 1, 2007 
through specifically supporting two goals of JAS (consistent with Government?s National 
Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty ? MKUKUTA: (i) growth and reduction of 
income poverty through the provision of reliable energy supply, and (ii) universal access to 
quality and affordable services.  
 
The objectives of this project are consistent with the Investment Framework for Clean Energy 
and Development and its goal of accelerating investments aimed at increasing energy access in 
developing countries, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa, while reducing global carbon emissions.  
Page  2
The proposed project has also received co-financing commitment of US$6.5 million from the 
Global Environmental Facility (GEF) to remove barriers to the use of renewable energy for 
electricity supply.  The proposed GEF interventions fall under the Climate Change Focal Area, 
Operational Program 6.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed lending instrument would be a 4-year Sector Investment Loan (SIL). The total 
IDA-financing sought is US$105M, complemented by US$6.5M of GEF.  It would have three 
components.  
 
(i)  
The grid component to focus on urgent investments in Tanzania Electric Company 
Supply Limited (Tanesco) transmission and distribution network, tentatively US$85 million.  
 
There are large investment needs in transmission and distribution as little investment has gone 
into maintaining and replacing T&D systems since the late 1980?s.  Tanesco?s current 5-yr 
investment plan focuses on capacity expansion and needs to be complemented with measures to 
exploit recent advances in energy efficiency and demand-side management interventions.  Of a 
cumulative investment plan of about US$ 1.3 billion (which includes access expansion), 
TANESCO has identified urgent T&D investments of over US$ 100 million for key urban areas, 
for which bidding packages are either under preparation or can be prepared very quickly by 
technical consultants.  
 
The grid component would improve the capacity of existing networks, thus contributing to the 
financial recovery of Tanesco; improve service quality for existing clients; and allow new clients 
to connect to the grid in the major urban areas, which are the main growth centers. The project 
would apply some innovative features for improved technical and commercial performance in 
these areas, based on experiences in other countries (e.g. Nigeria) to maximize impact of the 
investments.  
 
Specifically, these investments will improve the power system performance by reducing system 
losses, frequent outages due to overloaded transformers and old equipment, low and fluctuating 
voltage conditions and poor system power factors. The investments will include adding, 
replacing or upgrading transmission and distribution lines and substations and medium and low 
voltage equipment, meters, spare parts and tools. The project will support investments that aim at 
improving (i) distribution networks for reliable supply (ii) commercial character, (iii) customer 
interface of TANESCO, and possibly (iv) limited access expansion. The main rationale of these 
investments is to create value in the electricity business, and to demonstrate its viability in a 
replicable manner.  The component will be implemented by Tanesco.  Additional financing for 
this approach might be available from the Millenium Challenge Corporation (MCC).  
 
(ii) 
The offgrid component of US$14 million  (plus US$6.5 million of GEF) would support 
an institutional set-up for the newly established Rural Energy Agency (REA) and develop and 
test new offgrid electrification approaches for future scale-up.  The investments would 
concentrate particularly on the demonstration of sustainable solar market packages and PV 
Page  3
market development (scaling up SIDA?s ongoing operation); the implementation of several 
offgrid electrification mini-grids; and the testing of new service provision models (including 
private sector, coops, NGOs).  The project would also support development of small, renewable, 
grid-connected projects.   Consistent with the JAS growth strategy, the offgrid component will 
also focus primarily on those offgrid areas where provision of electricity can spur economic 
growth (sub-project screening includes an analysis of the productive use potential).  The 
component will be implemented initially by the Ministry of Energy and Minerals  (MEM) and 
passed on to REA once REA?s implementation capacity is established. (SIDA would support 
capacity building TA for REA).  The component would follow a phased approach, so that the 
model projects can be developed in line with the growing REA capacity.  The proposed 
component would leverage investments of other donors, particularly US$6.5 million of already 
pre-approved GEF, and additionally SIDA, MCC, and GTZ which expressed interest in working 
together with the Bank on the offgrid electrification development.  
 
(iii)  The technical assistance component of US$ 6 million for a technical assistance will 
support preparation of the comprehensive access expansion strategy and syndication plan, new 
investment packages (grid and offgrid), support for legal/technical/financial advisory support for 
the next least cost IPP, technical studies to optimize TANESCO operations, support to 
independent offgrid operators, capacity building for TANESCO and REA, and monitoring and 
evaluation.  
 
Costs (IDA and GEF)  
 
Component 1  Grid upgrade and expansion US$85 M 
 
 
Component 2  Offgrid electrification US$18 M  
 
Component 3  Technical Assistance US$8.5 M   
          
 
Total IDA US$105 M, GEF US$6.5 M   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Urban and rural areas throughout Tanzania.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower has Environmental Assessment and Resettlement Frameworks in place for the ongoing 
power sector projects.  TANESCO has its own Environmental unit. Strengthening with regard to 
social safeguards (resettlement) needs to be discussed with the client   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (EASTE) 
Ms Naima A Hasci (AFTS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP/BP 4.01 applies because the project will finance investments in power generation 
(isolated mini-grids and grid connected renewable generation), transmission and distribution. An 
Environmental Impact Assessment for the transmission and distribution upgrade (grid 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
component) has already been completed and disclosed.  The location of the target areas for the 
offgrid component will be determined during program implementation.  Therefore, GoT is 
preapring an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to ensure that the 
environmental and social issues associated with this program are adequately analyzed and 
understood, and that all associated adverse impacts are captured through screening, effectively 
mitigated and monitored and that the institutional capacity to ensure this happens is maintained 
and supported financially through the program.  The ESMF will be sent to the Bank for review 
and clearance before it is disclosed publicly in Tanzania.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
It is not anticipated that the sub-projects will  adversely affect sites having archeological, 
paleontological, historical, religious, or unique natural values as defined under the OP 4. 11. A 
screening mechanism will be incorporated into the ESMF that any such sites are identified and 
avoided or impacts are mitigated, in line with the cultural resources policy.  This plan should also 
be accepted by the local authorities. Awareness of possible chance finds will be raised among the 
public, the project contractors and operators, and chance-find procedures will be included in 
construction contracts.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The program design does not anticipate any major involuntary resettlement and will try, 
where feasible, to avoid or minimize impacts through alternative project designs.   In those cases, 
however, where OP/BP 4.12 is triggered the involuntary resettlement policy guidelines will be 
applied in order to prevent and mitigate undue harm to people and their social and economic 
assets.  In this context, a Social Impact Assessment (SIA), including a Public Consultation Plan 
will be undertaken to assess the scope of the project impacts, identify the number of Project 
Affected Persons(PAPs) and determine the scope of potential impacts on livelihoods and  assets. 
To facilitate this process a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is being prepared with a strong 
consultation component, that will draw from the SIA analysis with a view to ensuring adequate 
public consultation with and genuine participation of PAPs.  In those cases, where negative 
impacts (temporary or permanent) on land, livelihood and other assets (including access to their 
individual or community economic, social and cultural resources) are unavoidable, OP/BP 4.12 
will be applied to ensure that all PAPs:  a) are meaningfully consulted; b) are given the 
opportunities to participate in the planning and implementing of resettlement programs; and c) 
are assisted in their efforts to improve their livelihoods and standards of living or at least to 
restore them, in real terms, with a view to compensating for losses  to levels prevailing prior to 
the beginning of project implementation, whichever is higher.  
 
The RPF will be disclosed  publicly  in the local language in Tanzania as well as  in the 
Infoshop prior to Project Appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
None of the analyzed sub-projects so far requires a dam; any hydro projects are expected to 
be small-scale and run-of-river. Nevertheless, the ESMF will establish a framework for the 
safety of dams issues in case that policy is triggered in any sub-project to be financed.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Tanzania is part of a number of internationally significant rivers and lakes and a signatory to 
various international treaties affecting water.  This OP will most likely be triggered and 
therefore, the Task Team will ensure the necessary notifications are sent out by the GoT to 
riparian countries before appraisal of this program.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/16/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environmental Impact Assessment for the grid component was disclosed on January 1, 
2005.  The RPF for Dar Es Salaam segment was disclosed on Jan 6, 2006, and the RAP for 
the Moshi to Arusha segment was disclosed on November 25, 2005.  An Environmental 
Audit of 18 Substations was disclosed on November 1, 2005.  Because a considerable 
amount of time has elapsed since disclosure of some of these documents, public notices will 
be issued explaining where interested stakeholders can find them.  The ESMF and RPF for 
the offgrid component are under preparation, to be completed and disclosed by March 31, 
2007.  
 
The responsibility for further safeguards processing has been transferred to and accepted by 
AFTEG.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pankaj Gupta 
03/19/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/19/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
03/19/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
