Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/18/2006 
Report No.:  AC2129
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tanzania 
Project ID:  P085752 
Project Name:  Tanzania Agricultural Sector Development Program 
Task Team Leader:  Robert Townsend 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 14, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTS2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural extension and research (40%);General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (30%);Irrigation and drainage (20%);Agricultural marketing and trade 
(10%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
90.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.00 
 
INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT 
46.00 
 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
18.00
70.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The program has two complementary objectives: (i) to enable farmers to have better 
access to and use of agricultural knowledge, technologies, and infrastructure; all of which 
contribute to higher productivity, profitability, and farm incomes; and (iii) to promote 
agricultural private investment based on an improved regulatory and policy environment.   
 
3. Project Description 
The program has two main components. The components are aligned to the 
Government’s national and local level budget, planning and prioritization process. The 
sub-components of the local government support are aligned to the block grant transfer 
system of Government, while the national level sub-component are aligned to the key 
technical themes of the Agricultural Sector Development Program (ASDP).  
 
Component 1: Local Government Support. This component will primarily support 
achievement of the first objective listed above through improvements of Local 
Page  2
Government Authority (LGA)capacity to plan, support and co-ordinate agricultural 
services and investments in a more efficient, participatory and sustainable manner. 
Support will be provided to develop and implement District Agricultural Development 
Plans, including increasing farmer influence in resource allocation decisions for services 
and investments; progressing agricultural services reform and improving the quality of 
public expenditure. In addition support to achieving the second program objective will be 
provided through improvements in the local regulatory environment for economic 
activity, particularly local level taxation. The component comprises of three sub-
components aligned with the fiscal transfer system of the Government of Tanzania: (i) 
local agricultural investments, (ii) local agricultural services, and (iii) local agricultural 
capacity building and reform. The component will finance infrastructure, advisory 
services, and training with resource transfers to local government authorities linked to 
performance of local level planning, and implementation, agricultural services reform, 
the quality of local investments, and the local policy and regulatory environment.  
 
Component 2: National Level Support: This component will support achievement of 
both program objectives. The first objective will be supported through improvements to 
the relevance and responsiveness of the agricultural research system including greater 
linkages with extension. The second objective will be supported through improvements to 
the national level policy environment, and through developing mechanisms for greater 
public-private partnerships. Support will be provided to: (i) reform agricultural services, 
primarily research and extension; (ii) improve the overall sector policy, regulatory and 
legal framework; and market development; capacity building; information and 
communication; (iii) establish a framework to ensure the quality and technical soundness 
of investments and delivery of services at local levels.  Emphasis will initially be given to 
agricultural research and extension services, irrigation, market development, capacity 
building and program coordination. The components: (i) agricultural services; (ii) 
irrigation development; (iii) market development; (iv) co-ordination, monitoring and 
evaluation. This component will finance infrastructure, the development, adaptation and 
dissemination of new technology, and analytical work on market development.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The program activities will be located throughout Tanzania. However, the spatial 
coverage of the program will be determined during program implementation through 
LGA performance. Other considerations will be given to ongoing donor support. The 
program will initially provide a minimum base flow of resources across the local and 
zonal national level, while providing intensive support for districts and services which 
qualify for additional block grant transfers.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASEN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The environmental and social impacts of the Agricultural Sector Development Program 
(ASDP) Basket Fund supported activities will come from the sub projects and 
investments contained in the District Agricultural Development Plans (DADPs) of the 
qualifying districts that will receive financing under the ASDP and also from potentially 
larger scale irrigation schemes funded outside the DADPs but from the basket funded 
arrangements of the ASDP.  
 
Many of the adverse impacts associated with the DADPs would be low intensity, minor 
and site specific impacts and relatively straightforward to manage by the beneficiaries, 
assisted and primarily monitored by their local institutions. These anticipated impacts are 
likely to be associated with point and non-pollution of water sources, soil erosion, and 
increased loss of soil fertility, cultivation of marginal lands and other land use conflicts, 
and other issues from increased use of agricultural inputs.  
 
Adverse impacts associated with larger scale irrigation schemes (i.e greater that 300ha) 
could potentially be more severe, such as public health issues, increase in water stress of 
the renewable water sources, water quality and loss of land. The total irrigation expansion 
to be financed through the ASDP Basket Fund is estimated to range between 3,121 and 
9,758 hectares, depending on districts priorities. This is consistent with past experience in 
Tanzania which shows total annual irrigation development to be 6,000-7,000 hectares.  
 
Therefore, screening these program activities as a whole against the Government of 
Tanzania's (GoT) own requirements and that of the World Bank, the GoT and the Bank 
task team worked carefully during preparation of this program, to ensure the potential 
social and environmental adverse impacts were understood and carefully planned for 
their effective management during implementation.  
 
Some investments may lead to land acquisition (e.g. for trial plots and irrigation). It is 
expected that in most cases this will not lead to physical relocation, loss of assets and/or 
Page  4
access to assets by individuals or communities. In the minority of cases where socio-
economic impacts result from the land acquisition needs of these investments, the banks 
Involuntary Resettlement OP4.12 and the GoTs own laws and requirements would be 
complied with.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Tanzania’s National Environment Policy identifies the following as the 
criticalenvironmental problems facing the country today: land degradation, lack of 
accessible, good quality water for both urban and rural inhabitants; environmental 
pollution (e.g. water contamination); loss of biodiversity, habitat and wetlands; 
deterioration of aquatic systems; and deforestation.  
 
During preparation of this program, the immediate and root causes of these problems 
were reviewed and are understood. For instance, an immediate cause of land degradation 
in Tanzania is inappropriate agricultural practices leading to decreased soil quality and 
erosion. With regards public health aspects of water contamination, an immediate cause 
is increased breeding ground for mosquitos, in water weed infested areas and irrigation 
canals. In addition, some of the root causes associated with land degradation in Tanzania 
are associated population pressure in arable areas, unsustainable land use practices, 
topography (uneven relief, high stream flow velocities), unpredictable and varied rainfall 
patterns and climate variability, and lack of systematic implementation of EIA for 
infrastructure projects due to lack of financial and human resources.  Root causes of 
water contamination are more generally due to lack of enforcement of environmental 
regulations and laws, monitoring, poor or lack of health care systems, poor drainage 
designs and lack of maintenance of irrigation systems.  
 
Any program activities that have the potential opportunity to make these matters worse 
either in the short, medium, or long term would be addressed appropriately as part of the 
safeguards measures designed in the ASDP, or they will not be eligible for funding under 
the ASDP.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
As stated earlier, sub projects will be identified during implementation. Alternatives for 
sub project designs and locations will be considered and as part of the ASDPs 
environmental and social screening procedures.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has taken all the necessary steps to comply with the triggered World Bank 
Safeguards Policies. The triggered policies are:  
 
-
OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment  
 
-
OP 4.09 Pest Management  
 
-
OD 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement  
Page  5
-
OP 4.37 Safety of Dams  
 
-
OP 7.50 Projects on International Waters  
 
In compliance with OP4.01, the Environment Assessment (EA) category assigned to the 
ASDP is Category B. Since the local authorities that would qualify for these investments 
will become known only during implementation of the program, in compliance with the 
requirements of OP4.01, the GoT has prepared a stand alone Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) to ensure the environmental and social issues 
associated with this program are adequately analyzed and understood, and that all 
associated adverse impacts are captured through screening, effectively mitigated and 
monitored and that the institutional capacity to ensure this happens is maintained and 
supported financially through the program. The ESMF discusses the mechanism through 
which all investments when they become known, will be managed. The key features of 
the ESMF are:  
 
1) The first step in the process begins at the start of the planning cycle for the 
preparation of the DADPs. The potential sub project owner, implementer or operator 
assigns an Environmental Category for their sub project type, using the criteria below. 
This group can either be the District Agricultural and Livestock Development Officer or 
the farmer group. But in either case they will be assisted by the District Environmental 
Coordinator’s, and in the case of farmer groups further assistance can be sought from the 
advisory services of the ASDP. The following is a list of sub project types that may be 
considered for inclusion in the DADPs.  
 
Large scale irrigation is defined in this case as over 300ha. The potential major 
environment and social concerns are water pollution and water quality, water extraction 
and water rights, land loss and resettlement, natural habitats, species loss, land 
degradation, dam safety, and significant construction issues such as spoil disposal 
management. This subproject environmental category is A.  
 
Medium Scale Irrigation, i.e between 50 ha and 300ha. The potential major environment 
and social concerns are water pollution and water quality, water extraction and water 
rights, land loss and resettlement, natural habitats, species loss, land degradation, and 
significant construction issues such as spoil disposal management. This sub project 
environmental category is a B*.  
 
Small scale irrigation, i.e. less than 50 ha and with no resettlement. The potential major 
environment and social concerns are land degradation, water pollution. This sub project 
environmental category is a B**/C.  
 
Other types of sub projects such as water harvesting, small watershed management, 
ground water charging, etc. The potential environment and social concerns are soil 
erosion, and water source contamination. This may involve significant construction issues 
such as spoil disposal management. This sub project environmental category is a B.  
 
________________________________________  
 
Page  6
*
Resettlement is also likely to be a factor for most sub project types involving land 
acquisition or restriction for new irrigation sites or extension of existing sites.  
 
** Although most irrigation sub projects are expected to be medium scale and therefore 
fall within a Category B, it is possible that some may require the use of dams and involve 
water storage/reservior. This could include the impoundment of large relatively flat areas. 
As such, these areas could remove land from cultivation and possibly result in 
involuntary resettlement. In such cases, the sub project would fall into a Category A.  
 
*** Any sub project with resettlement will be Category B, at a minimum, even if they 
are less than 50 ha irrigation or small market.    
 
The ASDP Category is B for the program as a whole. Not to be confused with the sub 
project categories.  
 
________________________________________  
 
2) The second step is to determine which of the
 World Bank’s safeguards policies may 
be triggered by the sub-projects and what the requirements are to comply with the 
triggered policy. This requires the sub project potential owner/implementer/operator to 
use the Safeguards Tables in Annex A of the ESMF. Further information on these 
policies is available on the Bank’s website, www. worldbank.org. If any of the Bank 
safeguards policies are triggered by sub project, the owner/implementer/operator will 
modify the design, implementation, operation, maintenance and decommissioning phases 
to ensure that the sub-project satisfies the requirements of that particular policy.  
 
3) The thrid step is for the owner/implementer/operator to prepare a comprehensive sub 
project Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) including an Environmental 
and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (Annex C of the ESMF contains guidelines on how 
to prepare and ESMP). Additionally, for situations where OP 4.12 apply, the 
Owner/Implementer/Operator will prepare a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) consistent 
with the separately disclosed RPF. For situations where OP4.37 applies, the 
owner/implementer/operator will prepare a Dam Safety Measures Report and similarly 
where Pest management issues apply, the use of the IPMP is mandated. Annex H of the 
ESMF has specific guidelines for the assessment and preparation of the Dam Safety 
Measures Report. Annex B of the ESMF contains an example of comprehensive terms of 
reference for the ESIA. For Category C sub projects, the owner/implementer/operator is 
only required to prepare an ESMP. Annex C of the ESMF contains guidelines for the 
preparation of an ESMP for Category C sub-projects and what the ESMP in Category A 
or B sub project ESIAs should also contain. According to Tanzanian Law and World 
Bank OP4.01, Public Consultation is required as part of the ESIA and/or ESMP process. 
Annex F of the ESMF has a generic guide to an acceptable public consultation process.  
 
4) The fourth step is for the operators to submit their ESIA and or ESMP to the required 
authority as specified. The ESIA for Category A and B sub-projects will be reviewed and 
cleared by the NEMC. The ESMP for Category C sub-projects is to be reviewed and 
cleared by the respective Regional Environmental Engineers/Specialist, with assistance of 
Page  7
Zonal Irrigation Engineers as required. Annex G of the ESMF contains a generic 
Environmental and Social Appraisal Form to be used by the National Environment 
Management Council and the Regional and Zonal technical staff, to provide uniform 
guidance to their review process and to notify the District Councils of their decision 
before final approval and funding is made. The first set of cleared ESIA’s for Category A 
and B sub-projects would also have to be reviewed and cleared by the World Bank, to 
ensure compliance with its safeguards policies. The World Bank reserves the right to not 
allow funds under the ASDP be applied to sub projects that do not meet the requirements 
of its safeguards policies. This is stated explicitly in the ESMF.  
 
Also, since the overall program objective of increasing agricultural productivity could 
lead to an increase in the use of agricultural inputs, including the use of pesticide, the 
GoT, in compliance with the Pest Management OP4.09, even though the program will not 
finance the purchase of  these chemicals, has prepared an Integrated Pest Management 
Plan (IPMP), to ensure the desired management of these inputs is achieved.  
 
Additionally, since involuntary resettlement cannot be ruled out, the GoT has also 
prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), to address the needs of those who may 
be affected by the land acquisition needs of the program.  
 
Finally in compliance with Safety of Dams OP4.37, the GoT has integrated the dam 
safety requirements into the ESMF for situations where it may apply.  
 
The use of the IPMP and the RPF has also been fully integrated into the ESMF, as 
described in steps above, to ensure a truly integrated safeguards management approach. 
The World Bank has reviewed the ESMF, RPF and IPMP prepared by the GOT, made 
comments and have had these documents revised accordingly. The World Bank has 
approved and cleared these documents, and they have since been disclosed locally in 
Tanzania and at the Infoshop.  
 
With regards to compliance with Projects on International Waterways, OP7.50, the GoT 
is in the process of issuing the necessary notifications to riparian countries through the 
appropriate regional bodies, and any due responses will be noted by the World Bank, 
when they are received.  
 
The GoT have also agreed to prepare a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) of 
the National Irrigation Master Plan during implementation. The intensity, extent and 
scale of the adverse environmental impacts will be examined by the Strategic 
Environmental Assessment, which will be undertaken in the first year of implementation 
of the Program. The recommendations of the SEA with regards to water quality and 
quantity and other impacts, cumulative and otherwise, will inform subsequent planning 
decisions for the location and scale of irrigation investments, alternatives, mitigation 
measures and monitoring activiteis.  
 
In terms of capacity of the GoT to implement these measures, the ESMF has designed a 
suitable training program which it has costed at US$400,000 to address these needs at the 
Page  8
local and national levels, and the ESMF also contains a tangible EAMP with an 
additional cost of US$400,000 to implement and a budget of US$250,000, for the review 
of subprojects EIA's and ESMP's.  
 
The GoT has over the many years been engaged with the World Bank in many projects 
and they are familiar with the Bank’s requirements in this regard. The Task Team is 
confident that with these measures in place and with regular supervision, the GoT has 
more than the required capacity to successful address the safeguards issues designed into 
this program.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the line ministries responsible for agricultural, the Environment, 
Local Development and decentralization, the National Environment Management 
Council, Regional and Local Governments, and the Farmer Associations and individual 
farmers.  
 
The consultative process has been and will continue to be an on-going process. During 
preparation missions, the Bank met and discussed with the key stakeholders on many 
occasions. Field visits were conducted to the likely districts and visits where held with 
farmers in their field. These discussions informed the design of this program in general, 
but more particularly the safeguards mechanism described above. Also, during 
preparation of the ESMF and RPF, consultations also were held with farmers, were the 
program was explained to them and they were given the opportunity to express their 
views.  
 
By design, the preparation of the District Agricultural Development Plans (DADPs), can 
only occur in a consultative process with local communities, and at that time also, the 
ESMF and its requirements will be discussed. This will give potentially affected people 
the opportunity to have their voices heard as the program investments will be proposed as 
part of the development of the DADP’s.  
 
Also, the preparation of the SEA will be done in consultative process with the NEMC, 
the National Water Basin Authorities, the irrigation department, farmer groups and other 
stakeholders. The SEA draft would be discussed with these stakeholders and their views 
would be taken into account in preparation of the final draft SEA.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/05/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/09/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/11/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  9
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/05/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/09/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/10/2005 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/05/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/09/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/10/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
N/A 
Page  10
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert Townsend 
04/18/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr James Orehmie Monday 
04/18/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
04/18/2006 
Comments:   
