Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2533 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/31/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tanzania 
Project ID: P103633 
Project Name: Central Transport Corridor Repeater Project 
Task Team Leader: Dieter E. Schelling 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 12, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: January 24, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (47%);Roads and highways (38%);Aviation (15%) 
Theme: Regulation and competition policy (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring and 
privatization (P);Trade facilitation and market access (P);Infrastructure services for 
private sector development (P);Export development and competitiveness (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
130.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified) 
32.00
42.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The original project's development objectives were:  (i) upgrading of strategic road links; (ii) 
enhancement of road management capacity; and (iii) improvement of the operations of 
Tanzanian railways. Through the Repeater Project the following adjustments are proposed: (i) 
upgrading of strategic road links; (ii) enhancement of the management of road maintenance; (iii) 
improvement of public transport and traffic management in Dar es Salaam City; and (iv) 
improvement of airports.  
 
While the initial indicators set out for CTCP will be respected, it is proposed to define a joint 
GoT/DP sector performance assessment framework (SPAF) to be monitored by the newly 
formed Directorate of Policy and Planning of MoID. The SPAF would serve as the basis for the 
planned move towards a sector wide approach in the follow-on TSSP project. TA is planned 
under the current CTCP to assist with capacity enhancement at the Department of Policy and 
Planning of MoID.   
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Repeater Project is in the amount of $170m.  Following is the description of the 
proposed sub-projects to be financed under the project:  
 
(a) 
Rehabilitation and upgrading of the Korogwe - Mkumbara - Same Road  
 
This important road section (172 km long) which is part of the Dar es Salaam - Arusha trunk 
road has reached its design life and requires rehabilitation, strengthening, and widening. Design 
and bidding documents have been prepared and prequalification of contractors is underway. 
Works are planned to commence in July 2007. The cost for works and supervision are estimated 
at $40m.  
 
(b) 
Performance Based Road Management and Maintenance (PMMR)Contracts  
 
Tanzania proposes to adopt a PMMR concept for the management and maintenance of its road 
network and a project to pilot the program has been prepared with the help of a trust fund. 
Preparatory activities and bidding documents for the project that covers 1078 km of priority 
gravel trunk and regional roads in three regions have been completed. Procurement for the five 
year rehabilitation and maintenance contracts and supervision services is also complete and the 
contracts are expected to be signed in March 2007 to be financed initially under the current 
CTCP which will enable implementation to start while financing is secured. The cost for works 
and supervision services is in the amount of $25m.  
 
(c) 
Rehabilitation of Zanzibar Airport Runway  
 
The rehabilitation and extension of the Zanzibar airport runway was to be financed under the 
IRPII credit and a contract was awarded in 2003. This contract had to be terminated in April 
2004 due to poor performance. Subsequent attempts to procure a contract through selective 
bidding (with the previously prequalified bidders) failed and a decision was made to 
recommence the procurement process. The IRPII credit closed on December 31, 2006, and it was 
decided not to extend it further after 12 year. The balance of $12.9m from the credit was 
cancelled. The cost estimate for the remaining and proposed additional civil works (taxiways and 
apron) and supervision of the project for rehabilitation and extension of the Zanzibar airport 
runway is $25m.  
 
(d) 
Phase 1 of the Implementation of Dar es Salaam Bus Rapid Transit (DART) Project and 
Improvement of Traffic Management for Dar es Salaam City  
 
Preparatory studies for on the establishment of a bus rapid transit system in DSM city have 
been carried out, financed by the Bank (economic appraisal, design and bid documentation for 
bus lanes) and ITDP (Financial modeling of bus financing and operations). Tender documents 
for the civil works including bus lanes, stations and terminals are expected to be ready by the end 
March 2007 while the financial model will be ready for review in Mid March 2007. It is planned 
to award the works contracts in the last quarter of 2007 calendar year.  
 
To optimize traffic movement within the CBD as a result of the entry of DART and to improve 
efficient at various major junctions in DSM, it is proposed to carry out a traffic analysis leading 
to redesign traffic flow in the CBD and minor improvement to the layout and traffic signaling at 
the junctions. The estimated cost for the two is $80m.  
 
The purchase and operation of the buses is expected to be financed by the private sector.   
Page  3
D.  Project location (if known) 
Zanzibar; Tanga, Kilimanjaro, Mwanza, Rukwa Regions; Links to the Central Transport 
Corridor Regions   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
TANROADS has a well developed EA and SA capacity. All other entities have only limited 
capacity and need assistance.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTEN) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
All the project components have environmental impacts of various degrees.  Therefore 
OP/BP 4.01 is triggered.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Two of the projects components:  (b) Performance Based Road Management and 
Maintenance (PMMR) contracts (to a modest degree); and (d) Phase 1 of the Implementation of 
Dar es Salaam Bus Rapid Transit (DART) Project (substantial) involve involuntary resettlement.  
Therefore OP/BD 4.12 is triggered.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/24/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
EA for the Korogwe - Mkumbara - Same road and DART have already been submitted to 
AFTES for its review.  An EMP has been prepared for the PMMR and Zanzibar airport 
components and will be implemented during project execution.  
 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared for the project which is being 
repeated and RAP for Phase 1(A) and (B) are being prepared and will be implemented prior 
to the beginning of road construction. All the above safeguard documents will be disclosed in 
the country as well as at Infoshop within the Bank.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Dieter E. Schelling 
10/26/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
10/26/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gylfi Palsson 
10/26/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
