Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3088 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/01/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tanzania 
Project ID: P105220 
Project Name: Lower Kihansi Environmental Management Project 2 
Task Team Leader: Jane A. N. Kibbassa 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 3, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: September 27, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (65%);Central government 
administration (35%) 
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (P);Water resource management 
(P);Biodiversity (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
3.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives of Lower Kihansi Environmental Management Project (LKEMP) 
are to: (i) put in place a series of medium-term measures to ensure the long-term conservation of 
the Kihansi Gorge ecosystem and (ii) support the development of a coordinated and consistent 
legal and institutional framework for environmental and water resources management in 
Tanzania.  
 
Additional Financing will not affect the PDO, but would support the Government of Tanzania 
(GoT) to continue implementing selected activities in the original four components of the 
project, in order to fully achieve the envisaged project development objectives. Additional 
financing will enable the Government of Tanzania to fill a financing gap caused by additional 
issues that arose with unexpected mortality of toads both in the wild and in captive population 
due to prevalence of Chytrid fungus. The need now is to determine the future of the captive 
population and whether they can be brought back to the gorge, either for re-introduction or to 
move the site of captive breeding program.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project as appraised is comprised of four components:  
 
(a) Habitat and species conservation and management. The project will finance the 
development and launching of a Kihansi Gorge ecosystem monitoring and conservation program, 
will continue the search for populations of the Kihansi Spray toad outside of the Kihansi Gorge, 
and will develop a plan for the reintroduction of the Kihansi Spray Toad (KST) to another habitat 
in Tanzania. Among other things, the monitoring and conservation program would identify 
threats to other endemic or threatened species in the Gorge ecosystem, and would develop and 
implement necessary mitigation measures. These could include altering the bypass flow regime, 
translocation and reintroduction, or ex-situ propagation.  
 
(b) Establishment of final water right. The proposed project will finance a transparent process 
to establish Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited (TANESCO) final water right to operate 
the Kihansi facility on the basis of scientific inputs and representations from TANESCO, the 
Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism, the National Environmental Management Council, 
the Environment Division (Vice President's Office), stakeholders in the scientific community and 
NGOs. These activities will build upon the work started on an emergency basis (with Swedish 
and Norwegian financing). The project will finance the operations of a Task Force to (a) further 
investigate the scope for a modified environmental flow regime; and to (b) make 
recommendations to the National Environmental Management Council within a period of 24 
months as an input into decision making by the Rufiji Basin Water Office (RBWO) on the 
environmental flow regime and its implications for water rights, operating conditions and 
criteria; (c) make recommendations to the NEMC and the Rufiji Basin Water Office for effective 
monitoring and enforcement of the final water right; and (d) establish a transparent mechanism 
for monitoring and enforcing water right compliance.  
 
(c) Implementing an Updated Environmental Management Plan. In light of the discovery of 
threatened endemic species in the Kihansi Gorge ecosystem, there is a need immediately to 
prepare supplemental Environ-mental Assessment work, and to develop an Environmental 
Management Plan, which must be implemented as a condition of the final water right which is to 
be granted to TANESCO to operate the facility and to account for any proposed future changes 
in power infrastructure at the site. The project will propose the design, organization, staffing, and 
funding, for an environmental unit based at Kihansi which can independently meet the 
challenges of monitoring and implementation of an updated Environmental Management Plan, 
and which involves local government in implementation. The project will finance establishment 
and operation of this Unit until long-term financing arrangements can be agreed with 
TANESCO.  
 
(a) Institutional Strengthening. The national system for environmental and water resources 
management needs to be rationalized. Consistent with the recommendations of the 
Environmental Review, the project will finance preparation and implementation of a program of 
institutional capacity building which results in a coordinated system, at the national level, of 
environmental and water resources management. The program will take into account and will 
adopt and support the implementation of the recommendations and findings of the recently 
completed review carried out by the Institutional and Legal Framework for Environmental 
Page  3
Management Project (ILFEMP) as well as recommendations related to the establishment of a 
new Water Resources Management Policy.  
 
With the exception of the re-introduction plan for the Kihansi Spray toad, all the envisaged 
project activities have been fully or substantially implemented. The focus of Additional 
financing will be mainly on Component 1 
–
Habitat and Species Conservation and Management. 
This entails: (i) continuing with maintenance of the Kihansi gorge wetlands, which is the natural 
habitat of the KST, and monitoring of the gorge ecosystem; (ii) supporting the USA captive 
breeding program, establishing a KST captive breeding program in Tanzania, re-introducing of 
the KST to the Kihansi Gorge, and developing the local capacity for captive breeding of KST; 
(iii) implementing Landscape-Wide Conservation Plan (LWCP), through districts and local 
communities, with the aim of managing the upper catchment of the Lower Kihansi river to 
restore both quantity and quality of Kihansi river waters; and (iv) building the capacity for the 
enforcement of compliance of environmental quality and water resources management standards. 
The implementation of the above activities will contribute to the achievement of the first 
development objective, which aims at developing medium-term measures for the long-term 
conservation of the gorge ecosystem and endangered plant and animal species.  
 
Institutional and implementation arrangements during the project extension will remain more or 
less the same, except for the project coordination, which will be fully undertaken by the National 
Environment Management Council (NEMC).  The current consultancy services for NEMC will 
be terminated and functions of the Project Coordinating Unit will be mainstreamed within 
NEMC. Overall, the role of coordinating implementing agencies will remain within the Vice 
President’s Office. NEMC will remain the host and lead coordinating institution of the project. A 
senior officer from its existing core staff has been appointed to coordinate the project 
implementation, and will report to the Director General, through the Director of Research.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Lower Kihansi Gorge is located in the Eastern Arc Mountains. The Eastern Arc Mountains 
are a group of mountains which stretch from southeast Kenya through south central Tanzania and 
are situated between 3º 20’ and 8º 45’S latitude and 35º 37’ and 38º 48’ E longitude. They 
consist of the Taita Hills in Kenya, and the Pare, Usambara, Nguru, Ukaguru, Rubeho, Uluguru, 
Mahenge, Malundwe and Udzungwa Mountains in Tanzania.  
 
The Kihansi gorge is located along the eastern escarpment of the southern Udzungwa 
Mountains.  The gorge, created by the Kihansi River is approximately 4 km in length and 0.5 km 
in width.  The Kihansi River, as it flows through the gorge, plunges over the series of waterfalls 
and rapids.  The main Upper Falls at the head of the steeped-sided gorge is over 100 m in height 
and the Lower Falls is approximately 30 m in height.  There are several other smaller falls in the 
gorge which are between 10 and 30 m in height.   
 
The gorge contains four major vegetation types: miombo woodland, montane forest, Filicium 
forest, and wetland spray meadow with a respective are of approximately 95 ha, 100 ha    0.25 
has, and 2.0 ha.  
 
Page  4
More than 23 plant species occur in the Kihansi gorge that are either globally threatened or are 
species having regional and global conservation importance.  Three of these species 
–
a
wild 
coffee (Coffee sp.), a species in the Acanthaceae family, and species in the Triuridaceae family – 
are known only from the Kihansi Gorge and have not yet been formally described.  While it is 
possible that these three species occur outside of the Kihansi gorge, further field work is needed 
to establish their distribution and abundance.  
 
Sixteen bird species occur in the Kihansi Gorge that are of conservation concern.  Seven of 
these species are globally or regionally threatened or near-threatened.  All of these species have 
much large populations outside of the Gorge.  If local populations of these species within the 
gorge were to become extinct, it should not affect the global populations of these species because 
of the very small size of the Kihansi Gorge populations.  
 
Six species of primate occur in the Kihansi gorge.  Of these species, the Uhehehe Red Colubus 
is of conservation concern.  The Uhehehe Red Colubus has much large populations outside of the 
Kihansi Gorge.  The long-term population viability of the Uhehehe Red Colubus in the 
Udzungwa Mountains can be enhanced by developing a landscape-wide conservation strategy 
for the Kihansi Gorge in the context of the Udzungwa Mountains.  
 
Surveys that have been conducted to date of small mammals, fish, and insects have found that 
species of these taxa have broad geographic distributions outside of the Kihansi Gorge and thus 
should not be adversely affected by alteration in patterns of discharge through the gorge.  
 
The total area of natural forest in the Udzungwa Mountains is 2,103 km2 of which 389 km2 is 
closed forest. Approximately 89 percent of the origin forest cover in the Udzungwa Mountains 
has been lost (mostly in the last 200 years).  The remaining natural forest in the Udzungwa 
Mountains is highly fragmented with a median patch size of 9 km2. The montane forest in the 
Kihansi Gorge is one of the smallest patches of natural forest in the Udzungwa Mountains.  
Many plant and animal species in the Udzungwa Gorge face additional long-tem risks of 
extinction as a result of habitat isolation and area effects.  
 
There is modest agricultural settlement upstream of the Gorge in the catchment area. 
Agriculture in much of the catchment is carried out on steeply sloping hillsides, without terracing 
or other soil conservation measures. Soils are unstable and prone to erosion.  Agriculture, as well 
as the loss of forest cover in the catchment, poses additional management challenges for the 
Gorge ecosystem because of increased sedimentation and irregular stream flow which is an 
outcome.  
 
In late 1996, the Kihansi Spray Toad (Nectophrynoides asperginis) was discovered in the 
Kihansi gorge.  It was formally described as a new species in mid-1998 using recently 
established IUCN risk criteria, the authors describing the Kihansi Spray Toad proposed that it 
should be listed as critically endangered because of its highly restricted geographic distribution: 
it is known only from four wetland meadow sites within the Kihansi gorge.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  5
The original Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for Lower Kihansi Hydropower Project 
(LKHP) and the Kihansi gorge ecosystem has been updated, and is currently being implemented 
by various public institutions including TANESCO. A final water right to divert and abstract 
water for TANESCO to operate the LKHP has been established. The Rufiji Water Basin Office 
(RBWO) continues to monitor compliance of the final water right by TANESCO, and the 
hydrology of the Kihansi River. An Environmental Management Act (2004) is now operational, 
following the development of seven regulations for its implementation. An institutional 
framework for long-term conservation of the Kihansi gorge ecosystem and its upstream 
catchment has been developed, but additional support is required to strengthen its capacity. A 
Landscape-Wide Conservation Plan (LWCP) has also been adopted, although the 
implementation of the proposed community-based investments intended to sustain the Kihansi 
river water quantity and quality started late. Efforts toward strengthening the capacity for 
environmental and water resources management in Tanzania have been initiated, through 
targeted training support extended to the UDSM, NEMC, TANESCO, MEM, MW, MNRT, and 
other government departments. However, the enforcement of compliance of provisions of the 
environmental and water laws and regulations remains weak.  
 
Environmental Units have been established in all the implementing sectors and institutions, 
namely Wildlife Division, Forest and Beekeeping Division, Ministry of Water, TANESCO, 
Rufiji Water Basin, Ministry of Energy and NEMC. The project has financed the establishment 
of an Environmental Center at Kihansi. The center is manned by NEMC as an overseer of on the 
ground supervision of the implementation and enforcement of EMP. In order to ensure 
sustainability, GOT has developed an exit strategy, which entails mainstreaming of LKEMP 
activities into the normal operations of the concerned implementing agencies through the 
established Environmental Units. This implies that future cost of project activities would be 
included in the Medium Term Framework (MTEF) budget of respective implementing agencies. 
To start with the GoT has budgeted TZS 250 million (US$ 215,000) in the FY2006/07 budget as 
counterpart funds to support project activities. The exit strategy identifies six project thematic 
areas and the lead and supporting agencies responsible for these areas as indicated below:  
 
•
Management of natural resources and infrastructure in the Kihansi Gorge – Vice 
Presidents Office;  
 
•
Management of the captive KST population – Ministry of Natural Resources  
 
•
Ecosystem monitoring and assessment –Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism;  
 
•
Coordination and management of the LWCP – Prime Ministers office  
 
•
Coordination of Scientific Assessment – Vice President’s Office  
 
•
Capacity Building – Vice Presidents Office (All Ministries and Departments, agencies 
and the University of Dar es Salaam)  
 
The government has also adopted a Strategy for Urgent Actions on Land Degradation and 
Water Catchments, which emphasizes the conservation of river catchments, including Kihansi 
gorge, which is quite critical in water resource management. In this regard, continued support to 
the on-going community-driven investments in the Kihansi river catchments to enhance water 
quality and quantity will also set precedence for other river basins management, including the 
Bank supported Water Sector Development Project.   
 
Page  6
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  08/13/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa 
07/30/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/30/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jean-Christophe Carret 
07/30/2007 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS. Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
