Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2549 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/19/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tanzania 
Project ID: P102262 
Project Name: Zanzibar Secondary Education Program 
Task Team Leader: Ivar Strand 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 24, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTH1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Secondary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1. 
The development objective is to improve completion of lower secondary education with 
successful performance among students. Quantitative indicators will be chosen which can 
measure the number of children, disaggregated by gender, taking and passing the O-level 
examination.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
2. 
Recognizing that secondary education benefits the young people receiving it and the 
country providing it, MoEVT has identified secondary education as its highest priority and 
requested the Bank to lead partners in supporting this sub sector.  At the same time, MoEVT is 
developing a sector program and this project will support and be integrated into this.  Given that 
this is the first separate project for Zanzibar and that the sector program will take some time to 
develop, it is intended that secondary education will be supported initially through a Specific 
Investment Credit.  ADB is likely to provide further support for secondary (it is currently 
supporting primary education) and USAID will be providing textbooks for science subjects.  
 
Page  2
3. 
To address more immediate needs, even as the SWAP is being discussed among the 
Government and donor partners, the proposed intervention will focus on three main outputs 
namely: (i) Improved access to and equity in secondary education; (ii) Improved quality of 
secondary education; (iii) Capacity Building for the education system.  
 
4. 
The proposed project has been tentatively costed to US$35 million.  Work remains to 
further refine realistic costing of project components based upon previous experience and expert 
inputs.  MoEVT will also prioritize project components to achieve a balance of components 
between access and quality - to address the issues noted above.  Tentatively, the following 
components and the specific inputs have been discussed as proposals to be discussed and 
finalized during preparation.  
 
5. 
Component I: Improving access and equity to Secondary Education  
 
6. 
Component 1A: To meet the demand for school facilities to accommodate the projected 
increase in secondary school enrolment, the project will support:  
 
7. 
(i) Construction of new schools with a total capacity of 100 classrooms.  The project will 
construct 100 classrooms in areas where very little provision currently exists or the facilities are 
dilapidated and the structures temporary.  It is expected that schools continue to be double 
shifted and as such this would add between 8000-12000 student places depending upon the 
student classroom ratio.   As part of this program, about thirty science laboratories, ten computer 
labs, ten libraries, ten administrative blocks, toilet facilities and water, and twenty staff houses 
will also be built.  Site selection principles will take into account existing coverage and school-
age population in the area. The areas for the new school  have been identified  but specific sites 
are to be identified. Construction is expected to commence about 12 months after Board 
approval.  What remains is to modify existing designs or to produce new designs for these 
schools.  Information on cost remains limited as the work undertaken by the MoEVT so far has 
mainly focused on completion and rehabilitation works, and as such there is limited information 
on the cost of new construction by Tanzanian or Zanzibari contractors. The current unit rates 
used for project planning have been calculated through analysis of empirical data from a limited 
number of construction projects.  Communities have traditionally contributed extensively to 
primary schools, and also to a lesser extent, towards secondary school extensions (usually within 
a
combined primary/secondary school), and ways in which communities will be engaged will be 
defined during preparation.  
 
8. 
(ii) Construction of 10 "model" secondary schools.  These schools will be established in 
all of the ten districts of Zanzibar and their size will vary according to school-age population and 
enrollment in the various districts.  The model school concept builds upon a long running system 
of selective "biased schools" at Zanzibar. There are very few of these biased schools currently 
and the provision of ten new model schools, one in each district, will significantly expand the 
capacity and make the distribution of quality secondary education more equitable on both islands 
(Pemba and Unguja).  The model schools are defined by the availability of adequate facilities 
and innovative education programs that could meet the students learning needs.  
 
Page  3
These model schools will not necessarily differ from other schools in terms of buildings, but are 
likely to be served with better facilities in the form of laboratories and equipment.  The model 
school will have facilities that will include (a) at least six standard size well-ventilated and well-
secured classrooms complete with furniture (b) a science block including laboratories for 
Chemistry, Physics and Biology (c) library and bookstore (d) Computer room (e) multipurpose 
hall and workshop (f) head teachers office with furniture and other office facilities (g) staff room 
with furniture (h) Hostels (i) ten staff houses and (j) adequate toilet facilities and potable water.  
In addition to the functional requirements, it is necessary to define the space standards applicable 
to the various sub-components (classrooms, laboratories, computer rooms, library etc), the level 
of equipment provision, the quality and type of finishes required and the capital cost constraints 
before appraisal.  
 
9. 
(iii) Rehabilitation of seven secondary schools; four of them situated in Stone Town and 
three in Pemba.  
 
10. 
Component 1B. In order to accommodate the expansion of enrolments, it will be 
necessary to increase the supply of secondary school teachers.  It is estimated that if all the 
secondary schools have to be equipped with academically and professionally qualified teachers, 
the system would need approximately 2414 new teachers for the next five years.  To increase the 
supply of teachers especially for Pemba, the project will support:  
 
11. 
Component II: Quality Improvement  
 
12. 
In addition to enhancing the physical learning environment at the secondary and teacher 
education levels, the project will support the provision of inputs aimed at improving the quality 
of education through provision of textbooks, reference books, equipment, and training of 
teachers through both pre-service and in-service training and improving the capacity of the 
teacher training institutions.  
 
13. 
Component 2A. To enhance the quality of teaching at the secondary level, the project will 
provide support for pre-service and in-service training of teachers over a five year period. Based 
on the demand for teachers, the project will finance the training of teachers mainly in the areas of 
science, mathematics, ICT and English language. The training will focus on improved classroom 
instruction, with certification of unqualified teachers at par with those graduating from teacher 
training colleges. Staff from Teacher Training College, the State University of Zanzibar and the 
Zonal Teacher Centers will be used in the professional development of teachers.  The in-service 
training program will be modeled on the successful Teacher Advancement Programme which has 
been carried out for the last five years. Capacity of these Institutions to deliver the services will 
be strengthened through the provision of 10 long- and short-term training courses and the 
provision of teaching and learning materials such as textbooks, reference books, laboratory 
equipment and chemicals.  
 
MoEVT  will refine and cost its plans for in-service teacher training., including:  (a)  secondary 
maths and science teachers;  (b) English for primary teachers;  (c) primary science and maths 
teachers; and (d) school head teachers and inspectors.  The plan will include course 
specifications, projected numbers and structures, costs, and implementation arrangements should 
Page  4
be prepared in advance of the next mission.  MoEVT will also prepare structures to ensure 
ongoing monitoring and regulation teacher supply, and teacher deployment policies and 
practices.  
 
14. 
Component 2B. Overall the project will enhance educational quality at the secondary 
education level by financing the provision of textbooks and reference books, science equipment 
and ICT equipment.  The schools will be provided with laboratory equipment and chemicals, 405 
computers, 560,000 textbooks and other teaching and learning materials for both students and 
teachers and at least 135,000 volumes of library books (5,000 volumes per school).  MoEVT will 
revisit possible cost-sharing modalities for the sustainable provision of textbooks in key subjects 
in all junior secondary schools in Zanzibar.  This includes. (a) Examine current distribution and 
utilization mechanisms for textbooks on the mainland and in Zanzibar; (b) report on appropriate 
cost-sharing modalities in other countries; (c) calculating annual cost implications of 
implementing sustainable textbook provision and (d) recommend a cost-sharing strategy for 
Zanzibar.  This will be completed during implementation and prior to distribution of the books.  
 
15. 
Component 2C.  The policy decision to teach some subjects in English language at the 
upper primary level is intended to improve the pupils? readiness for secondary school. The 
project will provide support for the development of curriculum and materials for the upper 
primary classes as well as in-service training of teachers at this level.  As has been described, 
pre-vocational education and training will be introduced to give the students an understanding of 
the skills required in the world of work and the project will provide institutional support to the 
Curriculum and Materials Development Division to undertake the work.  Government will 
prepare to implement the necessary changes in initial teacher education curricula to align with 
the revised structures, including:  (a) preparing diploma level secondary teachers to teach to 
Form 4; (b) preparing primary teachers of maths and science to teach through English from 
standard 5; and (c) enhancing the English language skills of all primary teachers.  
 
16. 
Component 2D.  To strengthen the supervision process, the Department of Inspectorate 
which is now understaffed and lacks necessary equipment and facilities will be improved 
through training more Inspectors and the provision of vehicles, computers and associated 
accessories. The Department will be responsible for supervising the teaching and learning 
process in the classrooms.  
 
17. 
Component III: Capacity Building for the Education System  
 
18. 
Component 3A. The objective of this component is to meet the capacity requirement for 
the education sector but in particular for those associated with the management of the secondary 
education sub-system. The project will support:  
 
19. 
(i) Technical assistance for the conduct of functional analysis of the organization and 
management of MoEVT, definition of the roles of the Central Ministry vis a vis the Regions and 
Districts.  As a result of the study it is anticipated that MoEVT will restructure its administration 
and management in order to strengthen its policy development role and its capacity to deliver 
education services more effectively. This will be particularly relevant and important in 
preparation for the SWAp.  
Page  5
20. 
(ii) Management training for about 100 secondary school managers both through regular 
face to face and through distance education by the use of the network of the Teacher Centers.  
Likewise the School Management Committee will be trained for trouble-shooting and in 
practical maintenance skills for minor repairs at schools. The project will finance the purchase of 
toolkits for all the secondary schools and provision of updated maintenance manual.  
 
21. 
(iii) Short- and long-term training of staff at various levels of the sectors will be provided. 
About 5 long-term training and 10 short-term training courses will be provided. The aim is to 
improve and upgrade management skills in the Ministry in the area of planning, budgeting, 
resource allocation, monitoring and evaluation and donor coordination.  
 
22. 
(iv) The capacity of the Programme Management Unit will be strengthened through the 
provision of technical assistance, short-term training and equipment necessary to undertake the 
implementation of the program. The project will provide the Programme Management Unit with 
computer equipment and consumables and supplies, operating cost related. It will also finance 
workshops and seminars on program activities, audit and evaluation costs.  
 
23. 
Component 3B. This component will cover issues of HIV/AIDS awareness and 
prevention, as well as gender and environmental issues among students and teachers. The 
magnitude of the impact of HIV/AIDS pandemic in education sector in Zanzibar is not 
documented and the data of teachers and students affected are not available. However, it is 
known that HIV/AIDS has affected all the sectors. This will involve HIV/AIDS and 
environmental awareness and sensitization in secondary schools by updating all the teaching and 
learning materials, and conducting workshops for teachers and students. The activity will be 
carried out to complement UNFPA-funded Moral Ethics and Environmental Studies. Girls' 
performance at secondary education level especially in the area of science and mathematics 
subjects will also be emphasized.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Zanzibar   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Education and Vocational Training, 
Zanzibar.  The Ministry has experience in implementing school construction programs financed 
by other donors including regional development Banks.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is expected to trigger the Environmental Assessment (OP/BO 4.01) and 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) policies due to its focus on construction and 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
rehabilitation of schools. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be 
prepared to identify, assess and mitigate likely negative environmental and social impacts of the 
project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project might trigger resettlement issues given the construction of new schools.  A 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared to address the potential resettlement 
issues.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/19/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), and the Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared prior to appraisal. The SMU has agreed to accept 
transfer of the safe guard responsibilities   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ivar Strand 
12/19/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
12/19/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Dzingai B. Mutumbuka 
12/19/2006 
Comments:   
