Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/21/2006 
Report No.:  AC2367
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tanzania 
Project ID:  P099231 
Project Name:  Financial Sector Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  Ravi Ruparel 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 19, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTFS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Banking (40%);Capital markets (20%);Non-compulsory pensions, insurance and 
contractual savings (20%);Micro- and SME finance (10%);Payment systems, securities 
clearance and settlement (10%) 
Theme:  Vulnerability assessment and monitoring (P);Analysis of economic growth 
(P);Small and medium enterprise support (S);Rural markets (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00 
 
UK: BRITISH DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DFID)5.00
7.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to promote increased household and firm access to 
financial services, facilitate efficient financial intermediation, and support financial 
stability and integrity.   
 
3. Project Description 
This is a repeater of the Second Financial Institution Development Project  (FIDP II) and 
is designed to continue providing support to the Government for its financial sector 
reform program.  
 
Component 1: Strengthening the Banking Sector: This component aims at enhancing the 
soundness and efficiency of the banking sector. The activities include: strengthening the 
capacity of banking supervision, strengthening the capacity of selected banks, review of 
banking regulations, improvement of risk management programs for small banks, 
establishing the framework for operation of credit reference bureaus, review of the 
Page  2
deposit insurance framework, developing systems for anti-money laundering and 
strengthening the financial reporting framework.  
 
Component 2: Developing Financial Markets: This component will focus on promoting 
vibrant primary and secondary markets supported by appropriate and secure settlements 
system and robust oversight. The activities include: strengthening the regulatory and 
supervision function of CMSA, developing the secondary market for money and 
government securities markets, developing framework for corporate and municipal bond 
markets, promote good corporate governance, improve public awareness of financial 
markets.  
 
Component 3: Reforming the Pension Sector: The component will focus on the 
promotion of an efficient and competitive pension sector supported by appropriate legal 
and regulatory structures.   The activities include: strengthening regulatory framework, 
establishing and operationalizing the pensions regulator, improving the investment 
capacity of pension funds to managing investments and undertaking actuarial analysis, 
increasing outreach to informal sector, and strengthening capacity for formulating and 
implementing pension policies.  
 
Component 4: Strengthening the Insurance Industry: This component focuses on 
promoting an efficient, sound, and competitive insurance industry with wider outreach 
and market based investment policies. The activities include: strengthening the capacity 
of the Insurance Supervisory Department (ISD) in risk-based supervision and actuarial 
analysis, acquiring insurance supervision software, reviewing the Insurance Act with 
regard to life insurance, developing banc assurance framework, and review investment 
policies of insurance companies.  
 
Component 5: Facilitating the Provision of Long Term Finance: This component will 
support improvement in the availability and access to long term financing for enterprises, 
infrastructure, and housing. The activities include: establishing a policy framework for 
provision of long-term financing, developing a development finance guarantee scheme 
and long term finance facility, transforming the Tanzania Investment Bank (TIB) into a 
development finance institution, strengthening the Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) 
guarantee scheme, establishing framework for leasing, developing framework for 
mortgage financing, developing the framework for infrastructure finance, and 
strengthening capacity for formulating and implementing long term finance policies.  
 
Component 6: Strengthening Micro and Rural Finance: This component will 
complement the existing initiatives under the FSDT and PSCP by focusing on promoting 
a
viable and sustainable microfinance industry with wide outreach operating under an 
enabling legal and regulatory framework. The activities include: strengthening regulatory 
framework for MFIs and SACCOs, enhancing capacity of supervisors, support 
transformation of MFIs and SACCOs to licensed MFCs and FICOs, strengthening MFI 
and SACCOs umbrella organizations, and create networks and apex institutions for 
SACCOs. The FSP will compliment the activities of the FSDT which is primarily 
responsible for working directly with commercial bank and non-bank financial 
Page  3
institutions to improve the scale and quality of their provision of micro-finance and SME 
finance services particularly to low-income market segments.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Not Applicable   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ravi Ruparel 
06/15/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/15/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Antony Thompson 
05/15/2006 
Comments:   
Page  5
