Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/20/2006 
Report No.:  AC2325
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tanzania 
Project ID:  P087154 
Project Name:  Water Sector Support Program 
Task Team Leader:  Francis Ato Brown 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 26, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 14, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTU1 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (50%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector 
(30%);Sanitation (10%);Sewerage (10%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Water resource management (S);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
130.00 
 
AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
80.00 
 
US, GOV. OF 
150.00 
 
GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) 
70.00 
 
NETHERLANDS: MIN. OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS / MIN. OF DEV. COOP.
 40.00 
 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
50.00
520.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The program development objective is to support GoT's improvement of the governance 
of water resources management and the sustainable delivery of water supply and 
sanitation services.  By the end of the program, the GoT would have met its MKUKUTA 
target of increasing water services coverage and be well on the way to meeting the MDGs 
for improved water supply and sanitation coverage across all segments of the population, 
as well as have in place a sustainable regulatory framework for comprehensive water 
resources management and development. Within the MKUKUTA framework are specific 
indicators to be achieved by 2010:  
 
a. Increased proportion of rural population with access to clean and safe water from 
54% in to 65% and within 30 minutes of time spent on collection of water;  
Page  2
b. Increased proportion of urban population with access to clean and safe water from 
73% to 90% and access to improved sewerage facilities from 17% in 2003 to 30%  
 
c. 95% of people with access to basic sanitation by 2010 and 100% of schools to have 
adequate sanitary facilities; and  
 
c. All nine Basin Water Offices will be fully operational - fully staffed, equipped and 
trained and ?will have prepared comprehensive Basin Plans.   
 
3. Project Description 
The program is designed to support the GoT's Water Sector Development Program 
(2005-2025).  The GoT Program is a consolidated document of (i) the National Rural 
WSS Program, (ii) the National Urban WSS Strategic Investment Plan, and (iii) the 
National Water Resources Strategic Investment Plan.  A Sector Wide Approach to 
Planning (SWAp) has been adopted and is aimed at meeting a resource shortfall in the 
Government's budget which targets an investment envelope of $670.0 million over the 
MKUKUTA period of 2006-2010. The program will also seek to promote synergies with 
other Bank and donor financed programs, and in particular, the Tanzania Social Action 
Fund (TASAF II) Project and the Local Government Support Project (LGSP) as the 
country transitions towards more decentralized delivery of services.  The program's four 
components are briefly described below:  
 
Component 1-Local Level: Scaling-up of Rural WSS Services Delivery to Meet MDGs 
(estimated US$ 290.0 million): This component will provide support to local 
governments in the provision of water and sanitation services through the implementation 
of District WSS Plans.  This will entail improvements in water supply (mainly shallow 
wells and boreholes with handpumps, small gravity, and mechanized borehole piped 
schemes) and sanitation services (latrines promotion and handwashing program) to rural 
villages, health centres, and schools.  Operational Guidelines which set out access and 
appraisal rules for this component have been prepared to facilitate funds flow and 
accountability by Local Government Authorities (LGAs).  The component will however 
use the existing Local Government Capital Development Grant (LGCDG) system the 
fiscal transfer system adopted by GoT for channeling resources to LGAs for capital 
development and services delivery.  This component will also provide support to 
complementary hygiene and sanitation promotion program, including a national 
handwashing campaign, as well as establish a supply chain for maintenance of rural/small 
towns WSS systems.  
 
Key inputs will include capacity building grants to support logistical needs of water 
departments of local government, sustained training and capacity building of 
district/community leaders and water and sanitation teams/committees in the processing 
and execution of community water and sanitation plans/sub-projects, technical assistance 
for district and community facilitation processes, handwashing, and sanitation promotion 
and design of systems and management arrangements for scheme operations.  In addition, 
local governments will obtain capital development grants to finance contracts for 
rehabilitation and expansion of community water and sanitation facilities as well as to 
support the expansion of supply chains for post-construction operations and maintenance 
of schemes.  Key outputs will include trained district water and sanitation teams, private 
sector support mechanisms for design and construction of services, and rehabilitated 
Page  3
WSS facilities under improved community management, and hygiene/handwashing 
promotion activities.  
 
Component 2-Utility Level: Scaling-up of Urban WSS Services Delivery to Meet 
MDGs (estimated US$ 275.0 million): This component will provide support to improve 
utility practice in regional and district capitals as well as gazetted national multi-village 
schemes in the provision of water and sanitation services.  The component will largely 
support the execution of Utility Business Plans and support improvements in water 
supply (mainly piped schemes) and sanitation services (sewerage systems and latrines 
promotion and handwashing program).  In particular, services to the urban poor will be 
emphasized.  Operational Guidelines have been prepared for this component to facilitate 
funds flow and accountability by utilities.  
 
Key inputs will include capacity building grants for logistical support and training for 
sustained capacity building of utilities, technical assistance for preparation of business 
plans, design of schemes and construction supervision as well as a combination of capital 
development grants and/or sub-loans to finance the rehabilitation and expansion of WSS 
services.  Key outputs will include rehabilitated and expanded WSS services and 
improved technical, financial and commercial operations of all beneficiary utilities.  
 
Component 3-Basin Level: Strengthening of Water Resources Management and 
Development Framework (estimated US$ 70.0 million): This component focuses on the 
governance of water resources and priority water resources management and 
development investments.  It is designed to provide support for: (i) Basin level water 
resources management -support for (a) strengthening of basin water offices, (b) water 
resources monitoring, assessment, and enforcement, (c) water quality management and 
pollution control, (d) protection of important water sources, and (e) water demand 
management. This support would be sequenced in the 9 basins with initial attention to the 
younger basins (drawing on significant experiences from the more mature basins and 
utilizing economies of scale in procurement) and move on to the more mature basins; (ii) 
Integrated river and lake basin management and development plans preparation of five 
integrated river basin management and development plans for the Rufiji, Pangani, 
Wami/Ruvu, Ruvuma, and Internal Drainage basins, and four integrated lake basin 
management and development plans for the Lakes Victoria, Tanganyika, Nyasa, and 
Rukwa basins.  These multi-sectoral plans will integrate past sectoral plans (such as the 
Regional Water Masterplans, National Irrigation Development Plan and National Energy 
Masterplan), current developments under ongoing programs (such as Nile Basin 
Initiative-NBI, Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project-LVEMP2, Lake 
Tanganyika Basin Commision-LTBC2, programs supported by Japanese, Norwegian, and 
Swedish Cooperation) and current priorities and targets defined under MKUKUTA, 
Vision 2025, Agriculture Sector Development Program (ASDP), and other emerging GoT 
programs.  The plan preparation will be sequenced initially starting with support for the 3 
more mature basins (Pangani, Rufiji, and Wami/Ruvu) in years 1 and 2 (and on the basis 
of the early experiences gained) and move on to the younger basins (Victoria, 
Tanganyika, Nyasa, Rukwa, Ruvuma, and Internal Drainage) in years 3-5; and (iii) 
Page  4
Priority water resources infrastructure investment - financing of selected priority single or 
multi-purpose water resources infrastructure investments/sub-projects).  
 
Key inputs will primarily consist of capacity building grants to support a set of technical 
assistance contracts and logistical support to BWOs to assist them in improving 
monitoring, enforcement and compliance capacities; map out the resource base (supply, 
use, and future demands and threats); actions to protect sources; promote demand 
management in each basin and prepare operational plans for the basin as well as fund 
priority projects for mitigating floods, drought, protecting watershed or groundwater 
recharge areas, irrigation control and intake structures, etc.  The priority project will be 
financed by capital development grants to the BWOs.  The key outputs will include 
operational and autonomous basin water offices; medium term integrated river and lake 
basin management and development plans; and selected short term strategic/priority 
investment projects.  Annex 4 provides a preliminary list of likely candidate investments 
that could be considered by the GoT.  The National Water Board will define criteria to be 
used to identify and select the priority investments to be funded under this sub-
component.  
 
Component 4 - National Level:  Support to Sector Institutional Strengthening and 
Capacity Building (estimated US$ 35.0 million): This component will provide: (i) 
support for operationalizing the new role of the Ministry of Water, including support for 
the development of the 10-year corporate strategy, technical assistance for corporate 
planning & MIS development and operational support for new offices, vehicles, office 
equipment, (ii) support to sub-sector planning and operational capacities (development of 
regulations and sub-sector operational procedures and guidelines-including 
environmental management monitoring), and sectoral policy, legal and institutional 
harmonization, (iii) support sector coordination and performance monitoring (including 
support for the Sector Working Group and National Water Board, annual sector reviews 
and stakeholder consultation, annual project technical and financial audits, development) 
and implementation of a communication strategy, (iv) support for sector capacity 
building - support for MoW staff and associated water related institutions, local private 
sector and Drilling and Dam Construction Agency, Water Resources Institute and other 
sector related training institutions, support for Community-Based Organisations (CBOs) 
and Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs), and support to the Energy and Water 
Utility Regulatory Authority (EWURA).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Nationwide - sub-projects are located in villages, towns, cities, and river basins 
throughout Tanzania.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTS2) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No significant safeguard issues or impacts have been identified or are expected. The 
ESMF and RPF provide mechanisms to identify impacts beyond the generic ones for 
which standard mitigation measures are built into planning and construction processes. A 
full EIA and environmental management plan will be prepared for Category A sub-
projects, in the unlikely event that they occur. Site specific EMPs will be prepared for all 
sub-projects to address generic issues as well as site specific ones which can not be 
eliminated through project re-design.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long-term impacts are anticipated as the environmental and social screening process 
will allow for the application of appropriate mitigating measures.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To address safeguard issues under this project, the Borrower has prepared the following 
documents:  
 
(i) An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to identify and 
assess potential impacts under Component 1, Component 2 and Component 3 including 
dam safety issues;  
 
(ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to address potential social impacts related 
to land acquisition and loss of assets under Component 1, component 2 and Component 
3; and  
Page  6
(iii) Riparian notification letters would be sent to riparian countries of anticipated water 
quantity or quality aspects precipitated by the project.  
 
An institutional and legal framework for environmental management, providing the 
basis for environmental impact assessment (EIA), cross-sectoral coordination, and 
integration of environmental management into local government planning processes, was 
approved by the cabinet in December 2002. Some of the major steps taken by the GOT 
for addressing environmental degradation and safeguards issues include the national 
environmental action plan (1994), the national environmental policy (1997) and 
Environmental Management Act (2005). Environmental impact assessment and audit 
regulations has been signed, while drafting of other environmental regulations, standards 
and guidelines that will allow smooth implementation of the Act are underway.  
 
The National Environmental Management Council (NEMC) is the key GOT oversight 
institution for addressing environmental/ safeguards issues. The capacity of NEMC is 
growing but remain inadequate for management of environmental issues in all sectors.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Local governments (district/community leaders and water and sanitation teams/ 
committees) and urban utilities (regional, district capitals and other small towns) will be 
the main stakeholders in the project. Selection of the sub-projects will be participatory 
and demand-driven.  
 
A
participatory approach will be taken in planning sub-projects. Water and Sanitation 
Teams/ Committees in towns/cities and villages, representative of the different socio-
economic groups in the community, will (be formed to) guide planning and 
implementation. During the planning process the Water and Sanitation Teams/ 
Committees, with the assistance of consultants, will involve the community in making 
decisions about system management and design. Participating communities will prepare 
Facilities and Management Plans that include Environmental/Social Baseline 
Assessments, Environmental Management Plans and Resettlement Action Plans as 
required for each sub-project. It will be disclosed to the community through focus group 
discussions and public meetings and will be appraised by the District WSS Committees. 
District/regional EPA will be involved in all social/environmental issues beyond generic 
ones addressed in standard sub-project implementation.  
 
The ESMF and RPF have been prepared in consultation with relevant stakeholders 
(government officials at the national, district and local levels and affected communities).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/11/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/22/2006 
 
Page  7
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/15/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
09/29/2006  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/11/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/22/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/15/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not Applicable.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
Yes 
Page  8
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Francis Ato Brown 
09/20/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye 
09/20/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo 
09/20/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
09/20/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Robert J. Roche 
09/20/2006 
Comments:   
