Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2579 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/14/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tanzania 
Project ID: P092898 
Project Name: Tanzania Public Service Reform Program (II) 
Task Team Leader: Denyse E. Morin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 7, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 3, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTPR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (80%);General public administration sector 
(20%) 
Theme: Administrative and civil service reform (P);Other public sector governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
26.00 
 
BELGIUM: MOFA-DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR INT. COOP.(DGIC)
 20.00 
 
CANADA: CANADIAN INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
(CIDA) 9.00 
 
DENMARK: DANISH INTL. DEV. ASSISTANCE (DANIDA)  9.00 
 
UK: BRITISH DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DFID)46.00
110.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
PSRPII will seek to enhance performance and accountability of public servants in central 
ministries, departments and agencies (MDAs) and thereby contribute to improvements in cost 
effective delivery of public services that meet the client needs in terms of quantity, quality and 
timely response.  Enhanced performance will be evidenced by: (i) improvements in the policy-
making and regulatory capacity of MDAs that will contribute to a more predictable and well 
regulated environment for service delivery institutions and the private sector to operate, 
measured by satisfaction surveys in the policy environment by private institutions, executive 
agencies and LGAs; (ii) support to greater decentralization of service delivery functions to local 
government authorities (LGAs) and executive agencies (EAs) ensuring cost-effective functioning 
Page  2
of government, measured by the increased level of citizen satisfaction with public service 
delivery; and (iii) greater access to information and responsiveness to the demands of 
stakeholders such as Parliament and the public that contributes to greater transparency and 
accountability of government and improved governance.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Government plans to develop PSRPII around the following key interventions: (i) building 
capacity for policy development and regulatory functions in central ministries and departments 
(MDAs) linked to decentralized service delivery institutions, (ii) improving human resources 
function in central MDAs to support policy and regulatory effectiveness, (iii) enhancing pay, 
incentives and rewards to attract and retain qualified and highly performing public servants, (iv) 
improving accountability of government to oversight and watchdog institutions and to the public, 
and (v) implementing change management interventions across the service. These are described 
further below.  PRSPII will require approximately US$150 million for its implementation.  
However, it is to be noted that these are very preliminary estimates that will need to be 
confirmed, particularly for e-government, the human capital management information system 
(HCMIS) and amount allocated towards the performance improvement fund (PIF) and the 
overall management, coordination of the program and change management interventions.  
 
1) Building capacity for policy development (approx. $5 million)  
 
This component will improve government policy responsiveness by building the capacity of the 
Cabinet Secretariat, MDAs in all areas of policy management (elaboration, analysis, monitoring 
and evaluation and regulatory functions).  Under PSRPI many service delivery functions of 
MDAs have been decentralized to executive agencies (EAs) and local government authorities 
(LGAs), and some have been privatized.  PSRP II will fund: (i) collaborative partnerships with 
policy think tanks; (ii) a program of capacity building in policy analysis and development for the 
Cabinet Secretariat and MDAs; and (iii) participatory policy development.  The expected results 
are:  policies that are effective, feasible and consistent within and across sectors; and MDAs that 
develop and oversee proactively the implementation of policies that support national 
development goals and strategies.  
 
2) Improving human resources (HR) function (approx. $92 million)  
 
This component will ensure that HR management systems are integrated into business functions 
in MDAs by using the HR performance management system developed under PSRP I but also 
introducing new aspects of e-goverment.  Interventions will include:  
 
(i) 
Decentralize HR functions such as recruitment, staff planning, deployment and reward 
management to MDAs to bring the HR function closer to the clients.  This should lead to optimal 
staffing levels within the MD that will take into account the objective of decentralization by 
devolution.  This component will also seek to have in place activities to combat actively 
HIV/AIDS in the workplace and to promote affirmative actions for disadvantaged groups.  
 
(ii) 
Institutionalize performance management systems and restructure MDAs to address the 
service delivery interface with executive agencies and LGAs.  This implies restructuring MDAs 
Page  3
and re-engineering business processes to take into account the interface. PSRPII will seek to 
review and customize performance management tools developed under phase I.  It will leverage 
information and communication technologies to enhance the use of performance management 
tools and in records management to ease decision-making. The program will support the 
construction of a national records center to facilitate improvements in records management and 
will pursue the implementation of improved records management at both central and local levels.  
PSRPII will also support the rollout of an integrated personnel and payroll system called the 
Human Capital Management Information System (HCMIS).  The project will support MDAs to 
prepare and implement information systems strategies to make full use of information and 
communication technologies towards improvement in service delivery.  
 
(iii) 
Implement a leadership development competency model for leaders in the public service.  
This will include transformation of the Tanzania Public Service College (TPSC) to a full staff 
college to train public service leaders and expansion of the Tanzania Global Distance Learning 
Center (TGDLC) by establishing regional centers to widen its coverage.  
 
Because of this component, there should be optimal and adequate staffing levels to support 
service delivery and thus effective and efficient use of human resources.  More transparent 
processes should result in the selection, recruitment, appointments, appraisal and promotion that 
will be fully based on merit.  The training interventions will result in improved knowledge, skills 
and job performance.  Approximately US$20 million will be devoted to these activities with the 
bulk going to the rollout of the HCMIS.  
 
3) Support to improvements in pay, incentives and non-monetary rewards (approx. $2 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to continue to improve the capacity of the public service to 
attract, recruit and retain an adequate number of qualified professionals to enable efficient and 
effective delivery of services.  Two major challenges need to be addressed to achieve pay policy 
targets established under PSRPI, i.e., (i) the trade-off between the need to increase frontline 
service delivery staff to keep pace with growing requirements for services and the need to pay 
adequately; and (ii) the appropriate size and structure of government that is required to deliver 
public services.  PSRP II seeks to review the planning and budgeting framework to allow 
flexibility in allocation of resources between personnel emoluments and other charges in MDAs.  
The program will also develop at the central level, a performance-based rewards and incentive 
system.  Consequently, the government will be able to recruit and retain a high level of 
competence and talent and MDAs will be able to better motivate their staff.  
 
4) Strengthen accountability and responsiveness of public institutions (approx. $8 million)  
 
To ensure the public service is accountable and responsive to the public, PSRP II will 
strengthen horizontal and vertical accountability systems to improve integrity within the public 
service.  The program will develop the capacity of the public service commission to enable it to 
undertake its oversight function effectively.  It will also support implementation of information 
education and communication programs to improve the interface with the public.  GOT intends 
to strengthen monitoring and evaluation systems and implement compliance frameworks for the 
public service code of ethics.  
Page  4
Because of these interventions, citizens and clients will be increasingly aware of the availability 
of public services, their rights to access them.  Their capacity to demand services will have 
improved.  Public servants will listen better and share more readily information.  Overall public 
servants will be more accountable for service delivery results.  
 
5) Support to program implementation and change management (approx. $40 million)  
 
This component has the objective of ensuring timely and cost effective delivery of PSRP II 
outputs and increased awareness of the program results among all stakeholders.  To achieve this, 
the program will support PO-PSM?s engagement with ministries and departments to ensure they 
are able to adopt and implement the proposed change program.  It will also support 
improvements in monitoring and evaluation, information, education and communication 
function.  The program will support institutional mechanisms for coordination of reforms both 
within PO-PSM and across the public sector.  
 
The PSRPII will deepen the operationalisation of the performance improvement fund (PIF) that 
will allow MDAs to access funds for demand-driven performance improvements.  The ongoing 
impact evaluation of the present PIF will guide the detailed design of the Fund.  GOT envisages 
that approximately US$25 million could go towards the PIF.  Phase II will pay greater attention 
to institutionalizing M&E at the MDA-level and centrally in PO-PSM to report on achievements 
of outcomes.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Dar es Salaam   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project will be implemented by the President's Office Public Service Management (PO-
PSM).  Studies to prepare an environmental and social management framework and a 
resettlement policy framework for the national records center were undertaken in the context of 
the preparation of the Accountability, Transparency and Integrity Project (P07544).  These 
studies make recommendations on capacity building of the PO-PSM to better manage the 
interventions proposed in the environmental and social management and resettlement policy 
frameworks.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is expected to trigger environmental assessment (OP/BO 4.01) due to the 
construction of a national records center. Studies on an environmental and social management 
framework and resettlement policy framework have been done under the Accountability 
Transparency and Integrity Project (P079544) project preparation facility.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The expected construction of a national records center will trigger involuntary resettlement 
(OP/BP 4.12).  A resettlement policy framework study has been done under the Accountability, 
Transparency and Integrity Project (P070544) project preparation facility   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/24/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.  An environmental 
and social management framework and a resettlement policy framework were prepared under 
the project preparation facility for the Accountability, Transparency and Integrity Project 
(P070544).  These documents will be retitled to reflect the current project and disclosed 
before appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Denyse E. Morin 
12/13/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
12/13/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helga W. Muller 
12/13/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
