Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2567 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/11/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tanzania 
Project ID: P098496 
Project Name: Science, Technology and Higher Education Reform program 
Task Team Leader: Arun R. Joshi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 25, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 13, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTH1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Tertiary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1. 
The Project Development Objective is to help produce more and better qualified 
graduates and technicians in strategic disciplines of economic relevance required to meet the 
national development objectives of the MKUKUTA.  Quantitative indicators will be chosen 
which can measure the output of graduates in specific high priority disciplines.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
2. 
Component 1: Quality enhancement and expansion of capacity in strategic areas.  The 
interventions will target activities in relevant public higher learning institutions that can 
contribute towards attaining a critical mass of skilled workers at degree and technician levels.  
The interventions would aim at supporting the critical economic and social sectors, and 
particularly those related to the major sources of growth.  
 
3. 
Sub-component 1A Institutional Investment Projects in Identified Strategic Disciplines: 
Initial priority will be given to interventions (a) that are in line with the national development 
agenda and (b) in those disciplines that can yield and/or allow quick results.  Activities will 
primarily support scientific and other equipment and staff development, and also civil works 
(including rehabilitation) if justified.  Universities currently providing programs in the areas 
Page  2
identified will be asked during preparation to collaborate to develop detailed proposals for how 
they reach specific objectives for each area. This will help ensure that the investments are built 
upon existing capacities and this will help ensure that they can be realized in a short period.  
 
4. 
The first selection is likely to be made among the following: (i) Teacher training  for the 
expanded secondary and tertiary education system, particularly for maths, science and languages;  
(ii) Graduate  studies in the sciences and education;  (iii) Minerals processing and marketing; (iv) 
Tourism and hospitality industry; (v) Conventional and renewable energy;  (vi)  Information and 
communication technology; (vii) Transportation systems;  (viii) Food science and technology for 
value addition of agro products;  (ix) Textile technology for value addition of agro-products;  (x) 
Bio-medical technology;  (xi) Manufacturing systems;(xii)  Agricultural production;  (xiii)  
Lands valuation  and management;  (xiv)Water, sanitation and environmental management;  (xv) 
Building  materials science and technology;  and (xvi) Business skills and entrepreneurship. 
Once these areas have been prioritized, a selection will be made of those for immediate 
intervention.  
 
5. 
Sub-component 1B Competitive Fund to Support Institutional Program Development in 
Strategic Areas.  The objective will be to improve quality, and expansion in the strategic 
disciplines.  A fund will provide a mechanism to support important smaller scale interventions 
which are not identified during project preparation.  It will focus on strategic areas relevant for 
economic growth. This fund will be open to all accredited higher education institutions. Draft 
criteria and selection modalities have already been developed and these will be agreed during 
preparation.  Tentatively, criteria are likely to focus on:  (i) Relevance for economically strategic 
areas;  (ii) Scientific an/or technological Quality of the proposal;  (iii) Human Resource 
Development Activities; and (iv) Track Record of the academic staff and existing programs.  
 
6. 
Sub-component 1C Human Resource Development to Enhance Capacity for Production 
of Skills.  In order to increase the pool of high level skills and academic staff, a set of programs 
are proposed to train and attract academic staff in the priority disciplines. This includes programs 
such as:  (i) Post-graduate and under-graduate training scholarships for study abroad, sandwich 
programs, and local training.  This could include scholarships for PhD and Masters level 
programs for study abroad in strategic areas, and also incentives for students domestically in 
selected strategic areas. These programs are likely to be nationally managed scholarship 
programs;  and (ii) At the institutional level,  programs will be developed to upgrade skills of 
existing academic staff;  and develop programs to attract international academics to work in 
priority areas in  Tanzanian institutions.  
 
7. 
Sub-Component 1D Increased Availability of Print Materials for All Subjects.  This 
includes:  (i) Upgrading and  updating libraries and sharing of such resources across institutions; 
and (ii) Review of textbook policies, including availability, use, and financing.  
 
8. 
Component 2:  Capacity Building.  Four programs are envisaged here as follows:  
 
Page  3
9. 
Sub-component 2A: Support Key Systems Management Agencies to better perform 
according their core objectives and mandate. Significant legislative achievements has taken place 
over the last few years and there is now in place a robust framework of regulations and 
institutions.  The challenge is to make these institutions technically effective. This will include:  
(i) Programs to further develop the capabilities of systems managers at MHEST agencies in 
selected areas. This could include supporting the development of quality assurance mechanisms 
at the Tanzania Commission for Universities (TCU) and at the National Accreditation Council 
for Technical Education (NACTE), supporting student intake coordination at TCU, supporting 
technical analysis of Students Loans Board issues (SLB), and other targeted interventions at the 
Commission for Science and Technology (COSTECH); and (ii) Reviewing mechanisms to 
enhance linkages between the higher learning institutions and the labor market, including 
strategic assessments of skills demand in the economy, and concomitant mechanisms for 
curriculum adjustments;  
 
10. 
Sub-component 2B:  Institutional-Level Management and Capacity Building to enable 
regulatory institutions to network and discharge their functions more efficiently.  This would 
include support for management interventions for executives at institutions of higher learning;  
 
11. 
Sub-component 2C:  Establishment Of a National Virtual Private Network/ICT (VPN) 
(TENET) that links all the higher and technical institutions in Tanzania (public and private) as 
well as R&D institutions.  This will ensure that all institutions are able to use a common internet 
gateway, and help in the sharing of electronic databases access.  The option of contracting out 
the network management to a private provider will also be explored. This network may facilitate 
cheaper inter-institutional communication via VOIP as well as localization of internet traffic. 
The network will also connect MHEST, HEIs and agencies into one WAN; and  
 
12. 
Sub-component 2D. Introduce an Efficient Management Information System for the 
Sector,   including ?smart-card or plastic money? type multi-purpose student IDs for all HEIs.  
This will enhance the capability of MHEST to supervise the operations of its institutions and 
agencies, create human resources databases, library access as well as student records.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Tanzania: This is a national program that will focus on higher learning institutions.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project implementation will be led by the Ministry of Higher Education, Science and 
technology (MHEST), though many of the sub-components will be directly implemented by the 
University institutions.  Both the Ministry and the institutions have capacity to ensure that 
appropriate guidelines and policies are being implemented.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Construction of Univeristy infrastructure.  Extensions of existing facilities - new facilities on 
new land not expected.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Will be triggered only if new land will be acquired for construction by institutions - to be 
determined prior to appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared prior to 
appraisal. If it is determined that new land will be acquired for construction, then a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared prior to appraisal. 
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ivar Strand 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Dzingai B. Mutumbuka 
 
Comments:   
