Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/12/2007 
Report No.:  AC2898
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tanzania 
Project ID:  P092898 
Project Name:  Tanzania Public Service Reform Program (II) 
Task Team Leader:  Denyse E. Morin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 25, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: September 27, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTPR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (80%);General public administration sector 
(20%) 
Theme:  Administrative and civil service reform (P);Other public sector governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
26.00 
 
BELGIUM: MOFA-Directorate-General for Int. Coop.(DGIC) 
20.00 
 
CANADA: Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) 9.00 
 
DENMARK: Danish Intl. Dev. Assistance (DANIDA) 
9.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  46.00
110.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
To enhance capacity, performance and accountability of MDAs in the use of public 
resources and service delivery to levels consistent with timely and effective 
implementation of the strategic and priority programs under the MKUKUTA.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Government has developed PRAP around the seven key interventions (components) 
briefly described below:  
 
(i) 
Structures and systems to facilitate service delivery  
 
(ii) 
Policy development  
 
(iii) 
Pay, incentives and rewards  
 
(iv) 
Responsiveness and accountability  
 
(v) 
Systems to manage public servants  
 
(vi) Leadership 
development 
 
Page  2
(vii) 
Change management and reform coordination  
 
Component 1:  Structures and Systems to Facilitate Service Delivery (US$ 35.2 million)  
 
Under this component, the Government plans to: (i) institutionalize performance 
management systems; (ii) restructure MDAs and re-engineer service delivery; (iii) 
continue to outsource internal non-core services; (iv) promote e-government and 
knowledge management systems with a particular focus on enhancing access to basic 
services by the poor; and (v) continue to improve records management.  Consolidating 
these systems will provide a strong foundation for public service organizations to meet 
the MKUKUTA objectives.  
 
Institutionalize Performance management systems.  Under PRAP, emphasis will be to 
ensure that the elements of performance management are internalized, applied and 
customized according to the needs of individual MDAs by providing good practice tools 
for strategic planning, open performance appraisal and client service charters.  PO-PSM 
will support the customization of the strategic planning process and M&E processes for 
both MDAs and EAs.  In addition management standards will be updated.  
 
Restructure MDAs and re-engineer service delivery. Organizational restructuring of the 
public service will be implemented in order to improve service delivery and government 
operations.  PO-PSM in collaboration with MDAs will seek opportunities to continue to 
streamline the central government to focus mainly on policy development, regulatory 
functions, public safety and security.  Service delivery to the public will continue to shift 
closer to the people.  Reorganization of public service has been ongoing and will 
continue to take place through further decentralization, creation of more EAs and by re-
engineering business processes.  
 
Continue to outsource internal non-core services.  The Government will continue to 
identify services that can be outsourced to private sector providers.  While the focus has 
been on outsourcing generic services such as security and office cleaning, during PRAP 
MDAs will identify opportunities for outsourcing non-generic services.  
 
Promote e-government and knowledge management systems.  The e Government 
initiative aims to develop the capacity of PO-PSM to harness e-Government opportunities 
in improving the delivery of public services.  The Bank has a regional initiative, Regional 
Communication Infrastructure Project 
–TA (RCIP) through which it would support the 
development of e-Government infrastructure for Tanzania.  Therefore, the focus of 
support under the PRAP will be limited to: (i) development and implementation of 
organizational arrangements for managing e-Government, (ii) capacity building, 
including human resources management in support of e-Government, (iii) preparations 
for enhanced e-Government services, and (iv) capacity development of an e-Government 
executive agency, which under the oversight of PO-PSM, will guide, support and oversee 
the use of ICT across Government in future.  
 
Continue to improve records management.  Work on improving records management 
and decongestion in the storage of files has been an important feature of PSRPI.One of 
the critical elements in achieving further improvements is the establishment of a National 
Page  3
Records Center (NRC).  As part of the Accountability, Transparency and Integrity Project 
(ATIP) initial preparation for the establishment of a NRC has been undertaken including 
a
feasibility study and detailed construction designs as well as an environmental impact 
assessment. PRAP will extend this effort by facilitating construction and equipping the 
centre.  The centre will provide space for storing non-current records and thus make it 
possible to utilize registry space more effectively in MDAs and LGAs.  This will enhance 
the access and retrieval of information while improving the working environment of 
records personnel and records users.  PRAP will essentially focus on facilitating MDAs 
in charge of specialized records systems to take the lead in the reform of their records 
management systems.  The interventions will also help to integrate paper records reforms 
with ICT tools; and to professionalize the personnel who handle records
—from clerks to 
managers.  
 
Component 2:  Policy Development (US$ 5.5 million)  
 
Government is reviewing its policy development and coordination functions in order to 
identify bottlenecks in the policy process and improve on it.  The Cabinet Secretariat is 
leading this exercise with support from PO-PSM.  PRAP acknowledges the importance of 
policy development capacities both at central level and in the ministries as a vital 
function that influences the implementation of key government priorities.  Some capacity 
was put in place in the MDAs under phase I but remains generally inadequate.  
 
The component intends to: (i) strengthen central institutions and the Cabinet Secretariat 
in all aspects of policy management (from development to M&E); (ii) enhance policy 
development and regulatory capacities within MDAs; and (iii) improve the climate for 
participatory policy formulation and development.  
 
Strengthen Central institutions and the Cabinet Secretariat in policy development.  
Measures will be taken to improve processes based on the review mentioned above.  
They will relate to policy formulation, scrutiny, evaluation and coordination of the policy 
process.  Capacity development packages to strengthen policy development, quality 
assurance and evaluation will be implemented in central ministries and agencies.  
 
Enhance policy development and regulatory capacities within MDAs.  MDAs will seek 
to collaborate with local research organizations and think tanks to create learning 
networks that will support their policy development capacity.  Lastly, structures and 
staffing patterns in all sector ministries will be reviewed to better align them with their 
core functions of policy management and regulation.  
 
By the end of PRAP, the quality of policies will have improved and they will be more 
realistic and consistent within and across sectors.  Moreover, MDAs will have learnt to 
develop and oversee implementation of policies that support national development goals 
and strategies.  Finally, there will be an improved M&E system for policy 
implementation that will operational within the Cabinet Secretariat.  
 
Component 3:  Pay, Incentives and Rewards (US$ 3.3 million)  
Page  4
In 2000, the Government adopted a Medium-Term Pay Policy (MTPP) as part of the 
PSRP.  The policy guides decisions on pay across Government, including MDAs and 
LGAs.  To implement the policy, a Medium-Term Pay Reform Strategy (MTPRS) has 
been adopted.  It includes the following features:  (i) a medium-term target salary 
structure that systematically enhances pay for all public servants; (ii) a job evaluation and 
re-grading exercise to facilitate improved link between pay and performance; and (iii) a 
Selective Accelerated Salary Enhancement (SASE) scheme, targeting key professional, 
technical and managerial personnel occupying strategic position within government.  
 
Progress has been slower than anticipated but in July 2006, at the turn of the 2006/07 
financial year, significant increases in pay were realized, and pay targets were almost 
met.  Work on the consolidation of remunerative allowances into salaries, which started 
in the mid-1990s to achieve a more transparent pay structure, has not been completed.  
SASE, was terminated for reasons related to equity.  Annex 1 describe in more details the 
accomplishments and challenges of pay reform.  
 
The present government has prioritized public service pay reform.  On the inauguration 
of the “Fourth Phase Parliament”  the President said:  
 
“I am aware that pay levels in the public service remain a concern.  We will look at it.  I 
intend, as soon as possible, to establish a Commission on Public Service Remunerations 
that I will task to produce short, medium and long term strategies to improve pay levels 
and other benefits”.  
 
In May 2006, the President appointed a Presidential Pay Commission to work closely 
with PO-PSM to find solutions to the issue of remuneration.  This component will 
support the implementation of Commission’s recommendations, not yet known, and the 
subsequent decisions of Government.  
 
The basic goal of the interventions under this component is to accelerate the pace of pay 
reform in the context of the MTPS to enable Government to recruit and retain a critical 
mass of technical and professional personnel, as well as to motivate the entire public 
service.  This remains a critical objective of the overall PSRP.  
 
Key interventions to address the challenges in pay will include (i) supporting 
government in designing a performance-based rewards and incentive scheme; (ii) setting 
up a flexible system for resource allocation between personnel emoluments and other 
charges; (iii) supporting the implementation of the recommendations of the Presidential 
Commission on Pay; and (iv) establishing clear guidelines for the use of allowances that 
will remove present distortions.  
 
Key outcomes will include: (i) decisions made on pay through new institutional 
arrangements on a yearly basis; (ii) increasingly transparent remuneration; and (iii) 
steady improvements in the salaries of public servants based on a revised pay reform 
strategy.  
 
Component 4:  Responsiveness and accountability to the public (US$ 8.6 million)  
Page  5
Despite the installation of mechanisms for securing enhanced levels of accountability in 
the public service at both institutional and individual levels, of the issue of accountability 
remains.  Systems and tools for strategic planning, open performance review and 
appraisal and client service charters are nevertheless in place.  New rules and regulations 
for securing enhanced discipline and ethical conduct within the public service have been 
approved.  
 
PRAP will seek to enhance accountability:  (i) to citizens, (ii) across government; and 
(iii) within each organization.  This will be done through the provision of information, the 
development of legal instruments, and the development of systems, processes, and 
procedures.  Strategically, the program will build the capacity of key government 
institutions of accountability, e.g., the Ethics Secretariat, Prevention of Corruption 
Bureau (PCB) and the Public Service Commission.In addition to creating frameworks for 
internal government accountability, and reporting requirements, PSRP will promote 
demand-driven accountability by working with a wide range of non-state actors.  
 
The main interventions planned under this component are to:  (i) strengthen the demand 
side of accountability for service delivery; (ii) create and enhance channels for feedback 
from citizens and clients; (iii) improve the capacity of ethics oversight and compliance 
institutions; (iv) strengthen internal accountability mechanisms within Government; (v) 
promote ethical conduct in the public service; (vi) enhance the capacity of the Public 
Service Commission in the performance of its oversight role and functions.  
 
Strengthening the demand side of accountability for service delivery. PRAP will create 
forums for citizens to interact with Government to offer views and suggestions, and help 
explain government policies and services to other clients and citizens.  The Information, 
Education and Communication (IEC) activities within MDAs will be strengthened so that 
they inform the public about public services more effectively and receive and take into 
account feedback from citizens.  A reporting framework will require MDAs to report on 
their performance results to the public periodically and to collect views from the public in 
order to adjust their activities accordingly.  
 
Create and enhance channels for feedback from citizens and clients.  PRAP aims at 
improving the process of handling feedback including complaints and grievances from 
clients and citizens within MDAs.  To ensure the smooth handling of feedback and 
complaints from clients and public, a Complaints and Grievances Handling Mechanism 
which is currently being tried in 5 MDAs will be introduced in all MDAs.  Other 
measures are also being considered, including citizens’ report cards.  
 
Strengthen the capacity of ethics oversight and compliance institutions.  Government 
will introduce a comprehensive and coherent accountability regime to enable departments 
and agencies to strengthen their management capacity and improve performance.  An 
Institutional Accountability Framework will be developed and used by MDAs.  The 
framework will demand that MDAs report to the President and the public on agreed 
indicators and rewards and sanctions will form elements of the framework.  
Page  6
Promote ethical conduct in the public service.  Efforts to make public service employees 
comply to the rules and practices of the service will be increased.  While efforts to 
educate employees on ethics will continue, the focus will be to operationalize a 
compliance framework that will focus on promoting discipline.  
 
Strengthen the capacity of the Public Service Commission (PSC) in the performance of 
the oversight role and functions.  PO-PSM will undertake a restructuring review for the 
PSC.  It will expand, improve and implement the HR compliance inspection routine. 
Furthermore, the PSC will elaborate its plan to improve its capacity to put in place a more 
transparent public service.  
 
This component will result in citizen and clients being increasingly aware of the 
availability of public services and rights to access them with a public service that is more 
responsive.  Public service managers will share more freely information and will be more 
accountable for results.  
 
Component 5:  Systems for managing public servants (US$ 23.3 million)  
 
PSRPI focused on modernizing systems to manage public servants.  A key intervention 
was the adoption of the Public Service Management and Employment Policy, which 
articulated the principles to be adopted in improving the way public servants are 
managed. PSRPI operationalized the policy.  This component will continue to deepen and 
make available appropriate HR systems and tools that effectively enable MDAs to have 
an optimal, adequate and competent staffing capacity.  
 
The component will implement the following interventions:  (i) strengthening and 
decentralizing HR processes and systems, especially in terms of recruitment, appraisal, 
HR planning  and training; (ii) combating HIV/AIDS in the workplace; (iii) taking 
affirmative measures in favor of disadvantaged groups in public service; (iv) 
strengthening the management of HR information; (v) transforming HR administrators 
into HR managers; (vi) strengthening local training institutions to provide the courses 
needed for improving public service performance.  
 
Strengthening and decentralizing HR processes and systems.  The policies and 
regulatory frameworks are already in place.  Phase II of PSRP will institutionalise Human 
resource planning that will ensure the public service has the capacities and competencies 
needed to meet its strategic and operational objectives.  This will entail that policies, laws 
and regulations and systems are reviewed and revised.  MDAs will put in place 
mechanisms to manage better their human resources and report on their challenges and 
opportunities.  
 
Combating HIV/AIDS in the workplace.  The Government has formulated a policy for 
managing HIV/AIDS in the public service.  It has to be translated into guidelines on 
designing HIV/AIDS interventions at work places.  Accordingly PO-PSM, in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Health (MOH) and Tanzania Commission for AIDS 
Page  7
(TACAIDs) will facilitate MDAs to better plan these interventions and to make them 
more relevant and effective.  
 
Taking affirmative measures in favor of disadvantaged groups.  The challenge is to take 
necessary steps to extend diversity interventions among the population and, where 
appropriate and necessary, take affirmative measures in favour of those affected groups.  
Capacity development strategies and activities will take into consideration
 GOT’s 
commitment as outlined in the Tanzania National Strategy for Gender Equality.  In 
addition, guidelines for the management of disability in the public service are anticipated 
to be completed in 2006/07.  Following this, (1) awareness needs to be created, (2) and 
MDAs need to design interventions to ensure their workplaces are conducive to 
physically-challenged people.  Work is presently ongoing to address the issue of diversity 
throughout the reform program and more specifically how each of the components of 
PRAP can contribute to enhancing diversity.  Once the study is completed, its 
recommendations will be translated into specific interventions.  
 
Strengthening the management of HR information.  Work to put in place a 
comprehensive Human Resource Management Information System (HRMIS) has been 
going on over Phase 1 and has presented substantial challenges despite positive results in 
salary administration. Activities under Phase II include:  (i) physical payroll inspection 
and annual audit in all MDAs and local authorities; (ii) the HCMIS reviewed, expanded 
in accordance with business processes review and decentralized; and (iii) improved 
personnel records management system.  It is expected that the system will provide a 
“global view” of available human resources and therefore will enable MDAs and central 
agencies to move from a record-keeping personnel function to human resource and 
knowledge management.  
 
Transforming HR administrators into HR managers.  Many MDAs and LGAs continue 
to use their personnel and administrative officers as “clerks of works” or “welfare 
officers”.  HR Departments do not undertake strategic HRM functions such as integrating 
HRM to the strategic plans of their organizations, human resource planning, preparation 
of need-based training and development plans, and performance review and evaluations.  
Programmes to emphasize the importance of HR in the success of an organization as well 
as to teach top officers how to better manage their HR will be offered.  Other capacity 
building interventions are envisaged.  
 
Strengthening local training institutions.  For the government to transform the public 
service into a pool of skilled, experienced employees there is a need to strengthen and 
expand the capacity of local training institutions including both the Tanzania Public 
Service College (TPSC) and the Tanzania Global Distance Learning Centre (TGDLC).  
Since both institutions are supposed to be independent eventually, during this phase the 
Government will also take measures to gradually ensure the sustainability of their 
operations.  
 
As a result of this component, the public service will benefit from optimal and adequate 
staffing levels to effectively support service delivery; human resources will be efficiently 
Page  8
and effectively used; the public service will be staffed with up-to-date skills and 
competence and these will be continuously upgraded; HIV-AIDS will have been 
adequately addressed in the service; recruitment processes will result in the selection of 
the best available candidates in a diverse public service.  Finally, recruitment, 
appointment, appraisals, and promotions will be based on merit.  
 
Component 6:  Leading the Future Public Service (US$ 16.5 million)  
 
During PSRPI leadership was addressed as an issue relating to training.  During PRAP 
the focus will be on identifying, creating and developing leaders for the public service.  
Training will only be one of many inputs.  Nevertheless the lessons learnt from the 
leadership-related training will be integrated into PRAP leadership development program.  
PRAP will identify key competencies for public service leaders and use this competency 
framework to identify individuals with potential for leadership positions. Moreover, the 
component will seek innovative ways to engage leadership in strategic thinking and 
supporting the long-term vision of government.  The program will also set up a Senior 
Executive Service into which officers above certain levels in all cadres will belong.  This 
will also be complemented by a senior executive succession plan.  GOT will also seek to 
establish innovative approaches to sustainable leadership development.  
 
This intervention will: (i) identify, develop and nurture leadership capacity of public 
service managers; (ii) recognize and reward exemplary leadership; and (iii) transform the 
TPSC into a fully-fledged staff college.  This component will examine how best to use 
both, the TPSC and the TGDLC to expand further access to innovative training and ways 
of doing things.  The use of the TGDLC will promote throughout the country some 
important views on the program.  
 
As a result of these interventions, there will be leaders who envision and initiate 
strategic changes, are entrepreneurial and facilitate the realization of the national 
development goals, promulgated in MKUKUTA; leaders will inspire, guide, and manage 
their organisations to improve service delivery and demonstrate accountability, integrity 
and transparency.  
 
Component 7:  Change management and reform coordination (US$ 11.2 million)  
 
The current PSRP implementation arrangements have proven to be successful and will 
continue for PRAP.  However, PRAP will be more MDA-driven and integrated with 
other reforms.  In addition, PO-PSM will design a plan that ensures the sustainability of 
the program through succession planning and development of the necessary capacity of 
senior public servants.  A capacity building plan will be implemented with specific 
outputs and outcomes to be achieved within a time-bound action plan.  Technical 
assistance will be focused on specialized skills that are not readily available within the 
public service.  In cases, where PO-PSM believes that it can hire under contract the 
necessary skills, it will be for a well-defined period with a view to absorbing these skills 
within the service and pay from government’s own resources.  
 
The objective of this component is to ensure that the outputs of the reform are being 
realized in an efficient and effective manner.  Under this component, support will be 
Page  9
provided to PO-PSM to effectively manage the PSRP.  This will include capacity 
development activities to build the relevant competencies of PO-PSM staff to effectively 
support MDAs.  Resources have also been provided under this component to support 
MDAs in implementing PRAP interventions contained in their strategic plans. In 
addition, support will be provided for initiating the dialogue with the Government of 
Zanzibar on public service reforms.  
 
This component will include the following interventions:  (i) continue to build PO-
PSM's capacity to manage and implement reforms; (ii) integrate effectively PSRP 
reforms interventions into MDAs sector strategies; (iii) coordinate and harmonize public 
sector reforms; (iv) strengthen the awareness, participation and commitment to PSRP at 
all levels; (v) ensure that PO-PSM provides administrative support services for the 
PRAP, i.e., procurement and accounting; and (vi) support public service reforms in 
Zanzibar.  
 
The expected outcomes of this component will be: (i) a PSRP implementation process 
owned and predominantly driven by MDAs; (ii) collaboration and coordination realized 
amongst public sector reforms; and (iii) strategic communication creating awareness and 
appreciation of the PSRP across all levels of Government.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project activities will be mainly in Dar es Salaam.  The site for the construction of 
the National Records Center building is in Dodoma.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
National Records Center  
Page  10
Division of Records and Archives Management of PO-Public Service Management 
currently operates a temporary Record Centre in Dar es Salaam. In line with on-going 
decongestion and sorting of records of the Ministries, Departments and Agencies 
(MDAs), the government is planning to construct a new National Records Center in 
Dodoma in order to deal with semi-current records of the URT and provide ready access 
to the records. The building will be a double storey storage block.  
 
PO-PSM through its Division of Records and Archives Management has been allocated 
a
plot by the Capital Development Authority (CDA) for construction of the new National 
Records Centre within the Dodoma Municipality. CDA possess an overall Statutory 
Right of Occupancy and holds a Title Deed with 99 years of Tenure that cover over 30 
km radius from the Dodoma Municipal center. Subsequently, CDA will issue a Sub-Title 
Deed to the PO-PSM.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Although the plot already allocated to PO-PSM for the National Records Center did not 
involve resettlement/compensation of previous owners/users, it is important for PO-PSM 
to review the processes that were followed in acquiring the plot in order to ensure that the 
process followed adhered to the Tanzania land laws, WB safeguard policies in the event 
that the construction of the new building leads to unforeseen loss of livelihoods and other 
impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An environmental and social management framework and a resettlement policy 
framework were prepared by the borrower and approved by national environmental 
management agency.  This was undertaken during preparation of the Accountability, 
Transparency and Integrity Project P070544.  These two documents have been approved 
by the national environmental management council, and have been disclosed at the 
project location, which is the Zonal Records Center in Dodoma, PO-PSM, Tanzania 
Public Information Center at the Tanzania Global Distance Learning Center, the National 
Environmental Management Council, Directorate of Records and Archives and at the 
Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. A notice has been placed in the widely 
read english and kiswahili newspapers informing the general public of the availability of 
these documents which includes a contact address for any inquiries related to the project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include the communities living in proximity to the plot for the national 
records center, the Dodoma municipal council, national construction council and the 
national environmental management council   
Page  11
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/07/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/18/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/07/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/18/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  12
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Denyse E. Morin 
06/08/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye 
06/08/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guenter Heidenhof 
06/11/2007 
Comments:  I concur with the assessment of the Safeguard Specialist of the Project Team. 
