Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/23/2006 
Report No.:  AC2344
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tanzania 
Project ID:  P099738 
Project Name:  Local Government Support Project - Scale-up 
Task Team Leader:  Matthew D. Glasser 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTU1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (85%);General water, sanitation and 
flood protection sector (10%);Roads and highways (5%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (P);Municipal governance and institution building (P);Access 
to urban services and housing (P);Municipal finance (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
98.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.30
2.30 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Development Objectives of the Local Government Support Program (LGSP) - Scale 
Up are the same as for the existing LGSP:  
 
(i) to strengthen fiscal decentralization, improve accountability in the use of local 
government resources, and improve management of the intergovernmental transfer 
system; and  
 
(ii)  to increase access to infrastructure and services in unplanned areas of Dar es 
Salaam and to improve their operations and maintenance.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project comprises three components:  
 
-
Component 1: Support for the local government capital development grant (LGCDG) 
system;  
 
-
Component 2: Dar es Salaam Upgrading and Institutional Strengthening; and  
 
-
Component 3: Support to PO-RALG (now PMO-RALG)   
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Component 1:  
 
The original project supports 41 local governments in rural and urban areas in various 
regions of the country (Tanga, Morogoro, Kilimanjaro, Arusha, Mwanza, Kagera, 
Tabora, Singida, Iringa, Mbeya, Ruvuma, Rukwa, Lindi, Mara, and Dar es Salaam). The 
additional financing provided in this scale-up will be available to local governments 
throughout mainland Tanzania.  
 
Only those local authorities that meet certain conditions will receive funding for 
investment in sub-projects. Qualifying local authorities will only be determined by an 
annual assessment process. The particular sub-projects the qualifying local authorities 
will invest in will be identified through a demand-driven planning process at the local 
level. It is therefore not possible to indicate, at this stage which local authorities will 
receive funding or the nature and location of the sub-projects in which they will invest.  
 
Component 2:  
 
This component of the original project supports upgrading of community infrastructure 
in 16 communities in low-income, unplanned and underserved areas in Dar es Salaam, 
namely, in the Municipalities of Ilala, Temeke, and Kinondoni. No additional financing is 
provided as a result of this scale-up project.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Under Component 1, local authorities will access modest amounts of capital funding for 
expenditure on the development of local infrastructure and services in priority sectors 
such as education, health, water, local roads, and on basic urban services, such as refuse 
removal. Potential environmental and social impacts due to infrastructure sub-projects are 
likely to include soil erosion, water and soil pollution, loss of vegetation, and the need for 
land acquisition. In addition, unsafe medical waste management may further exacerbate 
environmental pollution and may have negative effects on public health due to the 
transmission of the HIV/AIDS virus through the public's contact with medical waste 
disposed on public dump sites. Component 2 focuses on the upgrading of infrastructure 
and services in low income unplanned areas of Dar es Salaam. No additional financing 
for component 2 is provided under this scale-up project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long-term impacts are antecipated as the environmental and social screening process 
will allow for the application of appropriate mitigating measures.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The treatment of alternatives under the project was not required in view of its 
development objectives.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To address safeguard issues, the Borrower has prepared the following documents:  
 
(i)  an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to identify and 
assess potential impacts under Component 1;  
 
(ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to address potential social impacts related 
to land acquisition and loss of assets under Component 1.  
 
(iii)a Community Environmental Management Plan (CEMP) to ensure mitigation of 
potential impacts under Component 2; and  
 
(iv) a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) to compensate persons affected by infrastructure 
investments under Component 2.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
LGAs and communities will be the main stakeholders in the project. Selection of the sub-
projects will be participatory and demand-driven. For Component 1, Development Plans 
prepared through a participatory process will define priorities for investment. For 
Component 2, community participation was part of the component design and 
communities were involved in decision-making through the entire process of preparing 
Page  4
Community Upgrading Plans, including decisions related to capital cost contribution, 
direct participation during project implementation, and arrangements for subsequent 
operation and maintenance.  
 
The ESMF, RPF, CEMP, and RAP were prepared in consultation with relevant 
stakeholders government officials at the national and local levels and affected 
communities).  
 
The aforementioned documents were disclosed in Tanzania on August 25, 2004, and 
were advertised in the newspapers. The documents were disclosed at the Bank's Info 
Shop on August 31, 2004.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/09/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/25/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/31/2004 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/09/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/25/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/31/2004 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
NA   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Yes 
Page  5
Manager review the plan? 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Matthew D. Glasser 
05/23/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
05/23/2006 
Comments:   
