Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/21/2006 
Report No.:  AC2357
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tanzania 
Project ID:  P100314 
Project Name:  Tax Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader:  Ravi Ruparel 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 19, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTFS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Tax policy and administration (P);Law reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
12.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00 
 
DENMARK: DANISH INTL. DEV. ASSISTANCE (DANIDA)  8.00 
 
UK: BRITISH DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DFID)11.60
21.60 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The PDO is to promote an effective and efficient tax administration that provides high 
quality customer services with fairness and integrity.   
 
3. Project Description 
The TMP as a repeater project seeks to build on the activities of the Tax Administration 
Project (TAP) and deepen the reforms.  It has been designed to reflect the five (5) 
strategic goals of the Tanzania Revenue Authority (TRA) corporate plan.  
 
Strategic Goal 1: Improve revenue collection in a cost effective way: Narrow the 
revenue gap, improve the tax structure, and deepen the modernization of customs 
arrangements.  
 
Strategic Goal 2: Full integration of TRA operations: Integrate processes and 
procedures, strengthen the Large Taxpayer's Department; provide additional information 
technology infrastructure, introduce e-filing, roll out the Asycuda++ system for customs, 
and strengthen the Domestic Revenue Department.  
Page  2
Strategic Goal 3: Provision of high quality and responsive customer service: Develop 
taxpayer education programs, roll out district one stop centers, promulgate a taxpayer?s 
charter, establish quality management system, and establish customs client services unit.   
 
Strategic Goal 4: Promote tax compliance through a fair, equitable and transparent 
application of tax laws: Unify taxpayer identification, introduce risk management for 
audit-based taxes, further strengthen the Tax Investigation Department and improve tax 
enforcement.  
 
Strategic Goal 5: Improve staff competence, motivation, integrity and accountability: 
Strengthen management controls, promulgate a staff charter, strengthen training capacity, 
and implement the anti-corruption strategy.  
 
TMP will also provide support to the Zanzibar Revenue Board (ZRB) for improving 
efficient collection of taxes, promotion of voluntary compliance, provision of quality 
service to taxpayers, improvement of working environment, staff skills, competence and 
motivation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
N/A   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
Page  3
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
N/A 
Page  4
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ravi Ruparel 
06/15/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye 
06/15/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
06/15/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/15/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
 
 
Comments:   
