Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/25/2007 
Report No.:  AC2705
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tanzania 
Project ID:  P102262 
Project Name:  Zanzibar Secondary Education Program 
Task Team Leader:  Ivar Strand 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 29, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTH1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Secondary education (100%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
42.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
6.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective is to improve completion of lower secondary education with 
successful performance among students.   
 
3. Project Description 
Recognizing that secondary education benefits the young people receiving it and the 
country providing it, MoEVT has identified secondary education as its highest priority 
and requested the Bank to lead partners in supporting this sub sector. At the same time, 
MoEVT is developing a sector program and this project will support and be integrated 
into this. Given that this is the first separate project for Zanzibar and that the sector 
program will take some time to develop, it is intended that secondary education will be 
supported initially through a Specific Investment Credit.    USAID will be providing 
textbooks for science subjects.  To address more immediate needs, even as the SWAP is 
being discussed among the Government and donor partners, the proposed intervention 
will focus on three main outputs namely: (i) Improved access to and equity in secondary 
education; (ii) Improved quality of secondary education; and (iii) Project management.  
 
Page  2
Component I: Improving access and equity to Secondary Education.   To meet the 
demand for school facilities to accommodate the projected increase in secondary school 
enrolment, the project will support:  
 
(i) Construction of new schools. The project will construct classrooms in areas where 
very little provision currently exists or the facilities are dilapidated and the structures 
temporary. It is expected that schools continue to be double shifted and as such this 
would add between 24000 student places depending upon the student classroom ratio. As 
part of this program, science laboratories, computer labs, libraries, ten administrative 
blocks, toilet facilities and water, and twenty staff houses will also be built. Site selection 
principles will take into account existing coverage and school-age population in the area. 
The areas for the new school have been identified but specific sites are to be identified. 
Construction is expected to commence about 12 months after Board approval. What 
remains is to modify existing designs or to produce new designs for these schools. 
Information on cost remains limited as the work undertaken by the MoEVT so far has 
mainly focused on completion and rehabilitation works, and as such there is limited 
information on the cost of new construction by Tanzanian or Zanzibari contractors. The 
current unit rates used for project planning have been calculated through analysis of 
empirical data from a limited number of construction projects. Communities have 
traditionally contributed extensively to primary schools, and also to a lesser extent, 
towards secondary school extensions (usually within a combined primary/secondary 
school), and ways in which communities will be engaged will be defined during 
preparation.  
 
(ii) Construction of 10 "model" secondary schools. These schools will be established in 
all of the ten districts of Zanzibar and their size will vary according to school-age 
population and enrollment in the various districts. The model school concept builds upon 
a
long running system of selective "biased schools" at Zanzibar. There are very few of 
these biased schools currently and the provision of ten new model schools, one in each 
district, will significantly expand the capacity and make the distribution of quality 
secondary education more equitable on both islands (Pemba and Unguja). The model 
schools are defined by the availability of adequate facilities and innovative education 
programs that could meet the students learning needs.  
 
These model schools will not necessarily differ from other schools in terms of buildings, 
but are likely to be served with better facilities in the form of laboratories and equipment. 
The model school will have facilities that will include (a) at least six standard size well-
ventilated and well-secured classrooms complete with furniture (b) a science block 
including laboratories for Chemistry, Physics and Biology (c) library and bookstore (d) 
Computer room (e) multipurpose hall and workshop (f) head teachers office with 
furniture and other office facilities (g) staff room with furniture (h) Hostels (i) ten staff 
houses and (j) adequate toilet facilities and potable water. In addition to the functional 
requirements, it is necessary to define the space standards applicable to the various sub-
components (classrooms, laboratories, computer rooms, library etc), the level of 
equipment provision, the quality and type of finishes required and the capital cost 
constraints before appraisal.  
Page  3
(iii) Rehabilitation of seven secondary schools; four of them situated in Stone Town and 
three in Pemba.  
 
In order to accommodate the expansion of enrolments, it will be necessary to increase 
the supply of secondary school teachers. It is estimated that if all the secondary schools 
have to be equipped with academically and professionally qualified teachers, the system 
would need approximately 2414 new teachers for the next five years. To increase the 
supply of teachers especially for Pemba, the project will support:  
 
Component II: Quality Improvement  
 
In addition to enhancing the physical learning environment at the secondary and teacher 
education levels, the project will support the provision of inputs aimed at improving the 
quality of education through provision of textbooks, reference books, equipment, and 
training of teachers through both pre-service and in-service training and improving the 
capacity of the teacher training institutions.  
 
To enhance the quality of teaching at the secondary level, the project will provide 
support for pre-service and in-service training of teachers over a five year period. Based 
on the demand for teachers, the project will finance the training of teachers mainly in the 
areas of science, mathematics, ICT and English language. The training will focus on 
improved classroom instruction, with certification of unqualified teachers at par with 
those graduating from teacher training colleges. Staff from Teacher Training College, the 
State University of Zanzibar and the Zonal Teacher Centers will be used in the 
professional development of teachers. The in-service training program will be modeled 
on the successful Teacher Advancement Programme which has been carried out for the 
last five years. Capacity of these Institutions to deliver the services will be strengthened 
through the provision of 10 long- and short-term training courses and the provision of 
teaching and learning materials such as textbooks, reference books, laboratory equipment 
and chemicals.  
 
MoEVT will refine and cost its plans for in-service teacher training., including: (a) 
secondary maths and science teachers; (b) English for primary teachers; (c) primary 
science and maths teachers; and (d) school head teachers and inspectors. The plan will 
include course specifications, projected numbers and structures, costs, and 
implementation arrangements should be prepared in advance of the next mission. 
MoEVT will also prepare structures to ensure ongoing monitoring and regulation teacher 
supply, and teacher deployment policies and practices.  
 
Overall the project will enhance educational quality at the secondary education level by 
financing the provision of textbooks and reference books, science equipment and ICT 
equipment. The schools will be provided with laboratory equipment and chemicals, 405 
computers, 1,000,000 textbooks and other teaching and learning materials for both 
students and teachers and at least 135,000 volumes of library books.  MoEVT will revisit 
possible cost-sharing modalities for the sustainable provision of textbooks in key subjects 
Page  4
in all junior secondary schools in Zanzibar. This includes. (a) Examine current 
distribution and utilization mechanisms for textbooks on the mainland and in Zanzibar; 
(b) report on appropriate cost-sharing modalities in other countries; (c) calculating annual 
cost implications of implementing sustainable textbook provision and (d) recommend a 
cost-sharing strategy for Zanzibar. This will be completed during implementation and 
prior to distribution of the books.  
 
The policy decision to teach some subjects in English language at the upper primary 
level is intended to improve the pupils? readiness for secondary school. The project will 
provide support for the development of curriculum and materials for the upper primary 
classes as well as in-service training of teachers at this level. As has been described, pre-
vocational education and training will be introduced to give the students an understanding 
of the skills required in the world of work and the project will provide institutional 
support to the Curriculum and Materials Development Division to undertake the work. 
Government will prepare to implement the necessary changes in initial teacher education 
curricula to align with the revised structures, including: (a) preparing diploma level 
secondary teachers to teach to Form 4; (b) preparing primary teachers of maths and 
science to teach through English from standard 5; and (c) enhancing the English language 
skills of all primary teachers.  
 
To strengthen the supervision process, the Department of Inspectorate which is now 
understaffed and lacks necessary equipment and facilities will be improved through 
training more Inspectors and the provision of vehicles, computers and associated 
accessories. The Department will be responsible for supervising the teaching and learning 
process in the classrooms.  
 
This component will cover issues of HIV/AIDS awareness and prevention, as well as 
gender and environmental issues among students and teachers. The magnitude of the 
impact of HIV/AIDS pandemic in education sector in Zanzibar is not documented and the 
data of teachers and students affected are not available. However, it is known that 
HIV/AIDS has affected all the sectors. This will involve HIV/AIDS and environmental 
awareness and sensitization in secondary schools by updating all the teaching and 
learning materials, and conducting workshops for teachers and students. The activity will 
be carried out to complement UNFPA-funded Moral Ethics and Environmental Studies. 
Girls' performance at secondary education level especially in the area of science and 
mathematics subjects will also be emphasized.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Zanzibar: Unguja and Pemba islands.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
1. 
A number of environmental and social issues have been identified during field 
visits, environmental screening and meetings with local representatives during project 
preparation. The following activities were carried out during project preparation: (i) 
preparation of an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to 
summarize regulations, procedures and institutional responsibilities of different 
stakeholders; (ii) preparation of a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), to establish the 
resettlement and compensation principles, organizational arrangements, and design 
criteria to be applied to meet the needs of the people who may be affected by the project 
especially land acquisition to facilitate the construction of the Secondary Schools and 
Teachers Training College.  
 
The Environmental Assessment process for the project has been undertaken through the 
following steps: (i) field visits to proposed project areas in both Unguja and Pemba, 
including meetings with Field Officers and CBO representatives; (ii) meetings with 
project staff in the Ministry of Education and Vocational Training of the Revolutionary 
Government of Zanzibar; (iii) preparation of the ESMF report.  
 
2. 
The social aspects involved in the project include: (i) a field visit to proposed 
project areas in both Unguja and Pemba and including meetings with Field Officers and 
other stakeholders, and visits to existing projects; (ii) meetings with project staff in the 
Ministry of Education and Vocational Training of the Revolutionary Government of 
Zanzibar; (iii) preparation of the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to establish 
resettlement and compensation principles, organizational arrangements, and design 
criteria to be applied to meet the needs of the people who may be affected by the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
3. 
Typical project impacts include:  
Page  6
-
Impacts of material supply for construction: inadequate supervision of project 
contractors could create loopholes for environmental abuse through non-sustainable 
sourcing of building material.  
 
-
Impacts associated with operation of completed facilities: schools and colleges 
will require constant supply of inputs (energy, water, electricity), and will generate 
effluent (solid waste, water waste, sewage). The creation of institutions in formerly 
agricultural lands will change the local hydrological condition leading to more generation 
of surface runoff, with potential to trigger or aggravate soil erosion.  
 
-
By rehabilitating and equipping old dilapidated school buildings with modern 
teaching facilities the project will impact positively on delivery of quality education and 
thus facilitate production of better-equipped school leavers.  
 
-
Improvement of the safety and quality of life for students: Provision of quality 
facilities will further enhance the safety of occupants, decreasing the potential for 
occurrence of diseases associated with exposure and, the hazards associated with 
occupation of failing buildings.  
 
-
Improvement in enrollment rate: By increasing the number of classroom/places in 
the public, schools system, and positive impacts are associated with the anticipated 
significant increase in the enrolment rate at the secondary education level.  
 
-
Potential impact on HIV/AIDS awareness: Through increased enrollment in 
secondary education, additional opportunities for public health awareness and education 
for protection and prevention against HIV/AIDS will be available for secondary school 
students. It is this age group that is particularly vulnerable to this epidemic.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
4. 
Three screening procedures are recognized based on the three types of 
construction:  
 
-
Rehabilitation of schools outside Stone Town  
 
-
Rehabilitation of schools within Stone Town  
 
-
Development of new institutions  
 
5. 
Core criteria for monitoring this ESMF are as follows;-  
 
-
Approved Architectural Plans/ Design Report: will be screened to determine how 
potential impacts of sub-projects will be addressed in the rehabilitation works.  
 
-
The Project Report: Based on the Project Reports, the DOE will screen potential 
impacts of sub-projects and advice on the adequacy or otherwise of the Impact Mitigation 
Plan proposed for each sub-component.  
 
-
The Contract for Construction: the MoEVT will supervise activities of contractors 
to ensure mitigation measures prescribed for implementation during construction have 
been implemented.  
 
-
The Resettlement Action Plan: the ESMF will monitor social impacts to ensure 
that if land is acquired, assets impacted, or a negative impact on livelihood results, then 
the RPF will be utilized to direct the process for preparing a RAP.  
 
-
The Facilities Management Plan: MoEVT Inspectorate will use to monitor 
progress in implementing Impact Mitigation during operation of completed sub-projects.  
Page  7
-
The project may result in two possible types of resettlement:   (i)  Economic 
Resettlement: when sections of land used by a particular person/group of people are 
acquired, but the household is not displaced entirely. As most new school constructions 
will be undertaken on government land saved for temporary users, this is likely to be the 
main mode of resettlement. Under such circumstances, economic resettlement will be 
undertaken to compensate individuals/families; and (ii)  Physical Resettlement: may be 
undertaken when the entire land/buildings of a household are acquired, resulting in total 
displacement of a project affected household.  This type of resettlement is not expected to 
be widespread.  
 
-
For both cases, a Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared to mitigate 
negative impacts. If it is determined that any resettlement, whether economic or physical, 
will occur, then a Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared based on guidance and 
standards set out in RPF. During RAP preparation, impacted persons will be closely 
consulted to ensure that individuals/ families are able to maintain or improve their 
standard of living.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include affected communities.  A detailed process for consultation is 
described in the ESMF and the RPF.   These two frameworks have been disclosed in 
Zanzibar and distributed across the districts.  The screening frameworks will be disclosed 
to relevant communities in particular when the sites are being selected.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/22/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/29/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/29/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/22/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/29/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/29/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  8
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ivar Strand 
02/09/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye 
02/09/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
02/09/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Dzingai B. Mutumbuka 
02/09/2007 
Comments:   
Page  9
