                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                    CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                               Report No.:41142


 Date ISDS PreparedIUpdated:October 10,2007

 I. BASIC INFORMATION

 A. Basic Project Data
ICountry: Thailand                            I Project ID: P107716
                                              I Additional Project ID (ifany):
 Proiect Name: CDM Livestock Waste Management Promam
 Task Team Leader: Weiguo Zhou
 Estimated Appraisal Date: April 2008           Estimated Board Date: N/A
 Managing Unit: EASRE                           Lending Instrument: Carbon Finance
                                              I Purchase
 Sector: Rural, Renewable Energy
 Theme: Climate Change
 I B R ~mount US$^.):             0.00
 IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
 GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.70
 PCF Amount (US$m.):              6.60
 Other financing amounts by source:
         Participating farms (US$m.): 2.60
         Local government (US$m.): 0.20
 Environmental Category: B (partial assessment)
 Simplified Processing                 Simple [ ]               Repeater [ ]
 Is this a transferred project         Yes [ 1                  No [XI

 B. Project Objectives [fromsection 2 of PCN]:
 The project development objective is to reduce methane emissions from improved
 livestock waste management practices through a carbon finance transaction between the
 World Bank and the project sponsor and serve as a demonstration for other livestock
 producers. The key project performance indicators will include the following: (a) the
 biogas flow (m3); (b) the emission reduction (ER) of methane (ton); (c) electricity
 generation (kwh); and (d) the certified emission reduction (CER) credits created and
 traded (ton). An annual carbon credit up to 60,000 ton is expected.

 C. Project Description [fromsection 3 of PCN]:
 The project sites are dispersed in three provinces and the amount of CERs achieved at
 individual project sites is relatively small. To meet CDCF's requirement of minimum
 CERs for transaction, the farms have been "bundled" for project administration, technical
 standardization, and the CER transaction. The farms will transfer their ownership of the
 emission reductions to the project sponsor i.e. Advance Energy Plus Co., Ltd. (AEP).
 AEP is developing agreements with the participating farms to act on their behalf and

oversee the collective sale of CERs from the project and then disburse shares of the CER
revenue among the farms. AEP will keep a portion of the CER revenue for its role in
developing and assembling the CER transactions. No World Bank lending is involved.
The Department of Livestock Development (DLD) in Thailand's Ministry of Agriculture
and Cooperatives has been working closely with other government agencies, international
organizations such as the World Bank and the Food and Agriculture Organization, and
the pig farmers to promote the improved livestock waste management practices. DLD,
the implementing agency for the GEF funded Regional Livestock Waste Management in
East Asia (LWMEA) Project which was launched in Thailand in 2006, will serve as a
project integrator for this project. The proposed CDM project will consist of the
following three components:

  (i)  Component A: Construction of Livestock Waste Mananement Facilities. The
       proposed project will use identical technology i.e. covered lagoons to produce
       bio-gas for electricity generation, cookinglheating, and flaring on all participating
       farms. Component activities will include (a) construction of physical facilities; (b)
       installation of monitoring equipment and devices; and (c) farmer training. As a
       result, methane will be captured through such facilities and piped to small biogas-
       fired electricity generators that will result in CERs.

  (ii) Component B: Carbon Finance Transaction. The World Bank-managed CDCF
       will purchase the CER credits resulting from the collection and combustion of
       methane and power generation. The purchase will be a performance-based
       contract under which payments are triggered by successful verification of the
       CERs by an independent, accredited international entity. The quantity of CERs to
       be contracted, the length of time over which the purchase will be made, and the
       price paid will be finalized and agreed between the World Bank and the project
        sponsor during Emission Reduction Purchase Agreement negotiations.

  (iii) Component C: Community Benefit Packane. This Component will support
        community development initiatives in one or more poor communities (to be
        identified prior to the next mission), either surrounding the project sites andlor
        those negatively or positively impacted by the project. The project will satisfy the
        CDCF mandate by supporting activities to improve the quality of life of poor
        communities living around the project sites. Specific component activities could
        be social, infi-astructure, or other services and will be determined through a
        consultation process before the project appraisal. The community members will
        be organized to develop a list of priority activities during the agreed
        implementation period. The activities in the first two years will be relatively firm
        while the rest are largely indicative. The World Bank's review of all such
        activities will be required.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis(if known):
The participating farms are located in the provinces of Ratchaburi, Chonburi, and
Chachengsao which represent the majority of pig farms in Thailand. The participating
farms are within the two major river basins i.e. the Mae Klong (Ratchaburi) and the Bang
Pakong (Chonburi and Chachengsao) discharging water into the Upper Gulf of Thailand.
The three provinces are located on relatively flat lands which are utilized for agricultural,

industrial, and residential purposes. No known natural reserveslparks andlor important
natural habitats are identified in these lowland areas. Currently, untreated waste runoff
from many pig farms in these areas filters into the local streams, rivers, and ground water
systems as well as emitting GHGs. Bad odor and other nuisances have been the subject
for local complaints. Field visits to some of the proposed farm sites confirmed that these
farms are located in agricultural areas producing crops such as corn and sugar cane or
fairly distant from residential areas. On the farms, wastewater is discharged into ponds
while solid pig manure is collected on drying grounds and then sold/used as fertilizer.
However, water pollution occurs often resulting from runoff or mishandling of discharge,
especially during the rainy season. All project sites are within the existing premises of the
participating farms.

All participating farms under this project will also be supported by the LWMEA project
which aims at reducing the major negative environmental and health impacts of rapidly
increasing concentrated livestock production near water bodies and human settlements.
The Environmental Assessment and Social Assessment studies (in 2004105) conducted
for the LWMEA project indicated that most large farms in the project areas have not
followed proper waste management practices and concluded that proper management and
treatment of pig waste on these farms will significantly improve the local environmental
quality (especially odor, flies, and water quality). The negative impacts are expected to be
small, but it is important that the livestock waste management facilities are properly
located, constructed, and operated and that due attention is given to safe disposal and
reducing impacts of liquid and solid wastes.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for SafeguardPolicies:
Thailand established an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) process in late 1970s.
Under existing Thai regulation (NEQA of 1992), neither an EIA nor an Initial
Environmental Evaluation (IEE) for the project is required. However, to comply with the
requirements of the World Bank and Thailand's Office of Natural Resource and
Environmental Policy and Planning,, an IEE will be carried out for each participating
farm and the results will be reported in the project docwnentation. The IEE will be
prepared by the project sponsor under the technical guidance of the World Bank
environmental safeguard specialist located in Bangkok. AEP staff has experience with
World Bank operations and safeguards policies through collaboration on the Ozone
Depleting Substance Phase-out and Chiller Replacement projects. DLD is technically
strong and its institutional capacity for World Bank safeguard policies is being
strengthened under the LWMEA project. With close collaboration between AEP and
DLD, safeguard issues are expected to be addressed appropriately.

F. Environmental and Social SafeguardsSpecialistson the Team:
Manida Unkulvasapaul (Senior Environmental Specialist, EASRE)

Waraporn Hirunwatsiri (Environmental specialist, EASRE)

Chaohua Zhang (Senior Social Sector Specialist, EASSO)

11. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

SafeguardPolicies Triggered (please explain why)                I   yes         No      1  TBD
Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)                                X
The project will involve construction of livestock waste treatment facilities that could reduce the
discharge of the liquid and solid wastes, air pollution (includingbad odors), and flies to the local
environment. The Environmental Assessment (EA) of the LWMEA project concluded that the
overall impacts of the project will be positive, but an IEE for each participating farm will be
zarried out based on the EnvironmentalManagement Plan prepared for the LWMEA project and
a specific action plan for each farm will be developed. For Community Benefit Package
component, a simple EA framework will be developed by the project sponsor to address potential
environmental impacts from any civil works. A mechanism to provide training for the farmers
to implement the action plans and a tool for the project sponsor to monitor the implementation of
the action ~lanswill be ameed during.the World Bank's next mission.
Natural Habitats (OPIBP4.04)                                                     X
The project will not affect any natural habitats as defined in the policy
Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                             X
The project will not involve any forests.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                        X
The project will not procure any pesticides,nor will an increased use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources (OPIBP 4.11)                                         X
All activitieswill be carried out in the owners' land and will not involve cultureresources.
Indigenous Peoples (OPIBP 4.10)                                                              X
Since the identified project areas for the Construction of Livestock Waste Management Facilities
Component do not have ethic minority communities, the World Bank policy on Indigenous
Peoples will not be triggered for this component. However, activities and sites for the Community
Benefit Package Component have not been fully identified,therefore triggeringof this policy will
be determined during the next phase of project preparation. The terms of reference for the
Community Benefit Package Component preparation will include a screening mechanism for
indigenous peoples. If the impact is likely, this policy will be triggered and an Ethnic Minority
Development Plan will be prepared.
InvoluntaryResettlement (OPBP 4.12)                                              X
The Construction of Waste Management Facilities Component will require some land. It is
understood that all farm households are participating on a voluntary basis and their lagoons will
be built on their own farmland. The Community Benefit Package Component will result in small
amounts of investment at each selected site and the funding is not expected to finance any capital
investment that will require land acquisition or resettlement. Given the above, it is determined
that the World Bank policy on Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered under the project.
Safety of Dams (OPBP 4.37)                                                       X
The project will not involve any dams.
Projects on International Waterways (OPIBP 7.50)                1                X
The project will not involve any international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)                                          X
The project is not located in any known area on territorial disputeas defined under the policy.
Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in                                     X
Bank-SupportedProjects (OPIBP 4.00)

The project category is proposed to be Category B.

111. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-
    stage ISDS would be prepared: N/A

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the
    PAD-stage ISDS: December 2007

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
    needed. The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage
    ISDS:

  (i)     The project sponsor will undertake an IEE for the participating farms and prepare
          specific action plans which will be submitted to the Designated National
          Authoritiesby December 15,2007.

  (ii)    The project sponsor will also prepare a Community Benefit Plan which includes
          an indigenous peoples screening and a simple EA framework for the Community
          Benefit Package Component by October 31,2007.

IV. APPROVALS




1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-relateddocuments be disclosed before appraisal (i) at

the InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to
potentially affected persons.

