Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2734 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/30/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Timor-Leste 
Project ID: P104794 
Project Name: TP-Health Sector Project 
Task Team Leader: Timothy A. Johnston 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 11, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: November 13, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Child health (S);Other communicable diseases 
(S);Nutrition and food security (S);Population and reproductive health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
1.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development17.50 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
17.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the program would be to improve the quality and coverage of preventive 
and curative health services, particularly for women and children, in order to accelerate progress 
toward the health MDGs. The proposed project would have two parts (a) financial support using 
the Health Sector Strategic Plan and MTEF framework and (b) addressing remaining challenges 
and innovations needed for the health sector to be prepared for the next generation of issues.  
Specific objectives for the first part would be fully aligned with the three goals of the HSSP, 
namely:  (i) improve accessibility, demand and quality of health services; (ii) strengthen support 
services and management; and (iii) strengthen coordination, planning and monitoring. The 
second objective will be to promote innovation and learning (closely linked to the HSSP) by 
providing resources to pilot identified health sector innovations such as demand side and service 
provider incentives.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
Support to the health sector would be provided under a joint financing mechanism in the context 
of a health sector MTEF, which would serve as an integrated framework for government 
budgetary resources as well as the pooled sector financing. To strengthen performance 
management, annual support for the health sector would be reviewed yearly based on progress 
toward key performance indicators and agreed reforms.  
 
The grant and pooled donor fund will seek to contribute to progress toward the health (broadly 
defined to include health, nutrition, population and HIV) MDGs, including reducing child and 
maternal mortality, child malnutrition, and fertility rates, and combating malaria, TB, and other 
communicable diseases. The project could also help fill any remaining funding gaps for HIV and 
STI prevention as needed, and help to facilitate implementation of Global Fund grants.  
Intermediate program indicators will serve as the basis for annual monitoring of progress (such 
as vaccination coverage, prenatal care, trained birth attendance, etc.).  
 
Project components:  
 
The proposed project would have four components, corresponding to the specific development 
objectives. The content and allocation of funds among these components would be validated 
during appraisal based on the draft HSSP and the proposed MTEF.  The fourth component 
(“innovation”) could in principle be integrated into the first three; this will also be discussed with 
government during appraisal.While it is anticipated that a detailed costing of activities for the 
first 12-18 months will be agreed upon during appraisal, subsequent decisions as to what will 
actually be funded with pooled resources will be made through the MoH’s Annual Planning and 
Combined Sources Budgeting process, in consultation with participating partners and line with 
the goals and objectives set out in the HSSP.  
 
Component 1 – Health service delivery (approximately US$6m). Particular focus under 
component 1 will be given to: (a) implementation of the Basic Service Package for Primary 
Health Care; (b) strengthening community health services including in remote areas; (c) 
improving district level planning and management capacity to support service delivery; (d) 
improving hospital care and the referral system, including implementation of the Basic Service 
Package for Hospitals; and (d) assuring quality of care throughout the health system, including 
improvement of infrastructure and equipment at health facilities and access to basic operational 
supplies.  
 
Component 2 – Support Services and Management (approximately US$2m). Particular focus 
under component 2 will be given to:  (a) improving overall governance and management of the 
health sector, including implementation of identified high-priority organizational reforms; (b) 
improving human resource development and management practices, including the processes for 
identification, mobilization and management of priority Technical Assistance services; (c) 
improving procurement, distribution and management of essential drugs and supplies (through 
SAMES and Department of Pharmacy); and (d) improved systems for infrastructure planning, 
logistics management and infrastructure and equipment maintenance.  
 
Component 3 – Coordination, planning and monitoring (approximately US$2m).  Particular 
focus under Component 3 will be given to: (a) implementation of improved coordination and 
Page  3
communication mechanisms, both within MOH and between MoH and other sector stakeholders; 
(b) implementation of improved program planning and budgeting procedures that link resource 
allocation to district needs; (c) implementation of a practical and cost-effective HSSP Monitoring 
and Evaluation system; (d) improved policy development and research capacity within MoH  
 
Component 4 
–
Innovation and Learning (approximately US$2 m):  Particular focus under 
component 4 will be given to supporting pilot programs that are designed to: (a) promote 
community demand for health services; (b) provide incentives to service providers, particularly 
to attract and retain key health personnel in remote/rural areas; (c) establish effective public-
private partnership options.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would be implemented in both rural and urban areas in Timor-Leste. No resettlement 
or land acquisition is planned.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Timor-Leste is still emerging from a post-conflict situation, and institutional capacity remains 
relatively weak and government ministries (including Ministry of Health) still depend on 
international technical assistance.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed operation focuses on supporting health service delivery and capacity 
strengthening, particularly at the district level.  No new construction is planned, nor demolition 
of existing structures, although minor rehabilitation of clinics on existing sites is possible.  The 
current project (Second Health Sector Reform and Development Project HSRDP2) was classified 
as category C, but includes activities to improve medical waste management -- including 
installation of incinerators at regional hospitals. As part of its efforts to improve service delivery, 
the proposed project may support an update of the medical waste management strategy for 
hospitals and districts, and finance related training for health managers and staff.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
Page  4
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/17/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  08/30/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Task Team will review during project preparation the MOH's existing medical waste 
management policies and implementation, and assess whether updates or revisions of these 
plans are necessary. The Team will also confirm that the MOH is not planning to finance 
pesticides for vector control through the project.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Timothy A. Johnston 
08/29/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
08/29/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Fadia M. Saadah 
08/29/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
