Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/23/2007 
Report No.:  AC3134
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Timor-Leste 
Project ID:  P104794 
Project Name:  Health Sector Strategic Plan Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  Timothy A. Johnston 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 11, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 13, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Child health (S);Other communicable diseases 
(S);Nutrition and food security (S);Population and reproductive health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
1.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development19.30
19.30 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall objective of the project is to improve the quality and coverage of preventive 
and curative health services, particularly for women and children, in order to accelerate 
progress toward the health MDGs.  The NHSP would have two parts (a) direct financial 
support using the Health Sector Strategic Plan and MTEF framework, and (b) addressing 
remaining challenges and innovations needed for the health sector to be prepared for the 
next generation of issues.  
 
Specific objectives for the first part include:  (i) improve accessibility, demand and 
quality of health services; (ii) strengthen support services and management; and (iii) 
strengthen coordination, planning and monitoring. The second objective will be to 
promote innovation and learning (linked to priorities identified in the HSSP) by providing 
resources to pilot and evaluate priority health sector innovations.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The program would have four components, corresponding to the specific development 
objectives.  
 
Component 1 - Health service delivery (approx $12 m). The component will support the 
following objectives: (a) implementation of the Basic Service Package for Primary 
Health Care, and improving district planning and management capacity; (b) strengthening 
community nutrition and health services, as well as outreach services in remote areas, 
including through contracting with local and international NGOs; (c) improving hospital 
care and the referral system, including implementation of the Hospital Service Package 
(HSP); and (d) assuring quality of care throughout the health system, including 
improvement of infrastructure and equipment at health facilities.  
 
Component 2 - Support Services, Human Resources Development, and Management 
(approximately US$4m). Particular focus under component 2 will be given to:  (a) 
strengthening the capacity of the Institute of Health Sciences (IHS) to provide technical 
and management training to health staff, including through establishing a ?twinning? 
arrangement with a training institution in the subregion; (b) direct support for priority 
local and international training for Timorese staff; improved human resource 
development and management practices, and improved management technical Assistance 
services; (c) strengthen procurement, distribution and management of essential drugs and 
supplies, and (d) strengthen core MOH ?support? and fiduciary functions, including for 
planning and supervision of civil works, logistics and maintenance of infrastructure and 
equipment; procurement; financial management; and information and communications 
technologies (ICT).  
 
Component 3 - Coordination, planning and monitoring (appr. $2 m).  Particular focus 
under Component 3 will be given to:  (a) strengthen MOH capacity for donor 
coordination, including through support for establishment of the Department of 
International Cooperation; (b) technical assistance for strengthening the annual planning 
and budgeting process at central and district level; (c) further strengthening the MOH 
Health Management Information System (HMIS); (d) direct financing of surveys and 
other evaluations; (e) improved policy development and research capacity within MoH, 
including targeted support for operational research.   
 
Component 4 - Innovation and Program Development ($2.3 m):  Particular focus under 
component 4 will be given to supporting and evaluating pilot programs, with the 
expectation that successful initiatives will be scaled up and incorporated into MTEF and 
annual budgets and Annual Plans.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Entire Timor-Leste   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Isono Sadoko (EASIS) 
Page  3
Ms Ninin K. Dewi (EASIS) 
Mr Josefo Tuyor (EASRE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Civil Works. The project will not finance major construction of new hospitals, but may 
support maintenance and rehabilitation, as well as building and/or rehabilitation of some 
health posts. As such, it is envisaged that civil works and the corresponding 
environmental impacts, if any, will be minimal and temporary, which will include noise, 
air emissions and generation of construction wastes. Procedures to address these impacts 
will be included in civil works contracts, where contractors will be required to formulate 
and implement proper housekeeping measures to address the issues.  
 
Healthcare Waste Management. An evaluation of the health care wastes generation and 
management was commissioned by the Government of Timor Leste in 2004 with Bank 
support as part of the preparation of the Health Sector Rehabilitation and Development 
Project (HSRDP1). The evaluation revealed that about 80% of the total waste generated 
by healthcare activities can be classified as general waste. The remaining 20% of the total 
waste can be classified as hazardous materials, with the majority (15%) considered as 
infectious or anatomic waste; about 3% chemical and pharmaceutical waste and 1% 
genotoxic and radioactive wastes. The evaluation also proposed a practical health care 
waste management at the community health care facilities and health posts through the 
use of a small efficient incinerator (or gasifier) that could be easily managed, use locally 
available fuel, produce no toxic gases and reduce the waste to a small amount of harmless 
ash that could be safely disposed of by burial on the site.  
 
Under the IDA-financed HSRDP1 project, all community health care centers were 
equipped with clinical waste gasifiers to be used for the safe disposal of clinical wastes, 
13 of which have been supplied under HSRDP1 or one per district. For the four hospitals 
being constructed under the second Health Sector Rehabilitation and Development 
Page  4
Project (HSRDP2), similar but larger gasifiers were provided to these hospitals. The use 
of gasifiers in managing health care wastes will continue under the project.  
 
Asbestos Management. The main activities of the program that could have implications 
for asbestos generation and management are the rehabilitation of some health posts and 
hospitals. Asbestos in Timor Leste is found mainly in cement and building materials.  
These are mainly corrugated roofing sheets and flat sheets that have been used for 
walling or ceiling panels, which are considered safe if left in position and not damaged, 
cut or abraded.  The "Guidelines on Maintenance, Handling and Disposal of Asbestos 
Materials and Asbestos Waste" were formulated in September 2000 by the East Timor 
Transition Administration (ETTA) and contractors will be required to adhere to the 
guidelines during civil works.  
 
Social Issues:  
 
The Project will not be financing any large civil works, so no resettlement or adverse 
social impacts are anticipated. In addition, the entire Timor-Leste population is 
considered ?indigenous?, and no adverse impacts are expected for indigenous groups. To 
achieve the development objectives, however, project design and implementation will 
need to be adapted to the particular post-conflict context of Timor-Leste, as well as the 
prevailing cultural and social context and varied practices of different indigenous ethnic 
groups.  As noted in the Health Sector Review, the modern medical system coexists with 
traditional beliefs and practices that influence both health seeking behavior and 
household health, nutrition, and fertility practices, and well as gender relations. 
Interventions that seek to improve demand for health care and community health 
practices will need to address these underlying beliefs and cultural factors. The political 
crisis of April 2006 and its aftermath led to over 150,000 Internally Displaced Persons 
(IDP), including an IDP camp on the grounds of the national hospital (GVNH). About 
half of IDPs have now returned to their homes, and efforts are underway to relocate those 
who do not feel safe returning to their original neighborhoods.  The MOH and NGOs 
have been providing health services to the IDP camps, but the current strategy is to 
emphasize providing services at the community level to avoid creating tensions with local 
communities and to ensure services are available when IDPs return to their homes.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No negative long-term impacts are forseen.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Project design has sought to minimize financing of new construction, while strengthening 
existing medical waste management systems.   
 
A
social assessment will be undertaken prior to or soon after project effectiveness, 
which will recommend strategies to ensure that vulnerable groups benefit from the 
project.   
 
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Recipient has prepared a medical waste management strategy, as well as "Guidelines 
on Maintenance, Handling and Disposal of Asbestos Materials and Wastes."  
 
Recipient is undertaking a "Health Care Seeking Behavior Study" (with AusAID 
financing) to further analyse the reasons for low use of certain preventive and curative 
health services, including vulnerable groups.  Recipient also plans to update its strategies 
for accessing remote areas and populations.. Finally, the recipient has prepared an 
environmental and health care waste management plan to address the environmental 
impacts of the project and the health care waste issues during implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include the Ministry of Health, and the general population of TL.  
Safeguard policies will be disclosed at the public information center at the World Bank 
office, and relevant guidelines will be shared with MOH officials at central and district 
level, as well as contractors involved in civil works.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/17/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/23/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/23/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  6
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Timothy A. Johnston 
10/17/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Josefo Tuyor 
10/18/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Ninin K. Dewi 
10/22/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Isono Sadoko 
10/22/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Fadia M. Saadah 
10/23/2007 
Comments:   
