Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2191 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/05/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Timor-Leste 
Project ID: P095873 
Project Name: TP-Education Sector Support 
Task Team Leader: Jerry G. Strudwick 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: November 21, 2006 
Managing Unit: EASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (50%);Secondary education (25%);Tertiary education (25%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
9.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project???s development objective is: To improve learning conditions, instructional 
practices and learning outcomes across the sector.  
 
The education sector is not expected to be resource constrained over the medium term.  It will 
however be capacity constrained, at least over the short to medium term. The project will place 
an emphasis on assisting the Government to develop the policies, strategic plans and quality 
assurance mechanisms necessary to strengthen service delivery across the sector.  It will also 
assist the Ministry to articulate a sustainable sector development program via a series of sub-
sector strategies and initial three-year rolling plans that include reasonable performance targets 
for the sub-sector, its institutions and its students.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1:  Policy, planning and program development [est. US$4.0 million] This component 
will support: (i) the development of sub-sector strategies along the lines of the SP-UPC; (ii) 
associated policy studies, pilot studies and quality assurance mechanisms; and (iii) technical 
assistance to support the program implementation and budget execution.  
 
Page  2
Within the first two years of the project, four sub-sector strategies will be completed: 
secondary; technical-vocational; tertiary and non-formal.   Closely associated with the 
development of the sub-sector strategies will be the production, publication and dissemination of 
a
series of issue-specific policy, program and performance (system and student) studies.  An 
important component of each strategy will be an articulation of how the sub-sector will be 
monitored and progress against key performance benchmarks evaluated.   In its first year, the 
project will establish sector-wider monitoring procedures and standards.  These will be reviewed 
and strengthened each subsequent year.  
 
Among the areas for which policy studies and implementation/ operational guidelines are 
required are: understanding demand for schooling; minimum service standards for schools; 
tertiary institution accreditation; vocational-technical institution accreditation; teacher 
professional development; teacher deployment; learning materials; sector financing; school 
based management; school finance; school grants; scholarships; language development; school 
mapping and site determination; school construction and rehabilitation standards; system 
monitoring; student assessment; and access to services for marginalized populations (including 
disabled children).  
 
A
small number of pilots will be financed to assess the potential of proposed reforms and 
interventions.  A school grants program, a scholarships program or a small initiative with 
interactive radio instruction are examples of possible pilots.  An important pilot to complete over 
the project???s first two years will be grade 6 student assessment.  This will be closely linked 
with the MoEC/UNICEF Measuring Learning Achievement (MLA) initiative.  
 
Quality assurance commissions under consideration for inclusion in the project include a 
National Higher Education Commission and a National Vocational Technical Education 
Commission.  
 
In terms of prioritizing proposed studies, pilots, commissions etc., an annual project work-plan 
exercise will be built into the Ministry???s planning and budgeting cycle.  This will ensure that 
activities are embedded in the Ministry???sAnnual Action Plans and that their progress reviews 
are part of the Ministry???s AnnualJoint Review (AJR) of its program.   The project???s fist 
annual work-plan will befinalized during pre-appraisal.  
 
This component will also support program implementation by financing key technical 
assistance positions.  The proposed TA will provide policy support to the Minister???s and Vice 
Ministers??? offices, facilitate program implementation and improve the Ministry???s budget 
execution by strengthening its financial management and procurement capacity.  To achieve this, 
a
number of TA positions currently financed under the Fundamental School Quality Project 
(FSQP) will be transferred to the ESSP and located in the Directorate of Administration and 
Finance where they will develop capacity while focusing on facilitating sector-wide budget 
execution and procurement.  
 
Component 2: Learning Materials   [US$2.7 million] This component will finance: (i) the 
provision of learning materials and teachers guides to all primary and junior secondary schools; 
Page  3
and (ii) the establishment of a structure within the Ministry to support the design, procurement, 
and distribution of learning materials and books.  
 
The project will support the continued use of Lafaek children???s magazine in schools over the 
life of the project and will work with CARE, the Ministry and UNICEF to ensure that the Lafaek 
range of products are continually improved so that a wider variety of quality inputs reach 
classrooms (posters, work books, story books and materials for teachers to develop their 
understanding of soon-to-be-introduced teacher competencies).  Additionally, the project will 
ensure that the Lafaek materials are closely linked to the curriculum roll-out that the Ministry 
and UNICEF are managing.  
 
It is proposed that the Ministry reach a medium term (i.e. five-year) agreement-in-principle 
with CARE on how Lafaek will evolve as the new primary curriculum is introduced over the 
coming years and on which combinations of support materials will best suit each grade cluster (1 
and 2, 3 and 4, and 5 and 6) over that period.  The project would then look to finance the supply 
of Lafaek materials over the period of that agreement on a declining basis.  The actual rate of 
decline of project financing for Lafaek will be agreed to as project costs become clearer during 
(or prior to) project pre-appraisal.  
 
It is understood by all parties that over the course of the project, as Ministry capacity increase 
and as appropriate policies are put in place, the Ministry, with project assistance, will develop a 
long term strategy for the provision of learning materials to schools in which Lafaek may play a 
substantially lower profile role that it will over the medium term.   And, as the Ministry intends 
that learning materials production be outsourced, priority within the project will be given to 
establishing and providing initial support to a unit within the Ministry framework that will 
manage the process of design, procurement, and distribution of learning materials and books.  A 
recently completed textbook and learning materials consultancy under FSQP is expected to 
provide a framework for this activity.  
 
Key to success of this venture and to the more general availability of locally relevant learning 
materials for children will be the development of a Timor-Leste based local publishing house for 
children???s media.  The project will explore options to support the development of such a 
capacity.  
 
Component 3:  Construction/Rehabilitation Design and Quality Assurance   [US$2.1 million]  
This component will contribute to the costs of the Infrastructure Facilities Unit (the IFU).  
 
Under this component the project will contribute to the financing of the technical assistance, 
equipment, operating costs, stakeholder workshops, dissemination of construction management 
guidelines and building standards, and building and maintaining a school mapping database.  
These inputs will allow the IFU to provide architectural and engineering design, infrastructure 
quality assurance and a school mapping capacity to the Ministry???s school 
construction/rehabilitationprogram.  It is not intended that the project finance school 
construction.  
 
Page  4
The projected work program for the IFU is to deliver 621 new projects (a combination of new 
facilities and rehabilitation projects) between FY 07 and FY 11.  Depending on needs and site 
locations this is expected to add between 65,000 and 85,000 new school places over the life of 
the project.   It is also expected that the IFU will oversee the rehabilitation of other facilities, 
including the Institute of Continued Education (the in-service teacher education college) for 
which a rehabilitation feasibility study will be completed under project financing in FY 07.  
 
Site selection. Improved school mapping and site selection processes will ensure that project-
supported construction projects are responsive to prioritized needs, especially in respect to 
providing access to un-served and under-served areas, and are reflective of site location 
guidelines and standards.   This is a priority.  If school construction projects are not prioritized 
based on a national schools needs assessment it is probable that the Ministry will not meet its 
objective of UPC by 2015.  
 
The project will finance an education needs and services mapping of Timor-Leste.  This will be 
coordinated with the MoEC/UNICEF development of the Educational Management Information 
System (EMIS) and the extension of the EMIS into the IFU.  The construction and maintenance 
requirements and priorities derived from the mapping data will then be used in the formulation of 
the Ministry???s annual budgets for school construction/rehabilitation.  
 
Funding and Management of the IFU. It is planned that the ESSP???s financial support of the 
IFU will decline over the course of the project.  Currently, it is proposed that the IFU maintain its 
current form for FY 07 (i.e. as a unit made up of individual consultants).  However, from FY 08 
on, it is intended that IFU activities be outsourced under a series of single two- or three-year 
consultancies which will be co-financed by MoEC.  The actual rate of decline of project 
financing for the IFU will be agreed to as project costs become clearer during (or prior to) 
project pre-appraisal.  
 
Senior personnel within the existing IFU could be engaged by the new consultant group (i.e. 
from FY 08) to ensure continuity, but increased efficiency within an evolving IFU could be 
ensured as the contracted consultant would be required to select professionals with the expertise 
necessary for specific tasks in the IFU annual work program.   Initially, the Directorate of 
Finance and Administration could manage this contract, assisted by the financial management 
and procurement support team in that Directorate. As management capacity developed within the 
Directorate, consultant involvement in contract management would be phased out.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Country-wide   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Ministry's Infrastructure Facilities Unit (the IFU) has the capacity to develop, establish and 
enforce safeguard policies in respect to school rehabiltation and construction.  The IFU will 
produce Site Management Guidelines that must be adhered to all contractors and contractors will 
be required to respond to the guidelines in their bids.  ToRs for the dvelopemnt of the guidelines 
will be prepared prior to project apprasial.   
 
Page  5
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (EASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/06/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Specific studies would be completed by August 2006 should these be required.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jerry G. Strudwick 
03/20/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
05/02/2006 
Comments:  Revisions acceptable. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
06/05/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
