Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/29/2007 
Report No.:  AC2397
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Timor-Leste 
Project ID:  P095873 
Project Name:  TP-Education Sector Support 
Task Team Leader:  Jerry G. Strudwick 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 25, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (40%);Secondary education (30%);Tertiary education (30%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.91 
 
AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development 6.00
8.91 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
ESSP will strengthen the capacity of the Ministry for effective policy development, 
resource management, and innovation.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1.   Capacity Building for Policy, Planning and Program Development 
[US$3.7 million].  
 
The project will support the development of sub-sector strategies for both secondary and 
tertiary education.  To inform each of these strategies, prior to their drafting and to 
provide the new government with just-in-time policy guidance, ESSP will finance a 
number of policy advisory notes designed to provide decision makers with evidence of 
good practice and viable options.   Important components of each sub-sector strategy will 
be inclusion of a 3-year rolling plan with costs and financing sources and an articulation 
of how the sub-sector will progress towards key performance benchmarks.  ESSP will 
also finance a National Education Congress in early 2008 as a means of engaging a broad 
range of stakeholders in a consultative process around the development of the sub-sector 
strategies. ESSP will finance workshop activity linked to the 2009 AJR to ensure that the 
Page  2
SP-UPC and the two sub-sector strategies developed under ESSP are synchronized, 
expressed as a sector strategy, and reflected in a sector-wide medium term expenditure 
framework (MTEF).  A comprehensive review of the sector strategy will be carried out in 
2011.  
 
This component is closely integrated with the NZAID CBP.  The two projects will 
collaborate to complete a capacity needs assessments at each level of the ministry 
(national, district and school) and will both support the development and implementation 
of a Ministry-wide capacity building strategic plan, using a common results framework.  
While ESSP will focus on developing MoEC?s systems and staff capacities in respect to 
policy planning and resource management, the NZAID CBP will develop staff skills in 
respect to administration and program execution at the national, district and school levels.  
Both ESSP and the CBP will support the implementation of that strategy through 
programs that include on-the-job training and participation in short-courses in specialised 
areas.  
 
ESSP will continue the monitoring and program improvement currently provided to the 
school grants program (SGP) by PESP.  The project will also assist the Ministry to ensure 
that the SGP aligns with other MoEC programs that support school based management 
and with the school level capacity development provided by the CBP that will target 
school principals.  
 
To address the issue of unequal quality of higher education institutions, ESSP will also 
support the establishment of a National Commission for Academic Assessment and 
Accreditation (NCAAA) to oversee the accreditation and licensing of all higher education 
institutions, both public and private.  Extensive stakeholder consultation and training in 
the development of a quality assurance system will ensure Timorese ownership of the 
process.  Careful attention will be placed on setting realistic initial standards for 
accreditation.  Remedial steps will be developed to guide those institutions that do not 
meet these standards. Technical support will assist the Vice Minister of Higher Education 
in the development of the tertiary sub-sector strategy outlined above, the operation of the 
NCAAA and the activities of the Vice Minister?s office and the Directorate of Higher 
Education.  The project will also finance a study of the national university with the 
intention of providing government with options for its focus, development and location.  
 
MoEC's capacity will be strengthened in procurement, financial management and 
contract management.  Procurement and financial management specialist positions in the 
Directorate of Administration and Finance that are currently financed under PESP will be 
continued under ESSP.  In addition to the training provided during the project launch 
workshop and on-going on-the-job training, key procurement and financial management 
staff will have access to specialized overseas training that focuses on internationally 
recognized standards.  
 
To strengthen sector-wide planning and monitoring, ESSP will provide a Program 
Facilitator and an M&E specialist to assist the Ministry?s Policy and Planning Directorate 
to develop and disseminate planning tools and monitoring standards and procedures, and 
Page  3
to provide ministry-wide training in M&E.  ESSP will support sector performance review 
linked directly to the AJR process.  The project will support analysis of appropriate data 
prior to each AJR to ensure that a core set of system indicators are adequately reported 
on. To further facilitate and consolidate the AJR process, the costs of AJR will be borne 
by ESSP in projects years 2 to 5.   In order to evaluate education quality and student 
achievement on a continuous basis, the project, in cooperation with UNICEF and PESP, 
will support Ministry?s Measuring Learning Achievement program, in which learning is 
assessed in grades 3 and 5, and will assist in the development of a grade 6 assessment 
program.  
 
Component 2.   Learning Materials   [US$3.7 million].  
 
The project will support the ministry's outsourcing of the production of learning 
materials. This will be achieved by assisting MoEC to: (i) finalize its textbook and 
learning materials policy, (ii) establish a unit within the Ministry that will manage the 
tendering process for teaching and learning materials;  and, (iii) contribute to the 
financing of high quality learning materials, such as Lafaek, for primary and pre-
secondary students provided that these materials are closely linked to and supportive of 
the new primary curriculum, facilitate the introduction of textbooks and curricula, and 
reflect good practice in language instruction.  
 
PESP will fully finance the cost of the learning materials in project year 1 and ESSP 
will finance the materials over project years 2 to 5 on a declining basis.  The project will 
also fund a study tour to neighboring countries for key MoEC staff.  
 
Component 3.   Construction/Rehabilitation Design and Quality Assurance [US$4.1 
million].  
 
ESSP will assist MoEC to ensure the quality and cost-effectiveness of the GoTL-
financed construction/rehabilitation of an estimated 2,100 classrooms over the course of 
the project.   This is expected to add approximately 65,000 new student places.   To 
achieve this, the project will support MoEC's IFU, including: (i) consultant services; (ii) 
office equipment; (iii) operating costs; (iv) production and dissemination of construction 
and maintenance guidelines and building standards; (v) stakeholder workshops, and (vi) 
building and maintaining a school mapping database.  ESSP support will ensure that 
MoEC can maintain the high quality architectural and engineering design and 
supervision, infrastructure quality assurance and school mapping capacities that it has 
successfully developed under FSQP. The project, via the procurement specialist financed 
under Component 1, will develop MoEC's capacity to manage complex and multiple 
contracts so that the management of the IFU can be fully transferred to the Directorate of 
Administration and Finance.  The project will also support (i) a review of school site 
selection procedures and criteria to help the Ministry ensure that new school construction 
and rehabilitation is responsive to prioritized needs, especially in respect to providing 
access to un-served and under-served areas; (ii) a review of those rural and remote 
locations that may merit multi-grade schools; (iii) a review of existing primary school 
dormitories to assess the possibility of expanding these as on option for further system 
Page  4
expansion; and (iv) a review of kitchen needs at schools participating in the MoEC/World 
Food Program school feeding program.  
 
PESP will fully finance the IFU and its activities in project year 1, and ESSP will 
finance these costs over project years 2 to 5 on a declining basis.  From project year 3 on, 
should the Ministry prefer to switch from the current IFU structure of multiple consultant 
contracts to one in which the IFU?s services are provided under a single consultant 
contract, ESSP would contribute to the cost of that contract at a dollar level equivalent to 
the declining contribution to the costs of the IFU that the project would make according 
to the ESSP IDA Grant Agreement.  
 
Component 4   Work Skills for Pre-Secondary Students [US$2.2  million].  
 
This component reflects a new strategic direction for the MoEC in addressing youth 
related concerns by providing skills development opportunities to students and by 
responding to the expanding labor market demand for employability.  Through a pilot 
program, ESSP will develop an innovative skills development curriculum module for the 
final year of pre-secondary school that will help prevent youth disengagement from 
education particularly during the final stages of pre-secondary schooling, as well as 
developing work skills and attributes.  It is intended that the curriculum module 
developed be for a compulsory grade 9 subject that is build around a community 
development activity.  Once completed, the module will provide the guidance necessary 
for year 9 teachers to: (i) design a community development activity in consultation with 
their community that places an emphasis on creating the opportunity for participating 
students to acquire skills in areas such as, water provision, infrastructure finishing, 
agriculture, utilization of primary produce and tourism; (ii) identify the skills and other 
assets required to deliver the activity, and (iii) assess student performance as skills are 
developed and improved over the course of the year.  The project will set aside adequate 
resources to allow a degree of flexibility among schools as they identify their community 
activity. The pilot will include testing, evaluation and refinement of the module prior to 
its integration into the pre-secondary curriculum that is being developed by MoEC and 
UNICEF.  
 
ESSP will engage lead teachers to guide the pilot program's expansion from its initial 
introduction in three schools in project year 2 to a possible 96 schools in project year 5.  
Each lead teacher will receive two months of training in community development course 
design at selected qualified institution, either local or overseas. This will be followed by 
three months of in-country training in curriculum development during which they will 
contribute to the initial development of the module.   Given the innovative nature of the 
program, it will be closely monitored and evaluated to assess its impact on students.  The 
evaluation will also allow MoEC to make an informed decision related to possible 
program expansion.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be implemented throughout Timor-Leste.   
Page  5
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bruce M. Harris (EASTE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project is expected to have minimal adverse environmental impact.The 
project provides substantial technical assistance to the MoEC's IFU to ensure that school 
construction and rehabilitation is managed and completed according to accepted building 
codes and to Ministry's standards (developed under FSQP).  Contractor?s adherence to 
these requirements is independently reviewed and assessed by the IFU. MoEC has taken 
care over recent years to ensure the good practices from other school 
construction/rehabilitation programs in neighboring countries are reflected in their 
guidelines.  
 
There are no land acquisition or resettlement concerns as all civil works (financed by the 
government) related to ESSP will be conducted on sites on which existing schools are 
being rehabilitated, expanded or replaced, or on sites that are on vacant government land 
that is free from all encumbrances, habitation, dispute, claim and controversy.  The use of 
the land will neither require a resettlement plan nor a resettlement framework.  This is a 
category C project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In respect to the MoEC?s proposed school construction program, while no major 
safeguard issues exist, ESSP will ensure that (i) appropriate construction and 
maintenance techniques are used on all school sites; (ii) sanitation facilities are properly 
Page  6
placed; (iii) sewage is properly disposed of; (iv) building waste is properly disposed of; 
and (v) any complications concerning asbestos material in existing construction are dealt 
with properly.  Each of these concerns is addressed in the building standards that have 
already been developed and tested under FSQP.  Prior to project effectiveness, the GoTL 
will provide a project operations manual for Bank approved that includes the Ministry?s 
school construction and rehabilitation standards; applicable building codes.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The IFU (see above) addresses all construction related safeguard concerns on behalf of 
GoTL.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders (and beneficiaries) are the communities, the education practitioners and 
contractors across the country.  For those communities that are to receive new or 
rehabilitated schools, the IFU will ensure that they are engaged in the discussions on 
siting and on services and school maintenance.  Stakeholder workshops will be held for 
this purpose.  In addition, the IFU will brief concerned contractors on the details of all the 
required building standards for school construction and rehabilitation and on 
environmental requirements.   Furthermore, the wider Timor-Leste community is briefed 
on all aspects of the Ministry?s program, including the ways that it addresses, or intends 
to address, the specific needs of population subgroups (e.g. by gender, by disability, by 
poverty and location, an d by language group, etc.). This briefing last took place in 
October 2004 via a National Education Congress.  The next such Congress, financed by 
the project, will occur in early 2008. It is intended that this be fully covered by national 
radio and television.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/17/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/17/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/17/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
Page  7
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jerry G. Strudwick 
05/01/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bruce M. Harris 
05/17/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Bruce M. Harris 
05/17/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
05/17/2007 
Comments:   
