                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DA.TA SHEET
                                             CONCEPT STAGE

 Report N.: 336177



 Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:

 I. BASIC INFORMATION

 A. Basic Project Data

 Country: Trinidad & Tobago                            Project ID: PO94948
                                                       Additional Proiect ID (ifanv):
 Project Name: Nariva Wetland Restoration and Carbon Sequestration Project
 Task Team Leader: Walter Vergara
 Estimated Appraisal Date: January 2007                Estimated Board Date: April 2007
 Managing Unit: LCSEN                                  Lending Instrument: Carbon Finance
I Sector: Irrigation and drainage (30%):forestrv (70%)                                                     I
                                                                      1
 Theme: Climate Change (P);Water resource management (S)
 IBRD Amount (US$m.): 0.00
 IDA Amount (US$m.): 0.00
 PCF Amount (US$m.): US$0.782 (upto 2012) and US$1.59 (upto 2017)
  Other financing amounts by source:
  -  Government of Trinidad and Tobago @US$175,000/yrfrom 20105 to 2018 (total 2,450,000 )
  -  Budgetary allocation from Ministry 2,000,000(will request; is not a firm commitment yet).
  -  USDA Forest Service @US$625,000,total project implementation(total 625,000until year 2010)
  -   Ducks Unlimited @US$25,000/yr,from 2005 to 2009 (total 125,000,5years)
  - PHRD US $340,000
 Others (to be confirmed]
 Environmental Category: B
  Simplified Processing                    Simple [ ]
  Is this a transferred ~roiect             Yes r 1


  B. Project Objectives
  The project development objective is to cause carbon sequestration through the reforestation and
  restoration of the Nariva wetlands ecosystem. The restoration of the wetlands will result in other
  environmental benefits, including protection of endemic specie!; in the area. This will be achieved
 through a restoration of the natural drainage regime and natural and forced recovery of original vegetation
  cover. As a result of these actions, carbon will be sequestered and emission reductions will be caused.
  (This project will only claim credit for carbon sequestered). Restoration of the wetland will strengthen its
  natural buffer servicefor inland areas and contribute to preserve the rich biodiversity of the ecosystem.


  C. Project Description:
 The Nariva Project objective is part of the Nariva Restoration initiative which aims at achieving the
 restoration, to the extent it is feasible of the landscape and ecological characteristics of Nariva through
 afforestation, hydrologic rehabilitation, fire management and improved agriculturepractices.

The project components or interventions seek to recreate the conditions found around 1969, years after
the construction of the Navet Dam, but before the illegal land reclamation of the 1980's. To recreate this
scenario the following activities have been identified, conditional in the revenues expected from Carbon
sequestration and GHG emission reductions:

WaterManagement Plan:
There are several proposals to restore water flow into different sectors of the swamp and swamp forest.
All the existing plans lack of detailed designs due to lack of d~etailedtopographic maps to guide the
engineering design. The selection of a scenario agreeable to all parties is a very important benchmark for
the project. It provides clarity on the way forward, and facilities coordination among the many disciplines
involved.
In general much, more work is required to (i) assess the real availability of water, its yearly fluctuations,
maximum and minimums; (ii) assess water requirements for existing productive (agricultural) water
demand. This activity should also include an economic and techni~calanalysis of agricultural potential in
sector A, identify bottle necks and suggest alternatives; (iii) identify the land form composition of the
Nariva swamp area (geomorphologic analysis); (v) criteria to select high priority restoration areas; (vi)
development of engineering options to accelerate the restoration of the ecological functions of Nariva,
constraint in the adequate provision of water for agricultural purposes.

Reforestation/vegetationwork plan:
Approximately between 1800ha and 2500ha will be reforested, including palm forest over a period yet to
be defined. Reforestation activities will emphasize forest areas that were present in the 1969 GIS analysis
but were missing in the 1994 or 2003 analysis. These areas include the forest to the west of Sector B,
which was cut down by the illegal rice farmers; the "bowl" to th~ewest of Sector B; areas between the
Environmentally Sensitive Area and the southwest corner of Sector A; Sandhill; clear cut areas to the
west of Kernahan; and the royal palm forest.
Only species native to Nariva will be used. The appropriate use: of swamp forest species or rainforest
species will be determined by the water level and extent of the -floodingonce the surveys provide soil
elevation information and the hydrological conditions have been re:habilitated.
The aquatic vegetation also needs to be managed. Active management and control must be used and
monitoring should be an integral component of this activity in order to assist with any adjustments to
original plans as the wok progresses. Mechanical and chemical treatment of invasive species may be
required to open areas for more natural plant communities. Local experts will be consulted on their
experience in controlling species such as Phragmites sp, and Mont,richardiasp.
The following table summarizes the expected land use changes as promoted by the Nariva Wetland
restoration and Carbon Sequestration Project:

         Land cover class             Existing conditions (hectares)
Forests                                          6,200                                7,400
Marsh                                            4,270                                3,250
Agriculture                                       880

Fire Management Work Plan:
The Ramsar Project-Forest Fire Protection Plan for Nariva Swaimp issued by the Forestry Division in
 1999 outlines the main elements necessary for effective and adequate fire management in Nariva. To
assure continued success, the government of Trinidad and Tobago in cooperation with outside assistance
should reinforce several components. The proposed work plan includes: fire training for local fire
responders, site assessment of fire problems, overall fire response planning and community outreach of
fire and environmental education.

Monitoring
The GOTT,Ducks Unlimited (DU), and the U.S Forest Service are in the process of developing a detailed
monitoring plan. This monitoring plan is limited in scope: il: includes recording the response of
reforestation activities and monitors biodiversity through key species. In particular the proposed
monitoring plan includes:

         Vegetation -how vegetation communities react to reforestation and the rehabilitation of
         hydrological system
         Avifauna-with special emphasis on migratory birds
         Aquatic fauna
         Manatee monitoring; and
         Carbon Sequestration

This monitoring plan should be the foundation for the design of a comprehensive M&E system. Other
components should be subject of the monitoring effort including: Social indicators; Project M&E
(procurement and financial auditing); Institutional strengthening results; CC awareness; and other GHG
emissions.

D. Project location and salientphysical characteristicsrelevant to the safeguardanalysis (if
known):

Trinidad and Tobago; Nariva Wetland designated by the Parliament of the Recipient as a protected area
pursuant to the Forests Act, Chapter 66: 01, the Conservation of Wildlife Act, Chapter 67: 01, and the
State Lands Act, Chapter 57: 01 (the Nariva Protected Area). The Nariva Swamp, 6234 hectares, was
declared to be a forest reserve in 1954. The Bush secti~nof t l i ~Xariva Swamp (3,480 acres) is an area of
high ground that was declared a wildlife sanctuary in 1968, and a prohibited area in 1989. The site was
thus reserved as a local and international research centre, and in theory no hunting or harvesting was
allowed on the site. The Trinidad Regional V'irus Lab (TRVTL) (now CAREC) conducted research on
arboviruses there in the 1950sand onwards.

Borrower's Institutional Capacityfor SafeguardPolicies:

Trinidad & Tobago's Environmental Management Authority (EMA) has a strong institutional capacity.

F. Environmental and Social SafeguardsSpecialistson the Team:

Walter Vergara: Environmental Specialist
Alejandro Deeb: Hydrologist
Jorge Villegas: Social Specialist

11. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

SafeguardPolicies Triggered(please explain why)                            Yes          No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP4.01)                                         x
An EA will be developed. This assessment will comprise primarily, a) the information needed to
thoroughly answer the questions posed in CFD Annex 4 on "Environmental Risks and Benefits" and b) a
summary of the stakeholder consultations on the project (particularly the environmental aspects) that were
carried out during project preparation (including the dates and venues of consultation events, the
organizations and stakeholder groups who participated, and the main types of comments provided)

Natural Habitats (OP/BP4.04)                                                 x
    The Nariva wetland and adjacent uplands would be restored and enhanced under the proposed Project
activity following an improved protection and management plan. For this reason an EA will be
performed. This assessment will clarify that the native tree planting proposed under the project would be
reforestation. The reforestation, water level management, and othei-Nariva Swamp restoration efforts will
be planned so as to consider the particular habitat requirements (of animal and plant species of special
conservation concern, such as the globally threatened West Indian Manatee and near-threatened
Caribbean Coot.
Forests (OP/BP4.36)                                                          x
    The Nariva swamp qualifies as a Critical Forest under OP 4.36. In order to mitigate possible impacts,
an EA will be performed. This assessment will clarify that the native tree planting proposed under the
project would be reforestation. The reforestation, water level management, and other Nariva Swamp
restoration efforts will be planned so as to consider the particular habitat requirements of animal and plant
species of special conservation concern, such as the globally threatened West Indian Manatee and near-
threatened Caribbean Coot.
Pest Management (OP4.09)
    Since the project might use chemicals to control invasive we
4.09) applies. An EA will indicate which compounds are likely to be used, as well as prohibited from use,
under the project. It will also indicate how the safe use, storage, and disposal of such substances will be
ensured during Project implementation. The use of highly hazard
WHO Category IA, IB, or I1lists will be avoided.
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)

IndigenousPeoples (OP/BP4.10)

Involuntary Resettlement (OPIBP4.12)
    Although the project won't cause physical displacement of         1

local communities might be restricted. A process framework will be developed in that regard in order to
address potential livelihood issues that might arise for local con
enforcement of the protected areas. Extensive consultations with
well as the definition of adequate compensation measures.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP4.37)

Projectson InternationalWaterways (OP/BP7.50)

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP7.60)

111. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared: December 2006

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS:

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
    The specific studies and their timing1should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
     January 2007

IV. APPROVALS                                               /              f



    Comments:                                                   c  '




I Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

1nfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.

