Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2217 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/03/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tunisia 
Project ID: P099811 
Project Name: TN-TUNIS WEST SEWERAGE (PHASE1) 
Task Team Leader: Mohammed Benouahi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: September 19, 2006 
Managing Unit: MNSIF 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sewerage (100%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P);Other financial and private 
sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
11.00
11.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project will help achieve the following objectives:  
 
(i) 
Enhance ONAS treatment capacity in the Greater Tunis area, thus improving the quality 
of sanitation services, and preserving the achievements of the sector;  
 
(ii) 
Improve the quality of the environment, particularly in Greater Tunis coastal area, which 
will induce beneficial effects on both local and international tourism;  
 
(iii) 
Promote the reuse of treated wastewater in irrigation on a sustainable basis and in 
significant quantities, which is very important given the severity of water scarcity in Tunisia  
 
(iv) 
Enhance ONAS performance through financial, operational, and environmental  
management capacity building.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project comprises of the following components:  
 
a) 
Sewerage. This component is estimated to cost US$65 million and includes:  
 
(i) 
the construction of a Sewage Treatment Plant in El Attar in the western part of Great 
Tunis.  This plant will have a capacity of 60,000 m3/ day in its first phase and will treat the 
sewage produced by an equivalent of 750,000 people;  
Page  2
(ii) 
the construction of a system of mains and pumping stations to transfer raw sewage to the 
treatment plant and the transfer treated sewage to irrigation basins be used for agriculture. This 
sewage transfer and treatment system has been selected among other alternatives which have 
been subject of detailed cost benefit analysis; and  
 
(iii) 
Technical assistance for construction supervision.  
 
b) 
Institution Building. This component is estimated to cost US$2 million and includes:  
 
(i) 
Preparation of economic and institutional feasibility studies for one hundred small towns;  
 
(ii) 
Establishment of a customer’s management system.  It was decided to integrate this 
ONAS system with the one being developed in SONEDE, the national water supply agency in 
order to avoid duplication of efforts and ensure better coordination between the two agencies;  
 
(iii) 
Technical assistance for reinforcing ONAS capacity in financial management; and  
 
(iv) 
Technical assistance for environmental management of the project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The general project location is in the Greater Tunis area. A new Wastewater Treatment Plant site 
is proposed to be located at El-Attar and two pumping stations close to the Sedjouni lake. The 
site selection process is incorporated in the Environmental Assessment report under preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
a) 
The proposed project triggers one safeguard policy “Environmental assessment” without 
expected special risks as it will be managed systematically within the project. The Tunisian 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) system is in general relatively advanced in terms of 
institutional and legal capacity.  
 
b) 
Tunisia is known as a country especially sensitive to environmental protection. Under 
previous Bank funded projects, ONAS staff participated in Bank safeguard policies training and 
is familiar with the Bank policy. In addition, capacity improvement activities will be undertaken 
as part of the implementation of component 2 of the project (Institutional strengthening- 
Environmental Management of the project).  
 
c) 
ONAS will closely supervise the quality of the EA Report, which is being carried out by 
an independent consultant. Furthermore, ONAS will also liaison with the National 
Environmental protection agency (ANPE) who is in charge of reviewing and approving EIA 
reports. There is thus strong capacity of the Borrower to meet Safeguard requirements.  
 
Social Assessment  
 
Current information indicates that no social safeguard issues are likely to be triggered by 
project activity. However, it would be prudent to conduct a social assessment which would elicit 
not only safeguard and other potential negative impacts from the project but also positive social 
benefits.  
 
a)- Expected social benefits  
 
Page  3
The project is expected to  
 
•
facilitate the connection to ONAS system of a large number of low-income households 
living in Tunis-west (Sidi Hassine, Sedjoumi, El Agba, etc.): currently, a large number of these 
households discharge their wastewater to cesspits and ONAS has been reluctant to connect them 
because of lack of treatment capacity.  
 
•
Provide medium farmers with new water resources which will enable them to increase 
yields and grow crops with higher returns. The volume of treated wastewater under the project 
will irrigate 2000 ha, cultivated in cereals and fodder.  
 
•
Improve the quality of the environment and citizens’ health not only in the areas not yet 
connected to ONAS network but also in other areas: Tunis-west where there is reuse of effluent 
that is inadequately treated because of strain on existing capacity; and  other coastal areas where 
pollution has increased in recent years.  
 
b)-  Land issues  
 
The land already identified for the location of the treatment plant is state-owned, part of land 
leased out to private tenants on a long-term basis with a contractual provision that the state can 
claim back plots for the public interest. Plots for the two pumping stations are also publicly-
owned and are currently not cultivated. The Ministry of “Domaines de l’Etat”, which is the 
custodian of all state assets, has already allocated these plots to ONAS for the implementation of 
the project. As for sewerage lines, they will be laid on municipal road sides. The works will not 
therefore require any expropriation or new land acquisition, nor any displacement of persons.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jaafar Sadok Friaa (MNSRE) 
Mr Colin S. Scott (MNSRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
The Cultural Property issue will be determined by the results of the Environmental and 
Social Impact Assessment.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The issue of Involuntary Resettlement will be determined by the results of the Environmental 
and Social Impact Assessment   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  4
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/15/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental Assessment Category:  
 
[
X] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined)  
 
The A rating has been assigned because of (i) the nature and the size of the planned 
wastewater treatment facility; (ii) the vulnerability of receiving water bodies i.e. Oued 
Meliane, and Tunis Bay; and (iii) the potential reuse of treated effluents and sludge for 
irrigation and soil conditioning. Potential negative impacts generally associated with such 
sewerage project could be:  
 
•
Impacts due to construction practices, e.g. noise, dust.  
 
•
Degradation of sensitive environments due to discharge of wastewater.  
 
•
Degradation of neighborhoods or receiving water body quality from sewer overflows, 
pumping stations bypasses, or treatment process failures.  
 
•
Public health hazards in the vicinity of treated effluent discharges.  
 
•
Odors, noise and emission of volatile organics from treatment processes.  
 
•
Sludge disposal issues  
 
In the early stages of project preparation a public consultation was carried out and served as 
a
scoping exercise for the preparation of the Environmental Assessment. ONAS has already 
started the preparation of the Environmental Impact Assessment  and a Draft Final EIA 
Report is expected in March 2006.  
 
The land acquisition issues and any other issues that could trigger OP4.12 will be evaluated 
in both the Environmental and Social Assessments, and will be fully clarified by the QER 
(May 2006).   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mohammed Benouahi 
03/30/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
04/03/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
03/31/2006 
Comments:   
