Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC914 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/24/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tunisia 
Project ID: P086660 
Project Name: TUN - Community-Based Integrated Rural Development 
Task Team Leader: Huong-Giang Lucie Tran 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 28, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 29, 2008 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Forestry (25%);Irrigation 
and drainage (10%);Crops (10%);Animal production (5%) 
Theme: Land administration and management (P);Water resource management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 
African Development Bank 
15.00 
 Local 
Communities 
5.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project would promote sustainable natural resource management, in particular of crop and 
rangeland in severely degraded zones, and agricultural productivity improvements, attained with 
greater involvement of resource users, by: (a) where feasible, helping to reverse degradation, and 
by developing integrated management practices, controlling soil erosion and introducing new 
technologies to increase on-farm income; and (b) allowing local communities to express their 
development priorities through comprehensive Participatory Development Plans covering soils, 
water, rangelands and forests, as well as rural infrastructure, and to carry them out in partnership 
with local Government agencies, leading to higher incomes and living standards.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would have the following main components, to be implemented over a 5-year period 
(2006-2011): (a) natural resource management operations. In the existing areas of Jendouba, 
Kasserine and Medenine, the project would support the still relatively recent PDP process begun 
Page  2
under the first phase with the assistance of MOA staff.  The same 101 local communities would 
be included (36 in Jendouba, 47 in Kasserine and 18 in Medenine), but the focus would be 
shifted to geographic areas not covered under the first phase. In the new areas of Siliana, Sidi 
Bouzid and Sfax, the project would provide the institutional and organizational support 
necessary launch the PDP process, and also support for a variety of investment activities similar 
to those in the first phase, i.e. soil and water conservation, agricultural and pastoral development, 
small-scale irrigation systems, other rural infrastructure such as rural roads and potable water 
supply, and income generating activities for women.  
 
(b) Institutional strengthening and capacity building. This component would help to strengthen 
and build capacity within the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources to implement the new 
approach at both the central and local levels, including a central Project Coordination Unit in 
Tunis and regional units in each of the six governorates involved.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Governorates of Jendouba, Kasserine, Medenine, and include three additional locations (to be 
determined during the course of preparation).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The proposed project and the potential GEF project attached to it will be implemented by the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources and the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable 
Development (the “Office National de l’Assainissement de l’Eau” (ONAS) and the General Dept 
of Environmental Quality of the Ministry). The ministry of Agriculture has recently completed 
the implementation of the Bank’s Natural Resources Management Project, and the current 
proposed project is mainly a consolidation and a scaling up of that project. In addition to that the 
Forestry Dept of the Ministry is currently implementing another Bank/GEF project on Protected 
Areas Managements, and as such capacity and familiarity with the Bank’s environmental 
requirements and Safeguards Policies does exist at the Ministry.  
 
Both ONAS and the Environmental Quality Dept of the Ministry of Environment and 
Sustainable Development also have a long standing track of collaboration with the Bank, and an 
adequate institutional capacity to implement and ensure compliance with the Bank’s safeguards 
policies, both environmental and social.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Dahlia Lotayef (MNSSD) 
Ms M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong (MNSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Environmental Management Plan developed under the NRM project will be evaluated 
and updated.  The project will also develop during project’s preparation clear criteria and 
checklist for the selection and screening of sub-projects to be supported during implementation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The scopes of activities as well as the specific areas of intervention are still to be determined, 
but include investments relating to soil, water, vegetation, agriculture etc. In this context, the 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
team will confirm during preparation if the Natural Habitatswill apply.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
The scopes of activities as well as the specific areas of intervention are still to be determined, 
but include investments relating to soil, water, vegetation, agriculture etc. In this context, the 
team will confirm during preparation if the Forest policies will apply.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
The scopes of activities as well as the specific areas of intervention are still to be determined, 
but include investments relating to soil, water, vegetation, agriculture etc. In this context, the 
team will confirm during preparation if the Pest Management policies will apply.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Certain project activities may trigger OP4.12.  An RPF will be developed prior to appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/14/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
January 7, 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Abdelkrim Oka 
06/14/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Luis F. Constantino 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
