Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1450 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/12/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tunisia 
Project ID: P075809 
Project Name: Higher Education Reform Support II 
Task Team Leader: Linda K. English 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 1, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 25, 2006 
Managing Unit: MNSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Tertiary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P);Education for all (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
140.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
40.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
40.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Bank will support the government four year sector program entitled: Supporting Quality in 
Higher Education Program. The Program Development Objective is to improve the skills of 
graduates so that they can contribute to a more knowledge based and diversified economy.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed program includes the following four main components:  
 
Component 1: Expand and restructure access to higher education. The objective of this 
component is to assist the government in its efforts to respond to the fast growing demand for 
higher education with a combination of traditional infrastructure and less costly investment 
options and recurrent costs.  
 
Component 2: Revise programs and improve the quality of higher education. The objective of 
this component is to improve the quality of teaching and learning to better equip students to 
succeed in the labor market.  
 
Page  2
Component 3: Reinforcing university autonomy and higher education performance.  
 
Component 4: Ensuring financial sustainability and social equity. This component will focus on 
putting in place a system to improve the effectiveness, relevance and financial sustainability of 
the higher education system during a period of rapid enrollment growth.    
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Country wide.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be determined.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif (MNSRE) 
Mr Hocine Chalal (MNSRE) 
Ms Concepcion Esperanza Del Castillo (MNSRE) 
Mr Jaafar Sadok Friaa (MNSRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental category: Given the potentially significant infrastructure component of the 
project (component 1-i), and the relative uncertainty about the loan amount and the lending 
instrument, it was recommended, that this project be retained, at this stage, under the Safeguards 
group oversight. Transfer of safeguards responsibility could be revisited after the pre-appraisal 
mission and at QER.  
 
Environmental Assessment: Recommendation was made to the team to consider a 
framework environmental (and social) assessment that would build on the experience gained 
during the previous higher education project. The structure and content of this framework EA 
would depend on whether the pipeline of universities to be built is totally or partially defined at 
project preparation. The framework EA would define the specific EA process to be followed for 
each university construction sub-project, the EA scoping and disclosure process and the standard 
ToRs for the specific university construction sub-projects. Then the EA process should be 
mainstreamed in the regular preparations studies (APS/APD). The cost of the mitigating 
measures should be integrated in the feasibility studies. The role of the Tunisian Environmental 
Protection Agency should also be defined clearly in the framework document.  
 
Social Safeguard Compliance Issue:  
 
Component 1 of the project will entail civil works for the construction of higher education 
facilities. The exact location of these facilities has yet to be determined. Therefore, the 
applicability of OP/BP 4.12 will be ascertained when it is determined if the civil works will (i) 
entail land expropriation and (ii) in the case of lands belonging in the public domain if current 
users will need to be compensated for loss of assets/means of livelihood.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/14/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The environmental assessment is expected to be completed by the end of February 2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Linda K. English 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Regina Maria Bendokat 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
