Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3092 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/02/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tunisia 
Project ID: P106415 
Project Name: Tunisia Avian Influenza Preparedness 
Task Team Leader: Jean-Philippe Tre 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date:  
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (50%);Animal production (30%);General 
public administration sector (20%) 
Theme: Rural policies and institutions (P);Other rural development (S);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Avian and Human Influenza Facility 
0.60
0.60 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall development objective of the Grant is to minimize the risk of outbreaks of the Highly 
Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) and other zoonoses in domestic poultry, and to strengthen 
Tunisia’s preparedness and infectious disease control capacity. The intended beneficiaries are 
large, medium, as well as backyard-sized farms.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Five priority activities were identified for this project: (i) to develop mechanisms for outbreak 
containment and a compensation scheme, (ii) to boost the veterinary and laboratory services 
capacity, (iii) to sustain and refine the epidemiological surveillance, develop a data analysis 
expertise, and to evaluate through international expertise the quality of the surveillance plans and 
of the diagnostic abilities, (iv) to train stakeholders involved in the poultry sector, and to conduct 
an awareness campaign for farmers and general population, and (v) improve coordination 
between national authorities and multilateral agencies.  
 
Component A 
Preventive Disease Management  
Page  2
This component will provide support for:  
 
·
Strengthening the intervention capacity by providing equipment to the central and 
veterinary services, allowing them to quickly intervene should an outbreak in poultry occur. This 
would be achieved by (i) provision of mobile intervention unit; (ii) provision of material for 
poultry culling; (iii) provision of equipment for disinfection and personal protection.  
 
·
Assisting the Government in developing a compensation scheme for farmers in case 
mandatory culling has to be performed, through (i) a fund to be used to for the culling logistical 
costs (ii) a detailed compensation plan to be formulated through a short term consultancy by an 
international compensation expert.  
 
·
Simulation Exercise of the National Preparedness Plan for an outbreak scenario. FAO 
will provide support in making sure that the National Preparedness Plan is effective.  
 
Component B  
Laboratory Services Support  
 
This component will provide support for:  
 
·
Ameliorating laboratory capacities for diagnosis of HPAI, by  (i) providing laboratory 
material for performing polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and enhancing safety of medical 
personnel while proceeding samples; (ii) providing small equipment to central and regional 
laboratories; (iii) providing reagents for HPAI diagnosis and ensuring a differential diagnosis 
with other poultry diseases; (iv) providing a fully equipped surveillance van to be used to collect 
samples and to process them before they will be analyzed in the central laboratory.  
 
·
An international audit to evaluate laboratory capacities for HPAI diagnosis, including 
PCR techniques. This would be achieved through the recruitment of an international expert who 
would work with and train the laboratory staff during his/her two 7 day visits, and provide 
recommendations on good practices and improvements.  
 
Component C 
Surveillance and Epidemiology  
 
This component will provide support for:  
 
·
Fortifying the veterinary services’ ability to carry out epidemiological surveys, by means 
of (i) provision of a van for transport of surveillance teams to suspected areas, including credits 
for fuel; (ii) supplying equipment for sample collection and for protection of medical personnel.  
 
·
Data analysis, by (i) providing informatics equipment for collection of the 
epidemiological data; b) recruiting a national consultant to enter all collected data into a disease 
information system; (iii) provision of software, including a disease information system and 
Geographical Information System; (iv) improving data and information collection from other 
epidemiological teams.  
 
·
An audit of the surveillance system, as well as a risk analysis of possible HPAI 
occurrence and spread in Tunisia, performed by an international expert.  
 
Page  3
Component D 
Training and Awareness Campaign  
 
This component will provide support for:  
 
·
Training of stakeholders involved in disease surveillance and control, including  (i) 
veterinarians from the public sector specialized in poultry diseases; (ii) delegates of 
D’Arrondissement Production Animale - 72 people during a period of 12 months; (iii) private 
veterinarians involved in poultry disease management and delegates from Les Chefs de 
Circonscriptions Production Animales (CCPA) and Des Commissariats Régionaux au 
Développement Agricole (CRDA) - 316 people over a period of 12 months.  
 
·
Awareness campaign for farmers and other stakeholders involved in the poultry sector, as 
well as for the general population, by means of a communication plan and information material. 
The communication strategy will identify all beneficiaries and stakeholders that would be 
impacted by an outbreak of HPAI, and the awareness campaign will be designed accordingly.  
 
Component E 
Project Management  
 
This component will provide support for:  
 
·
Effective coordination of the project activities between the national authorities, the 
implementing agency (FAO) and the World Bank, by means of recruiting (i) project manager 
(national consultant) charged with     establishing a management unit that will implement the 
project, and with providing technical assistance to veterinary services in epidemiology and 
laboratory diagnosis. The project manager will also be responsible for procurement of material 
and equipment and for writing quarterly reports.  
 
·
Hiring an administrative assistant who will provide support to the project manager.  
 
·
Hiring a communications specialist who will prepare a communications strategy for the 
entire project, as well as participate in preparing the awareness campaign outlined in Component 
D.  
 
·
Two FAO backstopping missions that will supervise and evaluate the project 
implementation, provide guidance and technical assistance, evaluate and report back. This will 
include one mission of an FAO officer per year for 9 days (a total of 18 days over 2 years) to 
provide technical supervision, evaluation and reporting.  
 
·
Incremental Operating Costs which will cover the cost associated with field supervision 
and implementation of project activities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
This project will be implemented nationwide in Tunisia.  
 
For specific components, certain provinces are targeted where reference and regional 
laboratories exist (for strengthening of animal disease surveillance capacity)   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  4
The Borrower’s institutional capacity for safeguard policies is adequate. All contracts will be 
appraised to ensure compliance with both Bank and Tunisian requirements.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Huong-Giang Lucie Tran (MNSSD) 
Mr Hocine Chalal (MNSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
In terms of OP 4.01, the the issues of relevance to the project relate to: (i) selection and 
implementation of culling methods; (ii) selection and implementation of disposal methods for 
culled poultry and associated waste; (ii) safe disposal of medical waste; and (iv) mitigating the 
negative economic impacts of disease-inducted death and/or mandated culling of poultry on 
small-scale and backyard poultry producers.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
In terms of OP 4.09, it is very likely that chemicals will be used for the culling of birds. The 
procurement of any pesticide will be contingent on an assessment of the nature and degree of 
associated risks, taking into account the proposed use and the intended users. The Project will 
require that any pesticides it finances be manufactured, packaged, labeled, handled, stored, 
disposed of, and applied according to standards acceptable to the Bank. The Bank does not 
finance formulated products that fall in WHO classes IA and IB, or formulations of products in 
Class II, if (a) the country lacks restrictions on their distribution and use; or (b) they are likely to 
be used by, or be accessible to, lay personnel, farmers, or others without training, equipment, and 
facilities to handle, store, and apply these products properly.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Under Component A, poultry culling is planned in case of an outbreak. In the eventuality of 
culling it needs to be specified where the poultry would be disposed of. It is therefore 
recommended that attention is paid to the following issues:  
 
Identification of relevant sites:  
 
-
Will they be on private or public land? If so documentation indicating proof of ownership 
should be obtained.  
 
Even if sites are on public land safeguards may still apply:  
 
-
OP 4.12 may still be triggered, as the land may be inhabited or being used by communities 
for economic purposes.  
 
If this is the case there might be involuntary taking of land resulting in either:  
 
i) relocation or loss of shelter;  
 
ii) loss of assets or access to assets; or  
 
iii) loss of income sources or means of livelihood.  
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
-
Site selection principles:  
 
Ensure that culling areas are chosen according to clear disposal site selection principles as 
disposal sites could be in the proximity of residential areas causing heat, smoke or odor or risk of 
disseminating/spreading of the virus to affect nearby human settlements.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/31/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The project’s prevention-focused activities are expected to have a positive environmental 
impact as the project’s investments in facilities, equipment, and training for animal health 
workers and facilities will develop capacity to improve the effectiveness and safety over 
existing HPAI handling and testing procedures. This would be reinforced by the 
mainstreaming of environmental safeguards into protocols and procedures for the culling and 
disposal of animals during HPAI outbreaks, and for laboratory safety and appropriate waste 
management procedures.  
 
The EMP should be completed as early as possible during project preparation. But in cases 
where completion and disclosure of the EMP are not possible by appraisal, a waiver must be 
requested. In that case, completion and disclosure of the EMP by the Government is 
recommended to be set as a disbursement condition for the relevant component.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean-Philippe Tre 
07/31/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
07/31/2007 
Comments:  Social reviewer: Gregorio Bettiza 
Environmental reviewer: Kanta Rigaud 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Luis F. Constantino 
08/01/2007 
Comments:   
