                                                                                                                                                                                                       43560


Authorized
                                                                                                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                                                                                                              APPRAISAL STAGE

          Disclosure                                                                                        I. Basic Information
                                                                                                            Date prepared/updated: 03/22/2007                                      Report No.: AC2383
                    Public
                                                                                                            1. Basic Project Data
                                                                                                            Country: Turkey                               Project ID: P096801
                                                                                                            Project Name: Electricity Distribution Rehabilitation Project
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: Sameer Shukla
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: June 21, 2006       Estimated Board Date: April 19, 2007
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: ECSSD                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                          Authorized
                                                                                                                                                          Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: Power (100%)
                                                                                                            Theme: Other urban development (P);Infrastructure services for private sector
                                    Disclosure                                                              development (S)
                                                                                                            IBRD Amount (US$m.):          269.40

                                              Public                                                        IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            Other financing amounts by source:
                                                                                                                    Borrower                                                          75.00
                                                                                                                                                                                      75.00
                                                    Authorized                                              Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
                                                                                                            Simplified Processing                         Simple []              Repeater []
                                                                                                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)          Yes [ ]     No [X]

                                                              Disclosure
                                                                                                            2. Project Objectives
                                                                                                            The Project Development Objective is to help improve the reliability of power supply to
                                                                        Public                              consumers in Turkey by supporting the implementation of the electricity distribution
                                                                                                            network rehabilitation program.

                                                                                                            3. Project Description
                                                                                                            The Electricity Distribution Rehabilitation Project consists of the following investments:

                                                                                                             Distribution Network Rehabilitation and Expansion: This includes investment projects
                                                                              Authorized                    for distribution network rehabilitation and expansion in the TEDAS regional companies
                                                                                                            of Ayedas, Uludag, Meram, Gedez, Toroslar, Menderes, Osmangazi, and Akdeniz. The
                                                                                                            projects comprise medium and low voltage (34.5 kV, 0.4 kV) line replacements and
                                                                                                            extensions, substation upgrades, and upgrading of lines from non-standard medium
                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                            voltages and their conversion to underground cables.

                                                                                                  Public     The distribution network projects to be financed by the Loan include rehabilitation and
                                                                                                            upgrading of existing distribution equipment and facilities, network expansion by
                                                                                                            constructing new distribution substations and feeders using predominantly underground
                                                                                                            cables, and replacement of existing run-down and aged medium and low voltage

overhead lines in densely populated areas with underground cables. While rehabilitating
the networks, efforts would be made to reduce non-standard medium voltages (besides
34.5 kV) which are currently in operation at several locations. Network rehabilitation
would help reduce losses, reduce network operation and maintenance costs, and reduce
supply interruptions caused by equipment and facilities outages. In addition, these
projects would also improve the safety of the network by reducing the potential for faults
and accidents through over head lines; help minimize compensation payments made for
material damages and ensure compliance with the Electricity Power Current Facilities
Regulation of 2000 which has increased the minimum allowable distance between
overhead power lines and buildings.

 Technical Assistance for supervision consultants: The project will also finance
supervision consultants to assist TEDAS and the regional companies in managing and
supervising the implementation of the investment projects.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The investment projects financed by this loan will be located in city centers, settlement
communities and other urban areas whose electricity supply is provided by the following
eight regional distribution companies:

 1- Ayedas Regional Company
 2- Uludag Regional Company
 3- Meram Regional Company
 4- Gediz Regional Company
 5- Toroslar Regional Company
 6- Menderes Regional Company
 7- Osmangazi Regional Company
 8- Akdeniz Regional Company

 The network rehabilitation projects financed by this Loan are not expected to have
significant safeguard-related impacts. The projects will include works such as
rehabilitation of existing equipment (transformers, capacitors etc.), replacement of low
and medium overhead lines with underground cables and expansion of the network by
construction of new underground cables and possibly overhead lines both at low and
medium voltages. The potential impacts are considered to be minor, of limited duration
and limited area. They are primarily associated with construction activities. All impacts
can be readily managed with standard procedures of good engineering and construction
practice. In the course of excavating the ditches to place any underground cable, there is
a possibility of unearthing artifacts of cultural significance. The EMPs all include
requirements to follow Turkish chance find procedures regarding cultural artifacts.
During operation, the chief potential issues are effects on the public (if any) of exposure
to electric and magnetic fields which also would be mitigated by burying cables at a
depth to insure surface values will meet international standards.

 The population of each of the respective areas will benefit from these projects. Existing
electricity users will experience fewer accidents and safety risks as well as more reliable
electricity supply; and consumers in expansion areas will immediately gain from the
reliable distribution network. In several places, the existing overhead lines are hazardous
and inconveniently located, due to inadequately planned investments. The incidence of
accidents is expected to decrease markedly in project areas. There will be some
temporary inconvenience as the overhead lines are buried in the streets but this should be
minor. Underground cabling and rehabilitation of the network is expected to improve the
reliability and safety of electricity supply in the areas during normal operation, but also
during calamities like storms and earthquakes. These investments are also expected to
enable the regional companies to serve more loads. Electricity tariffs may increase over
time in order to cover rise in costs, and with better efficiency, bill collections should
increase and illegal connections should decrease. Tariffs however are not expected to
rise due to the project. No land acquisition is expected, as the underground cables will be
located under public land (streets, sidewalks). Substation expansion and construction will
be on land already owned and occupied by the distribution companies; they will not
require land acquisition.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD)
   Mr Bernard Baratz (EASTE)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes           No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                            X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                          X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                     X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                   X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                       X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
In accordance with World Bank policies and procedures for Environmental Assessment
(OP/BP/GP 4.01), the Electricity Distribution Rehabilitation Project is rated Category B.
TEDAS has prepared very good quality draft Environmental Management Plans (EMPs)
to mitigate and monitor potential environmental impacts of the distribution network
projects financed by the Loan. TEDAS has also completed before the appraisal mission,
the consultation and disclosure of the EMPs for the projects included in the first group of
projects financed by loan. Consultation and disclosure of the next group projects will be

completed after the completion of their feasibility reports and before issuance of their
bidding documents.

 The network rehabilitation projects financed by this Loan are not expected to have
significant safeguard-related impacts. The projects will include works such as
rehabilitation of existing equipment (transformers, capacitors etc.), replacement of low
and medium overhead lines with underground cables and expansion of the network by
construction of new underground cables and possibly overhead lines both at low and
medium voltages. The potential impacts are considered to be minor of limited duration
and limited area. They are primarily associated with construction activities. All impacts
can be readily managed with standard procedures of good engineering and construction
practice. During operation, the chief potential issues are effects on the public (if any) of
exposure to electric and magnetic fields which also would be mitigated by burying cables
at a depth to insure surface values will meet international standards. There are no known
areas that are of significance with regard to cultural properties. However, if artifacts are
uncovered in the course of excavation, they would be subjected to Turkish chance find
procedures, which are consistent with World Bank safeguard policy on cultural
properties.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The investments will have significant positive impacts primarily through improving the
safety of the distribution networks in the urban areas and increasing the reliability of the
electricity supply to consumers.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
TEDAS has considered various alternative designs to prepare the least cost rehabilitation
program. The alternatives included new overhead lines in replacement of the old
overhead network; using aerial bunched cables; and underground cable network. Since
old networks at several places are of non-standard voltage, the new network (at voltage
level different from the existing network) would need to be constructed in parallel with
the old network in order to keep serving existing consumers during the construction
period. The right of way is inadequate to run two medium voltage overhead networks in
parallel, which makes the alternative of overhead lines technically infeasible. The
alternative of aerial bunched cables also would require additional supports for which right
of way does not exist at several locations. In addition, the aerial bunched cable would
also impact the aesthetics of tourist places and city centers and breach municipal
regulations. TEDAS has finally adopted underground cabling as the optimal alternative
for the expansion and rehabilitation of existing distribution network. The utilization of
cabling technology in the development and operation of distribution networks is common
in most Western European countries. One of the principal advantages of the underground
cables in urban areas is that they improve the safety of electric facilities and reduce the
environmental and aesthetic adverse impacts.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower has prepared high-quality environmental management plans (EMPs) after
due consultations in the areas where projects are proposed. The EMPs have also been
disclosed on the website of TEDAS. The EMP requirements will be part of the bidding
documents, and will be regularly monitored by TEDAS staff supported by supervision
consultants.

 The quality of the EMPs, and the quality of consultations demonstrate that there is
adequate capacity and appreciation of safeguards issues among TEDAS staff.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders are the people living in the vicinity of the project areas and the regional
distribution companies. TEDAS has conducted public notifications, consultation and
disclosure for the investment projects included in the first group of projects financed by
the loan. EMPs, along with their consultation and disclosure, of other project financed by
the loan will be completed after their feasibility reports are prepared, closer to the time of
implementation.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       05/29/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                   06/19/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    06/20/2006
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                   Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)               Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the               Yes
credit/loan?

  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's      Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a      Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities   Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project  Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?



  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                              Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                  Mr Sameer Shukla                             03/15/2007
Environmental Specialist:          Mr Bernard Baratz                            03/20/2007
Social Development Specialist      Mr Norval Stanley Peabody                    03/22/2007
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Ronald N. Hoffer                          03/22/2007
 Comments: Cleared for safeguards
Sector Manager:                    Mr Peter D. Thomson                          03/22/2007
 Comments:

