Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/12/2006 
Report No.:  AC2009
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Turkey 
Project ID:  P096262 
Project Name:  Avian Influenza & Human Pandemic Preparedness & Response APL 2 
Project 
Task Team Leader:  Mark R. Lundell 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 16, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 2, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Animal production (40%);Health (30%);Agro-industry (30%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (P);Other communicable diseases (P);Rural 
policies and institutions (S);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
15.40 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
6.49 
 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
3.69 
 
FOREIGN MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS (UNIDENTIFIED) 
9.84
20.02 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall objective of the Project is to minimize the threat in Turkey posed to humans 
by HPAI infection and other zoonoses in domestic poultry and prepare for, control, and 
respond to influenza pandemic and other infectious disease emergencies in humans. To 
achieve this, three areas will be supported:  (i) prevention, (ii) preparedness and planning 
and (iii) response and containment. Achieving these goals will contribute to diminishing 
the burden of disease and loss of productivity in Turkey, limiting the regional spread of 
HPAI, and enhancing economic and social prospects at the national, regional, and global 
levels.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project is likely to finance activities under three components: (i) animal health, (ii) 
human health, (iii) public awareness and coordination support.  
 
Page  2
Component I. Animal Health: The Project will support activities to cover the needs in 
the short, medium or long-term, and ranging from prevention, to control and total 
eradication of HPAI, which have been based on an assessment of the particular 
conditions, constraints and possibilities in Turkey (including a rapid assessment of 
veterinary services and recent assessments of the poultry sector). The Project activities 
will support strategy development, the improvement of the regulatory framework and 
epidemiological studies and surveillance programs to inform the improvement of disease 
control measures. Strengthening the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Affairs (MARA) and its affiliated reference and regional diagnostic laboratories in 
detection, reporting and follow-up of reported AI cases will be another goal of the 
project. Support to activities related to the implementation of the containment plan for AI 
outbreaks such as targeting virus eradication at the source, restructuring of the poultry 
sector through the reduction of the practice of backyard poultry raising, improving the 
opportunity for slaughtering of egg laying poultry, and promoting manure management of 
backyard poultry that is in conformity with existing environmental regulations will also 
be targeted by the project.  
 
Component II. Human Health: The Project will help to operationalize some elements 
that are contemplated as part of the global strategic plan, and expanding and intensifying 
the responses rapidly.  As it is unlikely that the global spread of a pandemic influenza 
virus could be prevented once it emerges, the emphasis is on reducing its impact.  Several 
tools will help achieve this aim:  (i) year-round surveillance; (ii) effective and accurate 
methods of diagnosis; (iii) social distance interventions; (iv) vaccines (once they become 
available); (v) anti-viral drugs; and (vi) strengthened medical services.  The project will 
help the Ministry of Health (MOH) to build its institutional capacity to implement the 
recently prepared national pandemic influenza action plan in coordination with MARA. 
The project will also improve the health information and communication systems as well 
as public health laboratories' capacities.  
 
Component III. Public Awareness and Coordination Support: Support will be provided 
for information and communication activities to increase the attention and commitment 
of government, private sector, and civil society organizations, and to raise awareness, 
knowledge and understanding among the general population about the risk and potential 
impact of the pandemic.  The existing consultative entity National Zoonotic Disease 
Committee that will become a truly functioning supra-ministerial coordinating agency 
between MARA and MOH and partnering with other sector representatives 
(environment, transportation, interior, etc.) will establish a Secretariat to implement the 
national awareness activities and in case of an AI outbreak, it will be in charge of 
triggering emergency responses by MARA and MOH, monitoring the actions taken, and 
coordinating public statements to the media.  This component will also support project 
implementation as well as monitoring and evaluation activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The AIHP is a national project which covers all regions of Turkey, to varying degrees. 
However, for specific components certain provinces are targeted where reference, 
Page  3
regional and public health laboratories exist (for strengthening of animal and public 
health disease surveillance capacity) and/or where poultry production is heavily 
concentrated (for the purposes of virus eradication at the source and restructuring of the 
poultry sector).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Tijen Arin (ECSSD) 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The two safeguard issues which pertain to the Project are those of environmental 
assessment for technologies to be deployed for disposal of culled poultry and of 
mitigating the negative impacts of mandated culling of poultry on small scale backyard 
poultry producers.  
 
In general, activities under the Project are not expected to generate any adverse 
environmental effects as they are focused largely on public sector capacity building and 
improved readiness for dealing with outbreaks of avian influenza in domestic poultry.  
These prevention-focused activities are expected to have a positive environmental impact 
as the Project's investments in facilities, equipment, and training for laboratories will 
improve the effectiveness and safety over existing avian influenza handling and testing 
procedures by meeting international standards established by the OIE.  This would be 
reinforced by the mainstreaming of environmental safeguards into protocols and 
procedures for the culling and disposal of animals during AI outbreaks.  In addition, 
whatever waste is generated in laboratory facilities will be managed using existing 
guidelines in Turkey   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Since the Project supports investments in incineration capacity for culled poultry (and 
potentially for disposal of other livestock and laboratory wastes), an Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) for the deployment of incineration capacity (mainly mobile but 
also potentially through stationary incineration units) will be necessary.  This EMP will 
also cover the clean up of animal wastes of culled poultry by the local public veterinary 
services supported under the Project.  The scope of this EMP will be specified in early 
project implementation.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Though no social safeguard policy is triggered by the Project, the Project is designed to 
mitigate the negative impacts of mandated culling of poultry on small scale backyard 
poultry producers.  Even though this impact is not expected to be large (likely no more 
than 5% of backyard poultry producers' value of household consumption), mitigation 
measures have been designed, and their further refinement is envisaged during the initial 
implementation period of the Project.  First, a state compensation fund will be set up 
under the Project (with an initial reserve of US$ 5 million) to pay producers roughly 75% 
of the value of their culled poultry.  A second project reserve (an additional US$ 4.5 
million) will also be established to target the restructuring needs of the poultry sector 
which arise as a result of the enforcement of the culling policy in areas affected by AI.  
This will be designed to mitigate the medium to long-term effects on producers (mainly 
of the backyard type) who are required to discontinue poultry production in areas which 
have been affected by AI.  
 
Third, the project team agreed with the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs on the 
desirability of using part of the Village-based Participatory Investments Program (under 
the existing Agricultural Reform Implementation Project) on the needs of poultry 
producers affected by the culling of poultry in affected areas.  Lastly, during the initial 
stage of project implementation, the project team will pursue  with the representatives of 
the commercial poultry sector a voluntary initiative by the commercial poultry sector to 
provide poultry products free of charge to backyard producers who have been forced to 
discontinue poultry raising.  This would be at the level of household consumption 
formerly raised by backyard poultry producers and extended for a two to three year 
period.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower will prepare and disclose an Environmental Assessment and an EMP, as 
discussed above, prior to disbursement under the Animal Health component.  The scope 
of this EMP will be specified during early Project implement
ation.  The Borrower’s 
capacity to plan and to implement the measures is adequate.   
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Meetings have been held with representatives of commercial poultry producers and will 
be broadened during the initial stage of implementation to include representatives of 
farmers’ organizations familiar with the socio-economic issues currently faced by 
backyard poultry producers, particularly in the areas where poultry production is 
concentrated.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/01/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/19/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/31/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Due to the emergency nature of this action, and in conformance with paragraph 12 of OP 
4.12, the completion and disclosure of the Environmental Assessment will be delayed 
from appraisal to be a condition of disbursement for Component 1 -- Animal Health   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
No 
Page  6
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mark R. Lundell 
01/12/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Tijen Arin 
01/12/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan 
01/12/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
01/12/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
01/12/2006 
Comments:  Seen and approved 
