Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3084 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/09/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Turkey 
Project ID: P106284 
Project Name: Cadastre Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader: Wael Zakout 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (100%) 
Theme: Land administration and management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall goal of the project is to contribute to government efforts to improve quality and 
effectiveness of public services through expanding and making effective E-government 
applications. The specific objective of the proposed project is to improve the effectiveness and 
efficiency of the land registry and cadastre services. This objective will be achieved through: (i) 
building the IT and communications infrastructure to support completion of the computerization 
of cadastre and land registry services in high priority areas; (ii) renovating, updating and 
production of digital cadastre and land registry information; (iii) improving customer services in 
land registry and cadastre offices; (iv) improving human resources in the Turkish Land Registry 
and Cadastre Agency (TKGM); and (iv) making digital land registry and cadastre information 
available to public and private entities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
It is proposed that the project includes the following components and activities:  
 
Component 1: Cadastre and Land Registry Renovation and Updating.  
 
The component will support the conversion (into digital format), updating and integration of 
existing analogue and digital cadastre information, land registry and related data, into updated, 
Page  2
accurate, consistent and standardized legally agreed cadastral renovated map and data sets, that 
will be incorporated into TAKBIS. The component will include the following activities:  
 
-
Further densification of the Geodetic Network (if necessary) and linkage to the graphic 
cadastre areas;  
 
-
Geo-referencing existing graphic maps to the International Terrestrial Reference Framework 
(ITRF) datum and the determination of transformation parameters;  
 
-
Compilation of the existing maps into common digital cadastral map/workspaces;  
 
-
Using orthophoto-maps or other means to determine areas necessary for on-site survey work 
using the ‘cadastre renovation’ law procedures;  
 
-
Preparation of ‘interim’ cadastral maps, data and schedules necessary for public display and 
possible objections;  
 
-
Development of final digital cadastre renovated maps and related data for registration in 
TAKBIS;  
 
-
Making amendments to related data in TAKBIS and notification to owners;  
 
-
Review and possible revision of the national cadastre and registry strategy;  
 
-
Assessment and revisions of the cadastre regulatory framework over the course of the project; 
and  
 
-
Development of the regulatory framework for the licensing of cadastral surveyors over the 
course of the project.  
 
The work will be undertaken through outsourced contracts to the private sector with TKGM 
supervision, management and quality assurance.  
 
Component 2: Modernization of Land Registry and Cadastre Infrastructure.  
 
The component will support the modernization of the TKGM infrastructure, including 
consultancy services to provide strategic advice on critical issues affecting the national 
implementation of TAKBIS in Land Registry and Cadastre Directorates. This component will 
also support procurement of equipment and hardware, and office renovations that may be 
required in support of the national implementation of TAKBIS, improve the ability of TAKBIS 
to maintain the quality of land registry and cadastre information it holds and strengthen TKGM 
service delivery standards.  The component will include the following sub-components:  
 
-
Cadastre integration consultancy support;  
 
-
Provision of hardware and office equipment;  
 
-
Office renovations.  
 
Component 3: Integration of E-Cadastre into the National Spatial Data Infrastructure.  
 
The component will support the government’s E-Government initiative through making 
available an E-Cadastre data theme and other foundation data themes through the Turkish 
National Spatial Data Infrastructure. It would provide access to land registry and cadastre data 
and other up-to-date base mapping for government agencies and private entities (within the 
limitation of the laws). The component will include the following sub-components:  
 
-
E-Cadastre information;  
 
-
Base mapping;  
Page  3
-
Spatial portal implementation.  
 
Component 4: Human Resources and Institutional Development.  
 
The component will support the development of strategic plans and human resources 
development plans to ensure that TKGM personnel skills match the strategic needs of the 
organization. The component will also finance training and study tours to countries which have 
undertaken similar modernization programs in the last few years.  
 
-
Human Resources Development Strategy;  
 
-
Business Planning and Strategic Planning including stakeholder analysis and the private sector 
roles;  
 
-
Training;  
 
-
Study on international trends and practices in computerization of land registries and 
development of E-cadastre.  
 
Component 5: Property Valuation.  
 
The component will investigate the options for the development of property valuation function 
in Turkey in line with international best practices. The component will also finance the 
development of interim guidelines and piloting of property valuation in 2-3 municipalities. It will 
include the following sub-components:  
 
-
Study on property valuation implementation options;  
 
-
Development of interim guidelines for property valuation;  
 
-
Piloting of property valuation;  
 
-
Development of implementation strategy;  
 
-
Professional development.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Implementation of project activities will take place in Ankara and specific regional/local 
cadastral and land registry offices country-wide.  Component 5 will pilot property valuation 
process in selected 2-3 municipalities which will be determined during project preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
According to the team’s assessment, the Borrower has sufficient capacity to implement 
applicable safeguard policies.  The TKMG has implemented certain components of two Bank 
projects, i.e., the Marmara Earthquake Emergency Reconstruction (MEER) project and the 
Agriculture Reform Implementation Project (ARIP).  Under the MEER project, the agency, 
among other activities, constructed five land registry and cadastre offices.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
One of the project activities under component 2 (Modernization of Land Registry and 
Cadastre Infrastructure) includes physical renovation of selected cadastral and land registry 
offices (painting, wiring, new windows, and improving sanitary conditions). Due to the minor 
potential environmental impact of such works, the project has been tentatively assigned 
environmental category B.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
The determination whether any of the offices to be renovated under the project will have 
cultural and historical values will be made during project preparation.  If applicable, the 
Environmental Managment Plan to be prepared by the Borrower will include the necessary 
provisions to safeguard these assets.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/16/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
During project preparation, potential environmental impacts of office renovation works will 
be assessed and the TKGM will prepare under the Bank guidance an Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) and will disclose it in country and at the Infoshop before appraisal. 
The EMP will include a construction and rehabilitation mitigation measures checklist and 
responsible party for the mitigation actions, as well as the monitoring plan, and will highlight 
the responsible party for the implementation of the EMP.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
07/31/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
08/01/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
08/02/2007 
Comments:   
