Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1919 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/05/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Turkey 
Project ID: P096400 
Project Name: Energy Community of South East Europe APL 3 Project 
Task Team Leader: Ranjit J. Lamech 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 20, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 23, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed ECSEE APL 3 (Turkey) project is part of the 
World Bank’s ECSEE APLProgram 
approved by the Board on January 27, 2005.   
 
ECSEE Program Development Objective  
 
Development of a functioning regional electricity market in South East Europe and its 
integration into the internal electricity market of the European Union, through the 
implementation of priority investments supporting electricity market and power system 
operations in electricity generation, transmission and distribution and technical assistance for 
institutional/systems development and project preparation and implementation.  
 
The proposed ECSEE-APL3, will continue the implementation of the internal market and 
regional integration by financing essential system investments.  In addition, APL3 will assist 
TEIAS in mitigating risks to public safety that have resulted from rights-of-way encroachments 
to existing overhead transmission lines in heavily congested urban centers.  In Istanbul, Izmir 
and Ankara, many overhead transmission lines go through densely populated areas, where the 
Page  2
rights-of-way and safety standards have been violated by residential and commercial structures, 
including apartment buildings, schools and colleges.  
 
The Objectives are to increase the safety, reliability, efficiency and capacity of the bulk power 
transmission system in Turkey and to improve market access for consumers and suppliers of 
electricity.  
 
The objectives would be achieved by:  
 
(a) 
Completing 4 major 154 kV  and 380kV sub-stations in rapidly expanding urban load 
centers; and  
 
(b) 
Upgrading the transmission network supplying the urban centers of Istanbul and Izmir.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will have two investments components:  
 
•
Component 1 – Transmission Network Strengthening: This component entails 
construction of a new 380 kV underground cable and 154 kV and 380 kV GIS substations.  The 
new substations would remove critical bottlenecks in the transmission network, reduce the 
network energy losses and enable TEIAS to serve new customers and the growing electricity 
demand.  The 380 kV cable was originally part of NTGP, and has been transferred to APL3.  The 
estimated cost of this component is about US$ 50 million.  
 
•
Component 2 – Urban Transmission Network Upgrading:  This involves construction of 
underground cables to replace existing 154 kV overhead transmission lines in densely populated 
areas of Istanbul and Izmir.  The 154 kV overhead transmission lines proposed for replacement 
with underground cables have been enveloped by rapid, uncontrolled urban expansion with 
sections of the lines passing over roofs of houses and with right-of-ways entirely lost to 
encroachment by streets and buildings.  The upgrading to underground lines will improve public 
safety and to achieve compliance with applicable safety regulations.  Upgrading to underground 
cables would also improve the performance of the high voltage transmission networks. The 
estimated cost of this component is about US$ 114 million.  
 
The initial feasibility studies have been reviewed for all the components.  The power engineer 
and social specialist have made field visits to all the proposed sites of the urban transmission 
network upgrading sub-components to review the safety violations of the existing overhead lines.  
It has been confirmed that the proposed components are justified based on system operation, 
safety and reliability considerations.  The exhibit at the end of this PCN highlights the safety and 
right-of-way violations of the transmission lines that are to be upgraded to underground cables.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The majority of the project components will be located in urban centers of Istanbul and Izmir.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project will be implemented by T
urkey’s power transmission company (TEIAS).TEIAS is 
currently implementing two projects funded by the Bank which require environmental and social 
impact mitigation plans and therefore, TEIAS’ staff arefamiliar with the Bank’s environmental 
and social safeguards.  The most recent review of TEIAS’ capacity for safeguard policies was 
appraised in early-calendar2005 for the ECSEE APL2 project.  This appraisal will be updated 
during project preparation and necessary measures taken to ensure compliance with the policies.  
Page  3
The construction of the underground cables and new substations will have minimal 
environmental impact.  TEIAS will prepare Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) to 
mitigate any potential environmental impact of the project components.  The EMPs will specify 
that no PCBs shall be utilized in any of the substation equipment financed under the project. The 
EMPs will be prepared and made public by TEIAS before the Bank starts its appraisal.  
 
The routes of the underground cable projects will be follow existing municipal roads and will 
not require acquisition of any land. Acquisition of very small size of land lots may be needed for 
the construction of the new substations.  If acquisition of private land is needed, TEIAS will 
prepare a Land Acquisition Plan and will make it public before the Bank starts its appraisal.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (ECSIE) 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
TEIAS will prepare Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) to mitigate any potential 
environmental impact of the project components. No major environmental impacts are 
anticipated, however, this will be thoroughly appraised during preparation and appraisal   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Chance finds of cultural property during construction/excavation will be addressed per the 
existing Turkish regulations for the same.  EMPs will take this into account and ensure that 
applicable regulations are applied during construction.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
No land acquisition is currently anticipated.  However, if acquisition of land is needed for the 
construction of the substations, TEIAS will prepare a Land Acquisition Plan.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/05/2006 
 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/03/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
EMPs and Land Acquisition Plan will be prepared and disclosed before the Bank starts its 
appraisal of the project.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ranjit J. Lamech 
11/01/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Rita Klees 
01/05/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
11/07/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
