Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/19/2007 
Report No.:  AC2034
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Turkey 
Project ID:  P082822 
Project Name:  Access to Finance for SMEs 
Task Team Leader:  Marialisa Motta 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 6, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 8, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSPF 
Lending Instrument:  Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector:  Micro- and SME finance (70%);General finance sector (15%);General industry 
and trade sector (10%);Banking (5%) 
Theme:  Small and medium enterprise support (P);Other financial and private sector 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
180.21 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's main development objective is to increase Turkish SMEs'access tomedium-
term finance in foreign and local currency, including in the East of the country. Key 
proposed indicators to measure project outcomes include (see Annex 3 for a complete 
list):  
 
(a) 
Number of SMEs and SME portfolio financed under the project;  
 
(b) 
Share of medium-term financing (more than 12 months) in total SME loan 
portfolio financed under the project;  
 
(c) 
Non-performing loans ratios for the project;  
 
(d) 
Share of credit line disbursed in local currency under the project; and  
 
(e) 
Number of provinces with active SME clients financed under the project.  
 
To assess project implementation progress, the WB will also monitor on a quarterly 
basis the amount of credit disbursed over the originally planned disbursement.  
 
In addition to the indicators included above and in Annex 3, the project will monitor 
basic indicators providing an overview of (a) the profile of SMEs financed under the 
project (e.g., amount of sales, number of workers, economic sector) and (b) the lending 
technologies used by PFIs and Halkbank (e.g., number of PFIs using credit scoring 
models or the information provided by the credit bureau to grant loans to SMEs); and (c) 
Page  2
overall increase in access to finance for the SME sector in Turkey. These indicators will 
be monitored for analytical purposes only and serve as useful inputs to define policies 
and projects aimed at further improving access to credit for SMEs in Turkey.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will finance two credit lines targeting SMEs. The total project amount will be 
Euro 150 million. The project will include two components: (i) a wholesale credit line of 
Euro 100 million to be intermediated by TSKB, which in turn will intermediate through 
retail banks and leasing companies, and (ii) a retail credit line of Euro 50 million to be 
intermediated by Halkbank. SMEs will be the final beneficiaries of both credit lines. For 
the purpose of this project, SMEs will be defined as firms employing fewer than 250 
people and having annual sales of less than US$20 million.  TSKB will on-lend the WB 
funds to private banks and leasing companies, which in turn will lend to SMEs. Halkbank 
will provide credit directly to SMEs. To ensure covering underserved regions, Halkbank 
will lend funds under the proposed credit line only to SMEs located in the East, South 
East and the center of the country. TSKB and the PFIs that receive credit by TSKB will 
target the rest of the country. (See Appendix 4.A for a detailed description of the 
geographical areas covered by the two Banks). The Treasury, Halkbank and TSKB have 
agreed with the WB team on the proposed geographical division. Both credit lines will 
finance medium- and long-term working capital (e.g., raw materials) and investment 
loans (e.g., vehicles, machinery or equipment). There will be no sector restrictions.  
However, a cap of about 30 percent of the total lending amount will be applied to the 
tourism sector. SMEs operating in the tourism sector include "hotels, motels, resorts, 
pensions, holiday villages and camping sites". Concerns have been raised that demand 
from this sector is high, and the cap will ensure sectoral diversification of the program. 
The compliance of TSKB and Halkbank with the 30 percent cap requirement for the 
tourism industry will be monitored during project supervision on the basis of a specific 
financial management report.  
 
Under the first project component, the WB will provide a Euro 100 million credit line to 
TSKB, which will be the borrower and implementing agency for this component. The 
Turkish Government will issue a guarantee to the World Bank. TSKB is a private 
development Bank. It was one of the financial intermediaries in the Bank???s EFIL I 
project and is the borrower and implementing agency for the EFIL II and III projects (see 
a
detailed description of TSKB in Section C and Annex C1). TSKB will on-lend the WB 
funds to private banks and leasing companies (Project Financial Intermediaries, PFIs), 
which will be selected pursuant to criteria agreed between the Borrower and the WB (see 
Appendix 2B). The PFIs will in turn make working capital and investment sub-loans and 
leases to private SMEs. The on-lending banks and leasing companies will assume the 
credit risk of the sub loans. As the Apex institution, TSKB will assume the credit risk of 
the loan that it intermediates.  
 
Under the second component, the WB will provide a Euro 50 million credit line to 
Halkbank, which will be the borrower and implementing agency for this second 
component. The Turkish Government will issue a guarantee to the WB. As mentioned 
above, to ensure coverage of underserved regions (the East, South East and part of the 
Center) the project includes a second credit line targeting these areas, which will be 
intermediated by Halkbank. Halkbank was selected after evaluations of all and 
Page  3
discussions with two potential candidates among public banks in Turkey. Halkbank has a 
unique advantage in offering credit to the Eastern Regions of the country due to its strong 
branch presence in the targeted region (see Section 1) combined with its focus on the 
SME segment and its plans to further grow its SME portfolio. Additional criteria for 
selecting Halkbank were its financial soundness, the recent good performance of its credit 
portfolio, and the size of its current credit portfolio in the targeted region creating 
confidence that the bank will be able to disburse the loans in a sound manner (see 
Appendix 6A).  As with TSKB for component 1, Halkbank will assume the credit risk for 
component 2.  
 
The World Bank's loan to TSKB and Halkbank will start as a Euro Fixed Spread Loan 
(FSL)with the option to convert into TRY. The loans to both Banks will start in Euros. 
Withdrawals can be converted into TRY at any time during the life of the loans, resulting 
in a local currency obligation for the converted portion of the loans. To re-denominate 
part of the loan obligation in TRY, the World Bank Treasury executes, with a market 
counterpart, a Euro-TRY swap.  The WB passes to the borrower the terms of the swap it 
obtains in its market transaction. If the maturity of the conversion is shorter than the 
maturity of the loan, then at the maturity of the conversion, the borrower will have the 
option to roll over the conversion (if the swap market still exists at that time), or to revert 
to Euro the remaining obligation. If the borrower chooses to roll over the conversion, it 
will not be exposed to currency risk, but there will be interest rate risk as the loan will be 
converted at market interest rates at that time. Our survey of the market indicates that at 
this point in time it is possible to execute Euro-TRY swaps for up to 10 years. For 
conversion of disbursed amounts to TRY, a minimum amount of Euro 3 million 
equivalent will be required in order for the World Bank Treasury to enter into a swap 
with the market counterpart to effect the transaction.  The Conversion Date (which is start 
of the Conversion Period) will always fall on the Interest Payment Date next following 
the Execution Date of the Conversion Request. The FSL Conversion Guidelines will 
apply when requesting, accepting and effecting conversions on Fixed-Spread Loans. The 
guidelines are posted on Treasury???spage at the web address:  
 
http://treasury.worldbank.org/Services/Financial+Products/Current+Products/Fixed+Spre
ad+Loan+(FSL).html.  
 
Additional information on the structure of the loan will be included in the Operational 
Manuals of TSKB and Halkbank.  
 
Annex 4 includes a detailed description of the Project Components. The Annex provides 
(a) the exact geographic regions served by Halkbank and TSKB's PFIs underthis 
operation, (b) the terms and conditions of the WB loan to TSKB and to Halkbank, (c) the 
eligibility criteria for the PFIs that will receive funds from TSKB, and (d) the eligibility 
criteria for the SMEs that will receive funds from the PFIs and from Halkbank.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project location:  
 
Istanbul, Turkey (location of TSKB, one of the borrowers)  
Page  4
Ankara, Turkey (location of Halkbank, one of the borrowers)  
 
Sub-loans will be given to SMEs throughout Turkey.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Halil Agah (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is subject to environmental assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01). The Project's 
environmental category is FI. Environmental issues of sub-borrowers and their sub-
projects will be addressed through the sub-loan environmental eligibility assessments. 
Environmental assessments will be carried out in accordance with both Government of 
Turkey Environmental Assessment (EA) requirements and World Bank environmental 
assessment policies and procedures. There will be no large scale significant and/or 
irreversible impacts.  Specific environmental procedures to be followed by the TSKB and 
Halkbank will be included in their respective Operational Manuals.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Each of the borrowers, TSKB and Halkbank, has prepared an Environmental Assessment 
Framework document that is acceptable to the World Bank; that defines environmental 
assessment procedures to be used in subproject evaluation; and which will be included in 
the Operations Manual for each bank. TSKB has during the EFIL II project developed 
Page  5
institutional capacity to determine and monitor environmental risks of individual sub-
projects. Halkbank has an environmental specialist who will be responsible for all 
environment-related aspects of the project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Borrowers and Project Financial Intermediaries have had and will continue to have 
consultations with final beneficiaries (small and medium enterprises).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/18/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/21/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/06/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  6
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Marialisa Motta 
04/05/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Halil Agah 
04/05/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
04/07/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gerardo M. Corrochano 
 
Comments:   
