Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2113 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/24/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Turkey 
Project ID: P096262 
Project Name: Avian Influenza & Human Pandemic Preparedness & Response APL 2 
Project 
Task Team Leader: Mark R. Lundell 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 16, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 2, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Animal production (40%);Health (30%);Agro-industry (30%) 
Theme: Natural disaster management (P);Other communicable diseases (P);Rural policies 
and institutions (S);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
15.40 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
6.49 
 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
3.69 
 
FOREIGN MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS (UNIDENTIFIED) 
9.84
20.02 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the Project is to minimize the threat in Turkey posed to humans by 
HPAI infection and other zoonoses in domestic poultry and prepare for, control, and respond to 
influenza pandemic and other infectious disease emergencies in humans. To achieve this, three 
areas will be supported:  (i) prevention, (ii) preparedness and planning and (iii) response and 
containment. Achieving these goals will contribute to diminishing the burden of disease and loss 
of productivity in Turkey, limiting the regional spread of HPAI, and enhancing economic and 
social prospects at the national, regional, and global levels.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project is likely to finance activities under three components: (i) animal health, (ii) human 
health, (iii) public awareness and coordination support.  
 
Page  2
Component I. Animal Health: The Project will support activities to cover the needs in the short, 
medium or long-term, and ranging from prevention, to control and total eradication of HPAI, 
which have been based on an assessment of the particular conditions, constraints and possibilities 
in Turkey (including a rapid assessment of veterinary services and recent assessments of the 
poultry sector). The Project activities will support strategy development, the improvement of the 
regulatory framework and epidemiological studies and surveillance programs to inform the 
improvement of disease control measures. Strengthening the capacity of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA) and its affiliated reference and regional diagnostic 
laboratories in detection, reporting and follow-up of reported AI cases will be another goal of the 
project. Support to activities related to the implementation of the containment plan for AI 
outbreaks such as targeting virus eradication at the source, restructuring of the poultry sector 
through the reduction of the practice of backyard poultry raising, improving the opportunity for 
slaughtering of layers, and promoting manure management of backyard poultry that is in 
conformity with existing environmental regulations will also be targeted by the project.  
 
Component II. Human Health: The Project will help to operationalize some elements that are 
contemplated as part of the global strategic plan, and expanding and intensifying the responses 
rapidly.  As it is unlikely that the global spread of a pandemic influenza virus could be prevented 
once it emerges, the emphasis is on reducing its impact.  Several tools will help achieve this aim:  
(i) year-round surveillance; (ii) effective and accurate methods of diagnosis; (iii) social distance 
interventions; (iv) vaccines (once they become available); (v) anti-viral drugs; and (vi) 
strengthened medical services.  The project will help the Ministry of Health (MOH) to build its 
institutional capacity to implement the recently prepared national pandemic influenza action plan 
in coordination with MARA. The project will also improve the health information and 
communication systems as well as public health laboratories' capacities.  
 
Component III. Public Awareness and Information: Support will be provided for information 
and communication activities to increase the attention and commitment of government, private 
sector, and civil society organizations, and to raise awareness, knowledge and understanding 
among the general population about the risk and potential impact of the pandemic. The existing 
consultative entity National Zoonotic Disease Committee that will become a truly functioning 
supra-ministerial coordinating agency between MARA and MOH and partnering with other 
sector representatives (environment, transportation, interior, etc.) will establish a Secretariat to 
implement the national awareness activities and in case of an AI outbreak, it will be in charge of 
triggering emergency responses by MARA and MOH, monitoring the actions taken, and 
coordinating public statements to the media. This component will also support project 
implementation as well as monitoring and evaluation activities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The AIHP is a national project which covers all regions of Turkey, to varying degrees. However, 
for specific components certain provinces are targeted where reference, regional and public 
health laboratories exist (for strengthening of animal and public health disease surveillance 
capacity) and/or where poultry production is heavily concentrated (for the purposes of virus 
eradication at the source and restructuring of the poultry sector).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
The AIHP would be implemented by existing project implementation units (the Central 
Execution Unit of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs and the PIU of the Health 
Transition Project in the Ministry of Health).  AS a result of having been involved with EA/EMP 
issues in the existing projects, these units' capacity for EA/EMP elaboration and implementation 
is deemed sufficient for the AIHP. They are receiving assitance (external consultancy) in the 
preparation of the EA and EMP.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Tijen Arin (ECSSD) 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Activities under the Project are not expected to generate any adverse environmental effects as 
they are focused largely on public sector capacity building and improved readiness for dealing 
with outbreaks of avian influenza in domestic poultry.  These prevention-focused activities are 
expected to have a positive environmental impact as the Project's investments in facilities, 
equipment, and training for laboratories will improve the effectiveness and safety over existing 
avian influenza handling and testing procedures by meeting international standards established 
by the OIE.  This would be reinforced by the mainstreaming of environmental safeguards into 
protocols and procedures for the culling and disposal of animals during AI outbreaks.  
 
Since the Project supports investments in incineration capacity for culled poultry (and 
potentially for disposal of other livestock and laboratory wastes), an Environmental Management 
Plan (EMP) for the deployment of incineration capacity (mainly stationary but also potentially 
through mobile incineration units) will be necessary.  This EMP will also cover the clean up of 
animal wastes of culled poultry by the local public veterinary services supported under the 
Project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/08/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
EA and EMP to be completed by May 31, 2006 at the latest (but are expected by mid-March 
2006).   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mark R. Lundell 
12/08/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Rita Klees 
12/09/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
12/09/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
