Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2981 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/27/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Turkmenistan 
Project ID: P105662 
Project Name: Turkmenistan Avian Influenza Project 
Task Team Leader: Peyvand Khaleghian 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date:  
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (50%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%) 
Theme: Other communicable diseases (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Health 
system performance (S);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Avian and Human Influenza Facility 
1.97 
 
EC: European Commission 
0.00
1.97 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objectives are to strengthen the country’s capacity to prevent the spread 
of avian influenza among poultry, to prevent the transmission of avian influenza from birds to 
other animals and humans, and to prepare for a potential pandemic of avian influenza in humans.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component I Public Awareness and Information – this component would support information 
and communication activities to increase public awareness through: (i) policy advocacy and 
support to the government for crisis communication management; (ii) public education through 
mass-media; and (iii) social mobilization of key groups including farmers, veterinarians and 
health workers.  
 
Component II Animal Health – this component provides support for prevention, control and 
eradication of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) through: (i) enhancing animal health 
planning and coordination capability for HPAI prevention; (ii) strengthening veterinary field 
Page  2
disease surveillance and diagnostic capacity of the veterinary laboratory; and (iii) strengthening 
HPAI outbreak containment plans.  
 
Component III Human Health 
–
this component provides support for reduction of the impact of 
a
pandemic influenza virus in people through: (i) enhancing public health program planning and 
coordination; (ii) strengthening of national public health surveillance systems; and (iii) 
strengthening health care system’s response capacity.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
So far, no avian influenza case has been reported in the country. Therefore, the project strategy is 
based primarily on preventing the entry of HPAI, and introducing rapid and effective 
containment procedures in case of an outbreak. Project design is consistent with this strategy. 
The project focuses on high risk areas, most notably the areas surrounding resting sites for 
migratory birds, as well as border crossings.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
As indicated in the National Action Plan, the line ministries responsible for project 
implementation, i.e. Ministry of Health and Medical Industry (MOHMI), Ministry of 
Agriculture, State Veterinary Department, and Ministry of Nature Protection will assume 
primary responsibility for implementation of the activities identified in the Environment 
Management Plan. UNDP will assist these line ministries in handling procurement and financial 
management (e.g. contracts for international and national experts, training programs) and 
MOHMI will be in charge of monitoring/supervision (e.g. outputs of international and national 
consultants, training program and monitoring/inspection activities) of EMP implementation. The 
Ministry of Nature Protection will play a key role in monitoring compliance with the 
environmental legal/regulatory requirements of Turkmenistan and evaluating the environmental 
impacts of project activities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
n/a   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  3
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/16/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Apraisal mission Departure  --- June 18  
 
Submission to the AHIF Trust Fund Board -- August 9, 2007   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Peyvand Khaleghian 
05/21/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
06/10/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Armin H. Fidler 
06/27/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
