Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/24/2006 
Report No.:  AC2074
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Turkey 
Project ID:  P096400 
Project Name:  Energy Community of South East Europe APL 3 Project 
Task Team Leader:  Ranjit J. Lamech 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 19, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 23, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
30.00
30.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of Turkey ECSEE-APL3 is:  
 
To increase the safety, reliability, efficiency and capacity of the bulk power 
transmission system in Turkey and to improve market access for consumers and suppliers 
of electricity.  
 
This objective would be achieved by:  
 
(a) 
Completing major 154 kV  and 380kV sub-stations and network expansions in 
rapidly expanding urban load centers; and  
 
(b) 
Upgrading the transmission network supplying the urban centers of Istanbul and 
Izmir.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have two components:  
 
Component 1: Transmission Network Strengthening: This component entails 
construction of new GIS substations and a new 380 kV underground cable to strengthen 
the transmission networks in Istanbul and Izmir.   The new GIS substations and 
underground cable will increase the capacity of the transmission networks in the cities 
and are necessary to meet the new and growing electricity demand in their local areas. 
Page  2
The construction of the GIS substations and the 380 kV underground cable is necessary 
to strengthen the reliability and capacity of the transmission networks in Istanbul and 
Izmir and will as a result provide the distribution companies, eligible customers and 
competing energy producers with adequate and reliable access to the local transmission 
grid and the future ECSEE regional wholesale power markets.  
 
Component 2:  Urban Transmission Network Upgrading: This component involves 
construction of underground cables to replace existing 154 kV overhead transmission 
lines in densely populated areas of Istanbul and Izmir.  The 154 kV overhead 
transmission lines proposed for replacement with underground cables have been 
enveloped in rapid, uncontrolled urban expansion with sections of the lines virtually 
passing over roofs of houses and with right-of-ways entirely lost to encroachment by 
streets and buildings.  The underground cable projects in the two cities included in 
Component 2 will have positive impact on the operation of the transmission networks and 
will ensure the safety of the public and reliability of the energy supply to existing and 
future consumers.  The Athens Memorandum clearly states that the safety and security of 
the electricity systems and the protection of public health and safety are necessary 
conditions to promote the functioning of effective markets.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The identified project components are located in the urban centers of Istanbul and Izmir.  
 
For component 1 -- the work involves the construction of new sub-stations in Istanbul 
and Izmir, and the laying of a new underground cable.  Component 2, involves the 
replacement of existing overhead lines with underground cables.  
 
The construction of the underground cables and new substations will have minimal 
potential environmental impacts that are adequately addressed through environmental 
management plans (EMPs).  
 
The EMPs were reviewed by the Task Team and found to be of good technical quality 
and met World Bank requirements. All EMPs prepared included consultation with locally 
affected groups and were publicly disclosed by TEIAS prior to World Bank appraisal.  
 
The routes of the underground cable projects will be follow existing municipal roads 
and will not require acquisition of any land. However, acquisition of small (50 to 80 sq 
m) land lots will be necessary for the construction of the new substations.  Land to be 
acquired in all cases belongs to public agencies. The project is not expected to require the 
acquisition of private land. Underground cables will all be located under city streets 
owned by the Municipalities.  The substations are to be constructed on land that is either 
owned by TEIAS or transferred to TEIAS by Turkish State Railways, TEDAS or the 
Metropolitan Municipality of Istanbul.  Thus the project is not expected to trigger OP/BP 
4.12 for resettlement or land acquisition.  Nevertheless, one of the substation sites may 
trigger the OP/BP because third parties may be affected by the transfer of land from the 
Metropolitan Municipality to TEIAS.  The site currently under consideration is being 
used by a petrol station, LPG depot and a food and snack kiosk.  The three enterprises 
may lease the land from the Municipality or some authority.  Under Turkish law the 
Page  3
enterprises are eligible for compensation for lost assets if they are evicted from the land 
and their assets are demolished.  OP/BP 4.12 also requires third parties to be 
compensated for lost assets and the cost of relocation and transition.  The Municipality is 
responsible for preparing the land prior to transferring it to TEIAS, as well as 
compensating current land users for their losses,   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
Mr Bernard Baratz (ECSIE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In accordance with World Bank environmental policies and procedures (OP/BP/GP 4.01 
Environmental Assessment) the project has been assigned “Category B” for 
Environmental Assessment. Under the APL2 project, TEIAS had prepared an 
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) acceptable to the World Bank indicating 
how it will review and address the environmental impacts of its investments.  The Task 
Team revisited this framework document and considered it to be appropriate to utilize for 
the APL3 project as well.  
 
As part of APL3 appraisal, the Task Team reviewed the Borrowers’ compliance with 
environmental assessment procedures under APL2 defined in the EMF document 
described above. In particular, the Task Team reviewed the two subproject EMPs for the 
Beykoz and Altintepe GIS and Transmission Lines with regard to: (a) incorporation of 
EMP requirements in the contractor bid documents, (b) procedures and documentation 
for consultation, (c) procedures and documentation for disclosure, and (d) technical 
quality of the EMPs.  This review demonstrated that TEIAS has ensured satisfactory 
preparation of EMPs, with appropriate consultations and disclosures.  For APL3, the 
EMPs are also included in the bidding documents, thus ensuring that the contractors are 
responsible for implementing them.  
 
Page  4
There are no potential large scale, significant nor irreversible impacts associated with 
the project.  All identified project components are classified as B category projects.  
Primary environmental issues are associated with project construction and include: noise, 
dust, interruption of traffic and management of waste/excavated materials. Since Turkey 
has a long and rich cultural history, there is always the possibility of uncovering ancient 
artifacts/relics of cultural significance with any excavation activity. In such an instance, 
Turkish chance find procedures  will be followed. Subproject sites in the vicinity of 
known structures of cultural significance will consider the procedures specified by  
Turkish law (Protection of Cultural and Natural Assets: No. 2863 revised as Law No. 
5226. (Note: Work will be stopped, regional office of the Ministry of Culture and 
Tourism informed, and work will only continue after their official approval to proceed. In 
the interim, no found items are to be removed from the project site). During operation the 
primary issue is public exposure to electric and magnetic fields. Polychlorinated 
biphenyls (PCBs) are banned in Turkey and will be prohibited from any equipment 
purchases under the current project (primarily the substation components). All 
environmental issues are easily mitigated through good engineering construction 
practices and design to internationally accepted standards (e.g. burying of cable to proper 
depths to assure compliance with standards for surface values of electric magnetic fields). 
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) have been prepared for all the identified 
underground transmission line project components; public consultations have been 
completed; and disclosed, and EMP requirements have all been incorporated into the bid 
documents.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will have a significant positive impact, primarily through the improved safety 
of the transmission system in the urban areas and the removal of unsightly pylons from 
dense urban environments.  The rights of way of the transmission lines have been fully 
encroached by unregulated urban growth in six of the eight lines to be replaced by 
underground cables.  The other two lines, both carried by the same pylons, constrain 
urban development and effective utilization of a major university campus.  The overhead 
transmission lines are perceived by the public to pose significant public safety risks in 
terms of line failures and traffic hazards.  In many places, vertical encroachment has 
created obvious hazardous conditions; in others, the actual threat is less obvious.  In all 
cases, however, the removal of overhead lines is expected to be welcomed by citizens of 
the two cities.  
 
In addition improving the public safety of the transmission system, the investments will 
improve the reliability of the electricity network, providing increased benefits to 
customers.  These impacts will be less obvious to customers, as the effects of most line 
failures are buffered by other elements of the grid.  Nonetheless, the impacts will be 
significant and benefit virtually all electricity users in the two cities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable   
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As mentioned previously, the Environmental Management Framework (EMF) that 
wasprepared under the APL2 project   has been adequately implemented by the 
Borrower. Therefore it will continue to be used under the APL3 program. The EMPs 
produced under APL2, were reviewed by the Task Team and found to properly identify 
the salient environmental issues and included appropriate mitigation measures. The APL3 
project will continue in this manner.  
 
As noted above, in the case of one substation, there is the possibility of an impact on 
private third parties who are currently using Municipality-owned land.The Land 
Acquisition Management Framework (LAMF) used for APL 2 has been revised to take 
care of the possibility that these third parties may be adversely affected, and may require 
compensation from the Municipality.  The LAMF indicates how TEIAS will handle 
potential land acquisition issues and thus takes care of any unforeseen land acquisition.  It 
is also consistent with
 TEIAS’ existing policyfor land acquisition based on the 
Expropriation Law (No. 2942) which involves payment of market prices for the land 
acquired and allows the land owner to go to court if they are not satisfied with the amount 
paid.  
 
The Task Team reviewed the technical capacity and procedures TEIAS followed under 
APL2 to implement the EMPs and found them to be reasonably adequate. There are six 
technical staff, all engineers, in the TEIAS Environmental Department. They are all 
located at TEIAS headquarters in Ankara. Under APL2, environmental management at 
the regional level is implemented by technical staff in the TEIAS regional offices: TEIAS 
regional technical staff were provided copies of the EMPs which they utilized to 
regularly monitor implementation. However, these regional staff members had limited 
training on environmental issues.  
 
Under APL3, it is the plan of TEIAS to situate an environmental person in several or all 
of their eighteen regional offices. During project implementation, the Borrower has 
agreed to prepare a: (a) training program, (b) staffing plan, and (c) detailed budget for 
institutional development acceptable to the World Bank.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are the people living in the vicinity of the project area.  TEIAS has 
conducted public notification and disclosure and consultation for the transmission line 
projects.  The exact location of all the sub-station projects has not been completed and 
there will be additional  EMPs prepared for these subprojects as well. EMP preparation 
public consultation and disclosure for these subprojects will all be performed in 
accordance with procedures detailed in the EMF   
 
Page  6
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/13/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/12/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/15/2004 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/06/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/18/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/18/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
Yes 
Page  7
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ranjit J. Lamech 
01/24/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bernard Baratz 
01/24/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody 
01/24/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
01/24/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
 
Comments:   
