Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/27/2006 
Report No.:  AC2383
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Turkey 
Project ID:  P096801 
Project Name:  Electricity Distribution Rehabilitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Ranjit J. Lamech 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 12, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: August 29, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
380.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
76.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
76.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the reliability of power supply to 
consumers in Turkey by supporting the implementation of the electricity distribution 
network rehabilitation program.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Electricity Distribution Rehabilitation Project consists of the following investments:  
 
Distribution Network Rehabilitation and Expansion: This includes investment projects 
for distribution network rehabilitation and expansion in the TEDAS regional companies 
of Ayedas, Uludag, Meram, Gedez, Toroslar, Menderes and Osmangazi. The projects 
comprise medium and low voltage (34.5 kV, 0.4 kV) line replacements and extensions, 
substation upgrades, and upgrading of lines from non-standard medium voltages and their 
conversion to underground cables.  
 
The distribution network projects to be financed by the Loan include rehabilitation and 
upgrading of existing distribution equipment and facilities, network expansion by 
constructing new distribution substations and feeders using predominantly underground 
cables, and replacement of existing run-down and aged medium and low voltage 
Page  2
overhead lines in densely populated areas with underground cables.  While rehabilitating 
the networks, efforts would be made to reduce non-standard medium voltages (besides 
34.5 kV) which are currently in operation at several locations.  Network rehabilitation 
would help reduce losses, reduce network operation and maintenance costs, and reduce 
supply interruptions caused by equipment and facilities outages.  In addition, these 
projects would also improve the safety of the network by reducing the potential for faults 
and accidents through over head lines; help minimize compensation payments made for 
material damages and ensure compliance with the Electricity Power Current Facilities 
Regulation of 2000 which has increased the minimum allowable distance between 
overhead power lines and buildings.  
 
Technical Assistance for supervision consultants: The project will also finance 
supervision consultants to assist TEDAS and the regional companies in managing and 
supervising the implementation of the investment projects.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The investment projects financed by this loan will be located in city centers, settlement 
communities and other urban areas whose electricity supply is provide by the following 
seven regional distribution companies:  
 
1-
Ayedas Regional Company  
 
2-
Uludag Regional Company  
 
3-
Meram Regional Company  
 
4-
Gediz Regional Company  
 
5-
Toroslar Regional Company  
 
6-
Menderes Regional Company  
 
7-
Osmangazi Regional Company  
 
The network rehabilitation projects financed by this Loan are not expected to have 
significant safeguard-related impacts.  The projects will include works such as 
rehabilitation of existing equipment (transformers, capacitors etc.), replacement of low 
and medium overhead lines with underground cables and expansion of the network by 
construction of new underground cables and possibly overhead lines both at low and 
medium voltages. The potential impacts are considered to be minor, of limited duration 
and limited area.  They are primarily associated with construction activities.  All impacts 
can be readily managed with standard procedures of good engineering and construction 
practice.  In the course of excavating the ditches to place any underground cable, there is 
a
possibility of unearthing artifacts of cultural significance. The EMPs all include 
requirements to follow Turkish ?chance find? procedures regarding cultural artifacts.   
During operation, the chief potential issues are effects on the public (if any) of exposure 
to electric and magnetic fields which also would be mitigated by burying cables at a 
depth to insure surface values will meet international standards.  
 
The implementation of the investment projects will not require the acquisition of private 
land.  Underground cables will all be located under city streets owned by the 
Municipalities.  The transformer substations upgrades or expansion will be carried out on 
Page  3
existing substations or land that is owned by TEDAS or by the Municipalities.  Therefore, 
the projects financed by this Loan will not entail any resettlement and the project will not 
trigger OP 4.12, Involuntary Resettlement.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
Mr Bernard Baratz (ECSIE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In accordance with World Bank policies and procedures for Environmental Assessment 
(OP/BP/GP 4.01), the Electricity Distribution Rehabilitation Project is rated Category B.  
TEDAS has prepared very good quality draft Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) 
to mitigate and monitor potential environmental impacts of the distribution network 
projects financed by the Loan.  TEDAS has also completed before the appraisal mission, 
the consultation and disclosure of the EMPs for the projects included in the first group of 
projects financed by loan.  Consultation and disclosure of the next group projects will be 
completed after the completion of their feasibility reports and before issuance of their 
bidding documents.  
 
The network rehabilitation projects financed by this Loan are not expected to have 
significant safeguard-related impacts.  The projects will include works such as 
rehabilitation of existing equipment (transformers, capacitors etc.), replacement of low 
and medium overhead lines with underground cables and expansion of the network by 
construction of new underground cables and possibly overhead lines both at low and 
medium voltages.  The potential impacts are considered to be minor of limited duration 
and limited area.  They are primarily associated with construction activities.  All impacts 
can be readily managed with standard procedures of good engineering and construction 
practice.  During operation, the chief potential issues are effects on the public (if any) of 
exposure to electric and magnetic fields which also would be mitigated by burying cables 
at a depth to insure surface values will meet international standards.   
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The investments will have significant positive impacts primarily through improving the 
safety of the distribution networks in the urban areas and increasing the reliability of the 
electricity supply to consumers.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
TEDAS has considered various alternative designs to prepare the least cost rehabilitation 
program.  The alternatives included new overhead lines in replacement of the old 
overhead network; using aerial bunched cables; and underground cable network.  Since 
old networks at several places are of non-standard voltage, the new network (at voltage 
level different from the existing network) would need to be constructed in parallel with 
the old network in order to keep serving existing consumers during the construction 
period.  The right of way is inadequate to run two medium voltage overhead networks in 
parallel, which makes the alternative of overhead lines technically infeasible.  The 
alternative of aerial bunched cables also would require additional supports for which right 
of way does not exist at several locations.  In addition, the aerial bunched cable would 
also impact the aesthetics of tourist places and city centers and breach municipal 
regulations.  TEDAS has finally adopted underground cabling as the optimal alternative 
for the expansion and rehabilitation of existing distribution network.  The utilization of 
cabling technology in the development and operation of distribution networks is common 
in most Western European countries.  One of the principal advantages of the underground 
cables in urban areas is that they improve the safety of electric facilities and reduce the 
environmental and aesthetic adverse impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has prepared high-quality environmental management plans (EMPs) after 
due consultations in the areas where projects are proposed.  The EMPs have also been 
disclosed on the website of TEDAS.  The EMP requirements will be part of the bidding 
documents, and will be regularly monitored by TEDAS staff supported by supervision 
consultants.  
 
The quality of the EMPs, and the quality of consultations demonstrate that there is 
adequate capacity and appreciation of safeguards issues among TEDAS staff.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are the people living in the vicinity of the project areas and the regional 
distribution companies.  TEDAS has conducted public notifications, consultation and 
disclosure for the investment projects included in the first group of projects financed by 
the loan.  EMPs, along with their consultation and disclosure, of other project financed by 
the loan will be completed after their feasibility reports are prepared, closer to the time of 
implementation.   
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/29/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/19/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/20/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ranjit J. Lamech 
06/20/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bernard Baratz 
06/20/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody 
06/20/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
06/21/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter D. Thomson 
06/27/2006 
Comments:   
