Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2228 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/13/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uganda 
Project ID: P090867 
Project Name: UG-Local Government Management & Services Delivery Project 
Task Team Leader: Lance Morrell 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 13, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 30, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTU1 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (100%) 
Theme: Decentralization (P);Municipal governance and institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The purpose of the Program and the Goal of the LGSIP is to build a long-term sustainable public 
sector system below the national level that delivers services in an efficient and effective manner 
while addressing the issues of poverty and sustainable growth with equity, and ultimately 
enhancing peace and development.  
 
The overall objective of the project is to strengthen the management and human resource 
capacity of local governments and communities to promote improvements in local service 
delivery and to ultimately contribute to poverty reduction.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Program would be a ten-year Adaptable Program Loan (APL) linked to the 
Government's LGSIP.  The Program would provide programmatic budget support to the local 
governments in the form of Local Development Grants and Capacity Building Grants.   
 
The proposed project would be the first phase of the APL and would be designed as 
programmatic budget support used for the Local Development and Capacity Building Grants, 
Page  2
with support to the Public Financial Management Reform Program provided as a specific 
investment loan.  The proposed project will use the Local Development Grant to support a multi-
sector dialogue intended to deepen the government's decentralization policy and to strengthen the 
delivery of sustainable services, with particular emphasis given to sub-counties and improving 
the CDD activities.  
 
It is anticipated that the project will have three components:  
 
Component 1: Support to the Public Financial Management Reform Program. This component 
will support improvements in public financial management and the 2004 Local Government 
Integrated Fiduciary Assessment (LGIFA) through a number of activities, including: (i) roll-out 
of the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) application to the remaining 28 central 
government agencies currently not using the IFMS and to about 20 - 30 higher level local 
governments; (ii) implementation of an interim management system for those local governments 
not using the larger IFMS; (iii) deepening of the IFMS by increasing the level of functionality in 
the system; and (iv) training of central and local government staff in the use of the IFMS.  
 
Component 2: Support to the Decentralization Policy Strategic Framework.  
 
Subcomponent (a) Local Development Grants. The development grants will continue to provide 
discretionary funding to local governments to finance high priority infrastructure and service 
delivery.  The grants will continue to be transparent and formula driven, but also reoriented to 
increase the level of community involvement and to push the impact of the grants to a lower 
level. The previous local development grant will now be divided into three separate windows to: 
(i) strengthen the capacity of the local governments in post conflict areas to deliver an improved 
level and quality of services to the communities and promote an increased level of trust between 
the communities and the government; (ii) support CDD initiatives including productive 
investments by matching funds raised by the communities. The window would be poverty 
oriented by providing a higher level of funding for the poorer areas; and (iii) continue the 
existing local development grants coupled with an enhanced system of assessments, rewards and 
sanctions to promote proper financial management and local accountability. The third window of 
funding would only continue in those districts that meet co-funding requirements and 
sustainability criteria. The development grants in the three windows will be released to the 
consolidated budget when agreed upon policy triggers developed on a multi-sector basis have 
been achieved.  
 
Subcomponent (b) Institutional Development Grants (IDGs). This subcomponent will support 
improvements in the management capacity of local governments through the provision of 
institutional development grants with emphasis given to LC-3 staff.  Building on the gains 
realized under LGDP II, the IDGs will support the professionalization of local government 
managers, and key staff and officials from statutory bodies through the introduction of 
certification programs as well as continue to upgrade knowledge and skills of the elected local 
government officials. Utilizing the lessons learned from the Makere University pilot, this 
subcomponent will also assist in the expansion of university level curriculum supportive of 
decentralization.  
 
Page  3
Component 3: Institutional Support and M&E. This component will provide focused technical 
assistance to MoLG to address LG issues in post conflict areas, to strengthen LC-3s in their role 
as mentors to parishes, and to emphasize CDD activities to strengthen the downward 
accountability of LC-3 to their communities.  The project will consolidate the outputs/outcomes 
achieved via the LGDP II and help to ensure that the capacity will exist to mainstream all aspects 
of the support to the local governments.  It will also provide support to strengthen the monitoring 
and evaluation system, and the government's management of the project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The local authorities that meet the minimum conditions will receive the development grants.  
Those local authorities that don't meet the minimum conditions will only receive the capactiy 
building grants.  The project will involve all higher level local governments and around 1000 
lower level local governments.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Government has an Environmental Impact Assesssment Policy and a National Environmental 
Managment Authority (NEMA) which oversees the implementation and enforcement of the 
policy. Higher LGs have Enviromental Officers as full time staff in their establishments. Under 
LGDP II, an EIA screening checklist for sub-projects was prepared for use by LGs for screening 
all sub-projects funded under LGDP II.  LGs departments were trained in the use of the checklist 
and screening process. Also prepared was a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). These documents 
will be reviewed and amended where necessary for use by LGs under the LGMSD project. 
Further training will be provided to the LG staff in the implementation of safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTS2) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project has a category B rating.  The investments under this project will focus on the 
improvement of the delivery of basic services and will result in improved living conditions.  The 
investments under the project would be sectorally varied given that they will be determined by 
local level priorities which will differ from one local government to another.  The types of 
investment are common community development projects whose potential environmental and 
social effects are well understood, unlikely to be significant, and readily manageable.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/26/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF)  
 
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Lance Morrell 
07/07/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/10/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
07/10/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
