Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/16/2007 
Report No.:  AC3083
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uganda 
Project ID:  P105649 
Project Name:  Agriculture Research & Training 2 
Task Team Leader:  Madhur Gautam 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 14, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: August 2, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural extension and research (80%);Central government administration 
(20%) 
Theme:  Technology diffusion (P);Other rural development (P);Other environment and 
natural resources management (P);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
12.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objectives (PDOs) of the Additional Financing are identical to 
the original PDOs of ARTP II, namely: (a) the generation of new knowledge, strategies 
and technologies in support of the PMA; (b) the design and implementation of improved 
procedures and capacities for scaling-up the application of new technologies; and, (c) 
capacity building of the reformed NARS. After FY ?09, IDA envisages, continued 
support to the implementation of GOU?s long term AR4D program through participation 
in a newly designed project which is expected to finance both agricultural research and 
agricultural advisory services (extension) on the basis of a sector-wide approach.  
 
The ARTP II Outcome indicators essentially remain the same with the Additional 
Financing, but have been expanded and revised upwards to reflect the extension of the 
Closing Date of the Project.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The Additional Financing will disburse $12 million under the existing three project 
components, as follows: (a) Technology Development and Adaptation (US$2.8 million); 
(b) Outreach and Extension Program (US$ 3.7 million); and, (c) Institutional 
Development (US$ 5.5 million).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Uganda - As in the original project appraisal (UG-P059127, there are no major 
enviornmental issues in this project.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas (AFTCS) 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
None.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Soil erosion, soil fertility depletion and pesticide residue pollution.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Soil runoff studies of different farming systems will be conducted to help determine 
appropriate soil conservation techniques; farmers and extension workers will be trained  
on soil conservation methods; studies on the judicious use of chemical fertilizers 
combined with the proper use of organic materials and use of green manure through tree 
legume fallow will be carried out to mitigate loss of soil fertility.  Research on Integrated 
Page  3
Pest Management (IPM) techniques would minimize excessive use of pesticides; 
pesticide residue levels would be monitored.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The updated ISDS will be disclosed.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  4
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Madhur Gautam 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Nina Chee 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
 
Comments:   
