Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/08/2006 
Report No.:  35452
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uganda 
Project ID:  P086513 
Project Name:  Millennium Science Initiative 
Task Team Leader:  Michael F. Crawford 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 13, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 25, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTH1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Tertiary education (65%);Other industry (35%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (P);Other financial and private sector 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.35 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
3.35 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project will contribute directly to two of the five pillars of Uganda's Poverty 
Eradication Action Plan.  With respect to Pillar Two, Enhancing Productivity, 
Competitiveness, and Incomes, the project will increase the amount and quality of skills 
available to the labor market in areas critical to private-sector led growth.  It will also 
increase the number and quality of connections between private firms and academia, and 
raise the awareness of firms as to the potential benefits of greater technology use.  With 
respect to Pillar Five, Human Development, the project will contribute to goals 5.1.5.P1 
(to improve [tertiary] curriculum to emphasize science and technology and use the credit 
system).   
 
3. Project Description 
1. 
The lending instrument for the project is a specific investment loan (SIL). The 
SIL is appropriate because this is the first project of its kind in Uganda; the implementing 
institutions do not have experience implementing competitive funds for the development 
of S&T capacity.   Supervision of the SIL will provide greater guidance and technical 
assistance than would be the case if the goals of this project were to be pursued under 
Page  2
budget support.   This is consistent with the Government's stated desire and Bank practice 
of having budget support be themain form of assistance, with projects only in areas 
bearing on productivity enhancement.  It is also consistent with the Strategic Framework 
for Investment in Africa, which identifies investment lending as appropriate for 
investment in areas sectors without an established track record.  
 
2. 
Project development objective and key indicators  
 
The project’s development objective is for Ugandan universities and research institutes 
to produce more and better qualified science and engineering graduates, and higher 
quality and more relevant research, and for firms to utilize these outputs to improve 
productivity for the sake of enhancing S&T-led growth.  
 
Increases in amounts of human resources trained would be measured by increases in 
numbers of programs, enrollment, and graduates in science and engineering, and labor 
market utilization of these skills.  Improvements in quality would be measured through 
independent review panels, and growth in total publications and publication citation 
impact analysis, as well as increased collaboration with advanced regional and 
international research partners and firms.  Improved relevance would be indicated by 
increased labor market utilization of S&T skills, greater public awareness and 
understanding of science, and greater use of technology and skills to improve commercial 
product- and process-improvements, and similar improvements in PEAP priority areas of 
public concern (i.e. health, agriculture, infrastructure, energy, etc).  
 
If the project is successful it will build experience within the GoU for managing a 
national science funding facility according to international best practice.  It will help 
make it possible for Uganda to achieve, within 10 years time, the targets of the National 
Council for Higher Education of one-third of tertiary enrollment in S&T disciplines, with 
all tertiary students getting exposure to some science.   It will train an increasing 
percentage of the national S&T workforce domestically, in programs that produce 
qualified Bachelors, Masters, and Ph.D.s in areas of relevance.  It will increase the 
private sector absorption of both people and knowledge, creating greater competitiveness 
and new areas of comparative advantage.  Its institutions and policies will support the 
continuous development and deepening of S&T capacity.  
 
3. 
Project components  
 
The project would consist of two components: (i) a competitive fund to support 
research, education and training in science and engineering, and linkages to the private 
sector; and (ii) an outreach, policy, and institutional strengthening component.  
 
Component One: Millennium Science Initiative (MSI) Fund [US$16.69 million].  The 
core of the project would be a competitive grant fund (the "MSI Fund").  The MSI Fund 
would have three “windows” to support (i) advance research connected tograduate 
Page  3
training; (ii) strengthening or creation of undergraduate degree programs in S&T 
disciplines; and (iii) research activities defined by the private sector.  
 
All grants would be competitively awarded through open, transparent selection 
processes.  Clear, merit-based selection criteria will be used for evaluating proposals.  
Expert peer reviews will provide technical opinions on proposal merit, and substantial 
feedback will be given to grant proponents.  Two rounds of competition will be held, so 
proponents who are not selected in the first round can resubmit improved proposals for 
consideration.  
 
Grants under Window A would go to research groups led by a senior principal 
investigator or emerging young investigators, based at universities or research institutes. 
Grants would fund specific subprojects or research programs that pass through the 
rigorous review of an international Technical Committee (TC).  Grant resources would 
fund scientific and technological equipment, reagents and research supplies/consumables, 
visiting professors, post-doctoral and graduate students, results dissemination, and/or the 
creation of specialized short courses.  Successful grant proponents would be required to 
demonstrate how their research would directly strengthen graduate training in their fields, 
and how the research is relevant to national needs.  Grants would vary in size according 
to the particular needs of each discipline and proposal; but they would be large enough to 
equip an international-level laboratory and attract the needed personnel to work in it.  The 
larger grants might exceed US$ 1 million total over a five-year period; smaller grants 
would also be available, but would be commensurate with international standards for the 
particular disciplines selected.   Technical assistance would be provided to grant 
proponents to improve the quality of proposals.  
 
Grants under Window B would fund the creation or strengthening of undergraduate 
degree programs in science, technology, and engineering.  They would fund acquisition 
of laboratory equipment, modification of buildings, visiting professors/specialized 
professors, reagents, consumables, and other research related recurrent costs, texts and 
didactic materials, and other related costs. Grant amounts would range as high as US$1.2 
million over a five-year period.  
 
Making a new degree program fully operational takes time and planning.  To 
accommodate this, grants under window B would have a planning phase and an 
implementation phase.  For new programs, up to 18 months would be used to assemble 
staff, equip laboratories, and recruit students.  For existing programs, the planning phase 
could be complete within the first 12 months of grant implementation.  
 
Grants under Windows A&B would be selected through a competitive process.  
Proponents will respond to a detailed call-for-proposals.  An eight-person Technical 
Committee, composed of Ugandan and non-Ugandan scientist, technologists, and 
entrepreneurs, would select finalists and grantees under a two stage process.  All 
proposals will be rigorously reviewed by ad hoc international peer reviewers.  The TC 
will conduct visits with and interview the finalists prior to selection of grantees. The TC 
Page  4
will also participate in the monitoring and evaluation of scientific and commercial 
outcomes.  
 
Grants under Window C would focus on activities that give firms greater access to 
technology and skills and link academia and industry.  Academia-industry collaboration 
would be organized around research topics defined by and useful to the private sector. 
Window C support: (i) small grants for technology evaluation; (ii) grants for "technology 
platforms"  through which firms and researchers definecollaborative research agendas on 
problems of direct interest to industry, and then pursue solutions collaboratively; and (iii) 
money for firm-based internships for students in science, engineering, and business 
administration.  
 
Technology evaluations would allow firms, in connection with academic partners, to 
identify and assess whether technology that exists and is used outside of Uganda could 
profitably be transferred for use domestically.  The grants would pay for the costs of the 
assessment and analysis, the firms would purchase and employ the technology 
themselves.  
 
Technology platforms are fora which bring together firms and knowledgeable partners 
from academia to define a set of technological problems facing firms to which research or 
consultation could provide solutions.  Once these research agendas have been defined, the 
partners could apply for follow-on funding to conduct research and devise solutions to 
the problems identified.  
 
Firm-based internships would provide students from science, engineering, ICT, 
mathematics, and other technology related disciplines with opportunities to gain hands-on 
experience in firms during their education.  Internships would be structured around 
specific themes to which the students, under the guidance of a firm and academic 
supervisor, would be expected to contribute.  
 
Grants under Window C will be vetted and selected by a subcommittee of the Technical 
Committee, with special expertise in entrepreneurship, engineering, and business R&D 
and consulting.  Grant proposals for Window C will be accepted on a continuous basis, 
and responses from the selection subcommittee will be prompt (4-6 weeks), in keeping 
with the demands of business.  
 
Component Two: Outreach, Policy, Institutional Strengthening Activities (US$16.65 
million). The aims of this component are to raise public understanding and appreciation 
of science while improving the capability of institutions to create and implement 
appropriate and effective policies for the S&T sector.  
 
The first subcomponent would be concerned with outreach activities that raise the 
profile and public understanding of the role of S&T in a country that is seeking to 
develop and modernize.    Activities would include "social marketing" of science by high 
profile researchers to primary and secondary school students.  This subcomponent would 
sponsor high visibility activities, including a National Science Week, in which the 
Page  5
contributions of science to development are highlighted, and career and other 
opportunities are promoted.  
 
The outreach subcomponent would also include activities to pilot two types of tertiary 
science education called for in the Government's S&T policy.  The first is remedial 
science educations for students who may not have had three passes in A-level science 
subjects, but who express an interest in pursuing science degrees and careers.  The second 
is "science-for-the non-scientist" courses, designedto provide breadth and understanding 
of natural and exact science to students who are studying arts, business administration, 
social science, or other subjects.  Such courses are not currently available, but are called 
for in the Government's policy.  
 
The second subcomponent would involve institutional strengthening of Ugandan 
Council for Science and Technology (UNCST) and the Uganda Industrial Research 
Institute (UIRI) as principal agencies involved in S&T policymaking, implementation, 
and service delivery.  
 
This subcomponent would provide support and technical assistance to the restructuring 
and strengthening of the UNCST to be more focused on deliverable outputs and policy 
implementation. An institutional assessment of the UNCST conducted in July 2005 found 
that has seen its core activity as the formulation of broad policies for science and 
technology.  This has led to the creation of various policy frameworks which have 
unfortunately not received budgetary commitment or institutional follow through.  In 
[give date of budget speech], the Government announced its intention to restructure the 
UNCST to improve its effectiveness.  In line with the recommendations of the institutions 
assessment, the UNCST will narrow its focus to six areas of concentration, each with 
specific annual work plans and outputs.  The Council's governance structure will be 
revamped to allow it to exercise effective control over this new structure.  
 
The new council will be reorganized into two units: one for policy, and one for 
operations.  The policy unit would be responsible for:  
 
1. 
Annual Analysis of S&T Activities and Expenditure  
 
2.
S&T Human Capital Development Report  
 
3.
Policy Recommendations for S&T in Economic and Industrial Development  
 
4.
Advice to Government on Occasional/Ad-hoc S&T topics (with UNAS)  
 
The policy unit would have responsibility for numerous sectoral monitoring and 
evaluation activities done in conjunction with project monitoring.  
 
The operations unit would be responsible for:  
 
1. 
Support to Research through Competitive Funding Mechanisms (incl. MSI)  
 
2.
Safety and Ethics Regulation and Compliance (incl. Bio-Safety) Services  
 
Page  6
The operations unit would house the MSI Project Secretariat.   Over time, the MSI 
Fund, and the MSI Project Secretariat, would transition from a donor-financed activity to 
a
domestically-financed national science funding system.  
 
The Government's policy for innovation and industrialization seeks to greatly enhance 
the role of the UIRI as a main conduit for provision of public services to industry.  The 
UIRI will play a main role in marketing and reviewing proposals for firm-academia 
interaction under Window C of component one.  In addition, Component Two would 
enhance UIRI’s ability to provide services to firms via (i) strengthening of its human 
capital base; (ii) an intensive needs-assessment of firm priorities for services;  and (iii) 
selected investments in rehabilitation of UIRI's physical capital.  
 
4. 
Lessons learned and reflected in the project design  
 
Lessons from general Bank experience include the need to base project design on 
thorough analytical work and stakeholder consultation.  Prior to beginning design of the 
Uganda MSI, five major participatory stakeholder workshops were held, involving 200 
key actors from universities, industry, government and civil society.  A comprehensive 
situation analysis, "The State of Science and Technology in Uganda",was produced to 
examine the current status of S&T in education, privatesector, health, agriculture, 
government and related sectors.  
 
Bank experience with the Millennium Science Initiative has taught that focused 
investment in research excellence, awarded through competition and closely linked to 
training, can provide a catalytic stimulus for quality, relevance, and human capital 
development in S&T.  In Chile, the number of PhD's trained domestically was doubled 
through concentrating resources on a few top scientists. In Chile, Venezuela, and Mexico, 
giving highly-selected researchers grants large enough to attract them to stay in their 
home countries has been key to renovating quality in several key research areas.  This 
trend toward use of competitive funding mechanism evolved in response to years of less-
than-satisfactory performance of Bank-funded projects that provided science and 
technology infrastructure without in-depth consideration or competitive screening for the 
specific research activities for which it would be used.  
 
Other projects have channeled support to improvement of undergraduate education 
through competitive funds.  The Indonesia: Quality of Undergraduate Education Project 
improved first degree programs at public and private universities by supporting staff 
development, equipment, technical assistance, and rehabilitation of facilities. The Quality 
Innovation Fund (QIF) of the Mozambique: Higher Education Project (P069824) was 
deemed at mid-term review a "very successful" element of an overall well performing 
project.  This mid-term review also suggested promoting greater participation of private 
universities in the QIF and raising maximum institutional thresholds by 33% to US$ 1 
million.  The Ethiopia: Post-Secondary Education Project has emphasized different levels 
of funds for different purposes, as well as the need to put great ex-ante emphasis on the 
development of funding administration procedures.  
 
Page  7
In Uganda, the Uganda: Decentralized Service Delivery-Makerere University Training 
Pilot Project has demonstrated that investments in training directed to high priority social 
needs (social service delivery) can modify traditional curricula and teaching methods and 
bring the work of students and professors much closer to concrete needs of service 
providers.  
 
Experience from the Mexico: Knowledge and Innovation Project underscores the gains 
from creating channels for private sector-academia interaction based around problems 
defined by firms.  
 
While project experience has been largely successful, it has also been apparent that 
improving S&T systems involves both institutional strengthening and "social learning."  
These take place over reasonably long time frames when projects have been able to 
demonstrate the advantages of improved research funding, administration, and linkage 
practices.  For example, the use of competitive, peer-review grant awards systems, or 
intensive researcher accountability, are initially resisted by those who may feel unable to 
compete.  After experiencing the benefits of this type of system, however, stakeholders 
strongly prefer the transparent, merit-based procedures to the less efficient practices they 
supplant.  
 
5. 
Alternatives considered and reasons for rejection  
 
Several alternatives to this proposed project design were considered:  
 
(i) 
An investment in pre-selected centers of excellence in biotechnology.  This 
alternative was rejected because it would concentrate too narrowly on research in a single 
field of science (albeit an important one) to provide the range of science-and technology-
based solutions for obstacles to Uganda's development.  Itwould not improve the 
Ugandan S&T system in a balanced way, with focus on research, training, and 
application of knowledge, and it would not create any open, transparent, funding 
opportunities to which all Uganda researchers could apply.  
 
(ii) 
An investment focused on secondary or primary level science education.  
Stakeholders pointed out the serious deficiencies of science education at the primary and 
secondary level, and the need to build the "pipeline" of qualified candidates for advanced 
training.  However, given the modest resources available, and the fact that other donors 
are active at the secondary level, it was felt that an investment in the tertiary/graduate 
training system would be cost-effective and would address an important sub-sector not 
currently receiving funding.  
 
(iii) 
An investment focused only on private sector demanded research, or only on 
undergraduate engineering.  It was felt that the Uganda S&T system needs should be 
encouraged to grow in a balanced manner, with a mix of fundamental science tied to 
training (graduate and undergraduate) and applied research and skills creation for near-
term needs of the productive sector.  Attempting to pre-select the exact "needs" of 
industry was deemed likely to miss the mark.   
 
Page  8
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The MSI has triggered OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment and OP 4.12 Involuntary 
Resettlement; the safeguard screening category is S2 (limited impact) and the 
environmental screening category is B.  Accordingly, the project has prepared an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to address the issues 
discussed in the preceding section, and a Resettlement Policy Framework to address and 
mitigate any potential negative social impacts in the event that there is land 
acquisition,impact on assets or impact on livelihoods in connection with the project.  
Both documents have been disclosed in Uganda on October 25, 2005, and at the Bank's 
Infoshop on November 3, 2005.  
 
The ESMF includes planning for the creation of individual Environmental Management 
Systems (EMS) in each laboratory, as well as proposed capacity building measures, 
monitoring and evaluation and supervision plans, and cost estimates.  The ESMF is 
included in the Project Implementation Plan/Operational Manual.  
 
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) outlines the policies, principles, and 
procedures to be adopted in the event that land is to be acquired in connection with the 
project, and the ex-ante screening process to mitigate any potential negative effects 
relating to resettlement, loss of assets, or the loss of livelihoods.  The overall 
responsibility for the implementation of the RPF will be the UNCST/MSI Project 
Secretariat.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The MSI has triggered OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment and OP 4.12 Involuntary 
Resettlement; the safeguard screening category is S2 ("limited impact") and the 
Page  9
environmental screening category is B.  Accordingly, the project has prepared an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework to address the issues discussed in the 
preceding section, and a Resettlement Policy Framework to address and mitigate any 
potential negative social impacts in the event that there is land acquisition, impact on 
assets or impact on livelihoods in connection with the project.  Both documents have 
been disclosed in Uganda on October 25, 2005, and at the Bank's Infoshop on November 
3, 2005.  
 
Laboratory safety and the safe disposal of wastes is the principal potential 
environmental concern.  The ESMF contains an in-depth digest of international best 
practice standards for laboratory safety.  The standards cover all classes of physical, 
chemical, biological, and radioactive hazards.  They discuss procurement and transport, 
storage, protocols and facilities for use in research, training of personnel, segregation of 
waste types, and disposal of wastes.  The digest also describes core processes for 
establishing functioning environmental management systems within laboratories, 
including development of training for personnel, designation of responsibility for 
environmental management, performance of needs assessment and waste stream 
assessment, installation and maintenance of appropriate equipment, treatment processes, 
and safe transport.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The ESMF includes planning for the creation of individual Environmental Management 
Systems (EMS) in each laboratory, as well as proposed capacity building measures, 
monitoring and evaluation and supervision plans, and cost estimates.  The ESMF is 
included in the Project Implementation Plan/Operational manual.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The UNCST has been the lead agency in Uganda for the creation of draft legislation 
covering biosafety.  This has given the agency in-depth experience with environmental 
and social safety issues from both the policy and implmentation perspectives.  
 
In producing the ESMF, the UNCST sought out international best practice for 
laboratory safety as the standard to which to aspire, going beyond the requirements of 
national legislation.  It has also sought and obtained the cooperation of the National 
Environmental Management Agency (NEMA) for implementation of compliance and 
monitoring.  NEMA has extensive experience in implementation of Bank's safeguard 
policy.   
 
Page  10
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders who were consulted early in the process were principal investigators 
and scientific research directors at public and private research laboratories, Vice-
Chancellors, and heads of faculties and departments at universities.Current practices 
safety practices were documented in several laboratories, and consultations were held 
with NEMA officials responsible for enforcement of hazardous waste standards.  
Disclosure has included not only these stakeholders, but the university community and 
the general public in vicinity of where project activities may occur.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/21/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/25/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/03/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/21/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/25/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/03/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  11
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael F. Crawford 
03/08/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Dzingai B. Mutumbuka 
 
Comments:   
