Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/29/2006 
Report No.:  AC2065
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uganda 
Project ID:  P050440 
Project Name:  Uganda Public Service Performance Enhancement Program (UPS-PEP) 
Task Team Leader:  Denyse E. Morin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 27, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 25, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTPR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other public sector governance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
FOREIGN SOURCES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
20.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
10.00
30.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
To support: (i) the transformation of the public service so that it is affordable, efficient 
and accountable for the use of public resources; and (ii) improvement in the policy and 
regulatory environment for sustainable growth and service delivery.   
 
3. Project Description 
UPSPEP comprises two components. The first one supports the implementation of the 
government's public service reform program (PSRP) through a sector-wide approach 
program (SWAp).  The second component fosters performance enhancement initiatives 
on a demand-driven basis supported by a performance enhancement fund (PEF).Key 
areas to be supported by the latter would include but not be limited to procurement, 
financial sector and statistics.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be implemented by the Ministry of Public Service. Under Component 1 
sub component 4, the Government will construct through the use of a construction firm a 
National Records and Archives Centre. The site for this National Records and Archives 
Page  2
Centre has been identified and a site specific Environmental Impact Assessment(EIA) has 
been prepared and disclosed both to Government and the World Bank. The World Bank 
through ASPEN and the Government through the national environmental management 
authority(NEMA) have approved the site specific EIA. This will be implemented by the 
construction firm under the supervision of NEMA and the World Bank. In addition a total 
of 7 house holds at the site will have to be re-located.  To support this process an 
abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan has been prepared and submitted to the 
Government and the World Bank for comments. This will be reviewed, approved and 
disclosed in the country and at the Info shop. Recommendations there in will be 
implemented prior to commencement of construction.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The construction of a National Records and Archives Centre will lead to minor road 
diversions, noise and dust polution and this is be mitigated by measures described in the 
site specific EIA which has been specifically prepared by Government and reviewed and 
approved by the World Bank's Safeguard Unit and Government's National Environmental 
Managament Authority. This has been disclosed in the country and at the World Bank 's 
Infoshop in Washington.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
Page  3
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To support the construction of a National Record and Archives centre under the project 
the Government has through the Ministry of Public Service developed the site specific 
Environmental Impact Assesment(EIA)with very clear recomendations on how exactly to 
mitigate these impacts. The site specific EIA has been reviewed,commented on and 
approved by the Bank and the Borrower and disclosed in country and at the Bank's Info 
shop.  
 
Some seven households will be affected by the development activity,the Bank's 
safeguard policy on Involuntary Ressettlement OP 4.12 has been triggered and as such an 
Abbreviated Ressettlement Action Plan has been prepared by the Borrower, and 
submitted to the Bank and Governement. This will be reviewed and approved by the 
Bank and will be disclosed both in the infoshop and the Government.   
 
The borrower has taken thew initiative to further disseminate the EIA to all regulatory 
agencies in the City of Kampala where construction is to take Place to ensure 
appreciation  and monitoring of mitigation factors proposed.In addition the EIA notice of 
availability of the EIA has been placed in the key news papers and location of access 
highlighted.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakehoders include Ministry of Public Service and the memebers of the seven 
households.  
 
The affected families under the 7 households have been consulted prior to the 
preparation of the RAP and duly informed of proposed activities as well as the measures 
to be taken to minimize the potential negative impacts. A joint Mission by the Bank's 
project team  and the Borrower carried out the consultation in accordance with the policy 
requirements. A provision has been made within the abbreviated RAP to allow for the 
affected 7 households to seek redress to the Uganda law where grievances arise.Other key 
stakeholders include the Government of Uganda, which through the NEMA has approved 
the site specific EIA and the abbreviated RAP.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/12/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/30/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/28/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/14/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/20/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/21/2006 
 
Page  4
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Denyse E. Morin 
03/28/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye 
03/28/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye 
03/28/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helga W. Muller 
03/28/2006 
Comments:   
