Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/26/2007 
Report No.:  AC2329
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uganda 
Project ID:  P078382 
Project Name:  Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Solomon Alemu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 7, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: October 9, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTU1 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (40%);Flood protection (35%);Sub-national government 
administration (25%) 
Theme:  Municipal governance and institution building (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
33.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.20
3.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve institutional efficiency of 
Kampala City Council (KCC) through implementation of the Strategy Framework for 
Reform (SFR). Achievement of the PDO will be measured in terms of the following 
monitoring indicators: (i) reduce overdue liabilities from Ushs 8 billion to Ushs 4 billion; 
(ii) increase the share of budget release for service delivery from 10% to 30%; (iii) 
increase in own source revenue from Ushs 22 billion to Ushs 30 billion; and (iv) increase 
in public satisfaction in service delivery in the following areas: roads from 18% to 50%, 
drainage from 22% to 30%, and solid waste from 44% to 60%.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Phase I project will comprise of three components that are aligned to support the 
implementation of the SFR II:  Component 1 will focus on institutional development 
activities that support organizational development and governance, the implementation of 
the Financial Recovery Action Plan, and actions to enhance effectiveness of service 
delivery. Component 2 will finance infrastructure mainly focusing on rehabilitation of 
high priority infrastructure which were identified as critical to maintaining the 
productivity and welfare of the City and that the proposed activities are ready for 
Page  2
implementation; and Component 3 will support project management and Monitoring & 
Evaluation (M&E) activities.  The objectives of the physical investments are the 
preservation of the current assets and arrest the deterioration of the assets.  It will enable 
Kampala to be functioning capital city and position itself to attract investors.  
 
Project components  
 
Component 1 - Institutional Development (US$5.8 million).  This component will assist 
KCC and its stakeholders to refine and expand the SFR into a comprehensive approach to 
municipal development, consonant with Kampala’s central role in the nation’s economic 
and political life.  Activities will include: (i) developing and beginning to implement a 
long-term vision for the city, including an effective development plan, which identifies 
the steps to be taken in the near and medium term to achieve that vision with specific 
annual milestones; (ii) implementing a financial recovery plan designed to place KCC 
and its divisions in a sound and sustainable financial condition; (iii) creating and 
implementing a comprehensive organizational development strategy, based on financial 
sustainability, the capacity to sustain O&M of infrastructure and services, and on the 
clear and enforceable separation of council’s role of policy-making and oversight from 
staff’s management role; (iv) introducing and sustaining mechanisms to improve the 
transparency and accountability of KCC, including the development and ongoing 
implementation of an effective and meaningful communication strategy between KCC 
and its stakeholders.  Technical and financial support will also be provided to ensure that 
an effective collaborative process is put in place to identify barriers to competitiveness 
and to address these appropriately, in order to improve the ability of the private sector 
(formal and informal) to contribute to economic development and poverty reduction in 
Kampala; and (v) environmental training.  
 
Component 2 - City Wide Infrastructure and Services Improvement (US$28.5 million).  
This component will support activities aimed at improving the provision of critical 
services to the city.  The investment in infrastructure and service improvements will 
address the following five priority areas which are critical for public confidence and 
which will contribute to the economic and commercial development of the city: (i) 
drainage system improvement - flooding from primary and secondary channels has been 
a
major problem in Kampala. It has adversely impacted on the property values, disruption 
of commercial and industrial activities, traffic and damage to road infrastructure; (ii) 
traffic management - improved urban traffic management would reduce travel time and 
vehicle operating cost.  It would also reduce road accidents in the city which are very 
high; (iii) road maintenance and upgrading - maintenance of roads would also reduce 
travel time and vehicle operating cost; (iv) solid waste management - under the solid 
waste management, support under the project would be only for the expansion of the 
landfill because the solid waste collection has been privatized; and (v) urban markets 
infrastructure - the investment provided for market infrastructure will consist of access 
roads, lighting, and sanitation to selected markets.  
 
Component 3 - Project Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$2.8 million).  
This component will encompass the management activities associated with the 
Page  3
implementation of the project, the establishment and implementation of a comprehensive 
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system and the preparation of the next phase of the 
project.  Activities will include: (i) project implementation support; (ii) monitoring and 
evaluation; (iii) annual citizen’s report card; and (iv) staff and councilor survey.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in Kampala. Kampala is the commercial and political 
capital city of Uganda, with a population of about 1.2 million, and an annual 
demographic growth rate of about 3.9% . The Kampala District accounts for about 80% 
of the country’s industrial and commercial sectors, over 60% of the urban population, and 
generates over 60% of the national GDP. Kampala is built on a series of hills and valleys, 
with gentle slopes separated by valleys consisting of natural streams, drainage channels, 
and wetlands of varying gradients.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The key safeguard policy issues raised by the project include potential soil and water 
pollution from construction activities, blockages and siltation of the drainage channels 
emanating from unpaved roads and construction sites; loss of vegetation due to 
construction activities; higher pollution rates due to increased water flow velocity in the 
channels; traffic accidents, noise, dust, and land acquisition, impact on assets and 
potential loss of livelihoods in the areas where existing infrastructures are to be 
rehabilitated or expanded.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
This project will not incur any potential indirect and/or long term impacts because 
appropriate provisions for environmental and social management have been made.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
This project supports a part of KCC's strategic development plan; hence, a discussion of 
alternatives would not have been relevant.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In an effort to address potential adverse environmental and social impacts of the project 
as well as to improve existing environmental conditions in the project area, the Borrower 
has prepared (i) an Environmental Analysis (EA) Report, including an Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) dated November 2006; and (ii) a Resettlement Action Plan 
(RAP) dated October 2006.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), 
Wetland Inspection Division (WID), Department of Water Development (DWD), 
officials of the Kampala City Council (KCC), members of Parish Development 
Committees, Local Council Officials, and directly affected community members. 
Consultation methods included field visits, meetings with stakeholders, focus group 
discussions,literature reviews, data collection and analysis, and collaboration with other 
consultants. Stakeholder suggestions have been incorporated into the design of 
component 2 of the project (i.e. bridges, pedestrian walkways, construction of a berm). 
The EA report and the RAP have been disclosed in Uganda on December 4, 2006, and at 
the Bank's Infoshop on December 12, 2006.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/06/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/04/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/12/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/27/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/04/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/12/2006 
 
Page  5
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Solomon Alemu 
06/26/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
06/26/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
06/26/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo 
06/26/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Matthew D. Glasser 
06/26/2007 
Comments:   
