Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/28/2007 
Report No.:  AC3129
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ukraine 
Project ID:  P090389 
Project Name:  Public Finance Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader:  Cem Dener 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 4, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: November 27, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSPE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme:  Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
15.00
15.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the proposed project is to strengthen public financial 
management by improving operational efficiency and transparency.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project is designed to strengthen public financial management through an 
integrated public financial management system (PFMS) and supporting for the MoF's 
urgent reform program. The project includes financial and technical support for the 
MoF's reorganization; developing new PFM methodologies and procedures; establishing 
integrated information and communication technology (ICT) solutions and other 
technological infrastructure; and training to achieve these objectives.  
 
During the preparation phase (which started in January 2006), the MoF, STU and KRU 
were involved in a number of important activities (mostly funded by donors) to develop 
the PFM Reform Strategy (named as the "Concept for Modernizing and Raising 
Efficiency in Public Financial Management") and define key reform objectives. As a 
baseline study, the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment 
was completed with Bank support in March 2007, and provided valuable feedback on the 
Page  2
current status of public financial management capacity in Ukraine. In parallel to these, 
the PFMP provided the opportunity to benefit from a Japanese PHRD Grant for the 
development of "Concept Document" which outlined key PFM reform actions based on 
the MoF functional review and needs analysis. Finally, PFMS "System Design" and 
"Technical Specifications" were developed.  
 
The CoM approval of the PFM Reform Strategy (or Concept for Modernizing and 
Raising Efficiency in Public Financial Management) is an important segment of project 
preparation. This will allow having well defined objectives and funding to support the 
development and avoid the negative effects of possible fluctuations in Government in the 
light of forthcoming parliamentary elections. Additionally, the Treasury (STU) 
development strategy includes the transition to accrual based accounting, to be designed 
and implemented mostly under EU-TACIS project.  
 
A
significant amount of multilateral and bilateral assistance in PFM is underway in 
Ukraine:  
 
+
The World Bank provided immediate advisory support on MoF reorganization; debt 
management and debt market development; and prepared a White Paper on public 
internal financial control for KRU (2005).  
 
+
EU-TACIS is providing TA and training to the Treasury for "effective state budget 
management" (2004-06), as a part of the EU-Ukraine Action Plan. EU project covers 
some of the TA needed for the implementation of PFMS, particularly the design of a 
phased approach to move to accrual based accounting, and a close coordination is 
necessary to avoid overlapping activities.  
 
+
French Government (French Treasury and ADETEF) is providing TA and training for 
the Treasury decentralization and internal audit.  
 
+
USAID will be providing technical assistance (TA) and training for the MoF Budget 
Dept. on design and implementation of Performance Program Budgeting (PPB) as well as 
macroeconomics (2005-08).  
 
+
US Treasury will be assisting the MoF Budget Dept. on PPB and budget execution.  
 
+
GTZ (Germany) and SIDA (Sweden) will be providing advisory support and training 
for institutional reform of the MoF.  
 
+
The Government of the Netherlands will support Ukraine's competitiveness through 
improved capital budgeting, public finance management and trade and transit facilitation 
through the World Bank or recipient executed trust funds (2007-08).  
 
In February 2007, the MoE led donor coordination efforts and several key donor 
coordination groups were established to focus on key reform areas in Ukraine. It was 
decided that the MoF will lead the "PFM donor coordination group", meeting on a 
quarterly basis, to avoid over-lapping assistance and to assure maximum value to the 
GoU of the limited resources available. Moreover, a Donor Coordination Team will be 
established as a part of PFMP implementation arrangements to coordinate the PFMP 
activities with other donor funded projects within the MoF and communicate with this 
group.  
 
Page  3
The PFMP implementation will complement these efforts with additional advisory 
support to the MoF, KRU and STU for some of the key PFM reforms, followed by core 
competency training, business process re-engineering, integration of work flows around 
core MoF tasks, and eventually, with implementation of ICT solutions to develop an 
integrated PFM system.  
 
Larger reforms requiring separate projects were excluded from the present project (e.g. 
Customs, Sub-national Public Finance Reform, and Tax Modernization, which already 
has a Bank-supported project). Also, the project does not include direct support to 
ongoing reforms being supported by other donors (e.g. Program and Performance 
Budgeting, supported by USAID and possibly by the US Treasury). However, ongoing 
reform activities will be closely monitored and related project activities will be 
streamlined with these to avoid duplicate efforts and to ensure smooth integration of 
outputs.  
 
The Public Finance Modernization Project (PFMP) will support the Government over a 
period of five years (2008-2012) and will include the following three components:  
 
Component 1:  Strengthening Institutional Capacity and Operational Effectiveness 
(US$5.9 million)  
 
The purpose of this component is to assist the MoF in selected institutional capacity 
building activities for PFM reforms, functional review of the MoF, business process re-
engineering, and design of ICT solutions, as a part of broader PFM reform agenda (2007-
2011) which is being implemented by the GoU and supported by a number of donors. 
Further enhancement and optimization of the functions and operational efficiency of the 
MoF and Treasury are other important objectives. Training needs that stem from the new 
functionalities of the system are also included in various subcomponents. Assistance in 
strengthening the institutional capacity will be limited due to existence of adequate donor 
funding (grants) available for the GoU to implement PFM reforms. Component 1 
activities will be coordinated with other capacity building efforts of the MoF to achieve 
targeted PFM reform objectives coherently.  
 
Since the MoF requested urgent advisory support for their reorganization and reform 
needs, the PHRD funded preparation activities started with the development of a PFM 
Concept Document (CD). The CD includes the functional review of all MoF units and 
other PFM organizations, the recommendations for improving institutional capacity, and 
the PFMS functional requirements, together with necessary procedural and organizational 
changes. The CD was approved by the MoF in April 2007 and MoF reorganization was 
completed in August 2007, accordingly.  
 
Based on the PFM reform needs identified by the MoF, some of the advisory support 
requirements were already covered through a PHRD grant during the preparation phase, 
as well as other ongoing donor funded activities. Further work on public procurement and 
human resources management components of the reform will be carried out by the 
Government itself in parallel to PFMP implementation. Hence, complementary advisory 
Page  4
support activities included in component 1 will focus on the following areas of PFM 
reforms, based on the requirements identified during preparation activities:  
 
1.1.  Improvement of coordination in the process of macroeconomic forecasting  
 
1.2.
Improvement of budget planning and mid-term budgeting; development of 
performance based budgeting capability.  
 
1.3.
Support to local budget reform  
 
1.4.
Development of a monitoring system for performance based budgeting  
 
1.5.
Support for the implementation of accounting reform  
 
1.6.
Creation of the single registry of spending units  
 
1.7.
Development of the unified chart of accounts  
 
1.8.
Improvement of the debt management system  
 
1.9.
Improvement of international financial assistance management  
 
1.10.
Improvement of coordination for internal financial control  
 
Component Manager will be the Ministry of Finance (MoF).  
 
Component 2:  Development of an integrated Public Financial Management System 
(US$57.45 million)  
 
With the completion of the Bank's first Treasury project in December 2004, a well 
functioning Treasury System (TS) is in place. However, integration of key PFM modules 
to create a single, integrated centralized information system that will serve as a backbone 
to all public expenditure management processes and interlace with the revenue collection 
systems is a key element of the reform agenda. Therefore, based on the functional and 
technical requirements identified during preparation phase, component 2 activities will 
focus on the development of an integrated Public Financial Management System (PFMS). 
Additionally, change management, training and related technical assistance (TA) 
activities are included to ensure sustainability of implemented solutions.  
 
Following activities are included in the second component:  
 
2.1.
IT support for interaction with IT systems of Spending Units (SUs) related with 
PFMS  
 
2.2.
IT support for analysis and modernization of business processes  
 
2.3.
Support for change management - workshops, study tours, training  
 
2.4.
PFMS implementation advisor(s) (long term)  
 
2.5.
Development of integrated PFMS software and installation of central servers  
 
2.6.
Installation of PFMS field hardware and network equipment  
 
TA for the development of specific tools for the interaction of SUs with the PFMS, and 
support for the modernization of daily operational tasks (office automation) will be 
provided at early stages of implementation. Change management activities are included 
to streamline operational and decision-making procedures, to train financial managers 
and operational staff in new procedures, control features, and information systems, and to 
conduct dissemination events (seminars, study tours) to foster system acceptance during 
implementation. An implementation advisor will assist the MoF throughout PFMS 
implementation to ensure compliance of ICT solutions with technical requirements.  
Page  5
Integrated PFMS solutions will be implemented through two major ICT contracts:  
 
+
Development of PFMS application software (ASW) and installation of related central 
servers and data storage systems (Activity 2.5).  
 
+
Installation of standard field hardware and network equipment (Activity 2.6).  
 
PFMS ASW will be developed as a combination of commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) 
software and custom developed software (CDSW) modules to provide full functionality 
of the designed system, based on the functional requirements and technical specifications 
developed during PHRD activities. PFMS ASW modules will be implemented in two 
groups to ensure successful and timely completion of planned activities according to 
existing capacity and resources of the MoF, STU and KRU IT Departments.  
 
PFMS modules to be implemented by MoF and KRU:  
 
1.
Macroeconomic forecasting & strategic budget planning  
 
2.
Formulation and approval of the budget  
 
3.
State debt management  
 
4.
International financial assistance management  
 
5.
State procurement management  
 
6.
Personnel management  
 
7.
Support for internal financial control and audit  
 
8.
Interfaces for data exchange with external systems  
 
PFMS modules to be implemented by STU:  
 
1.
Management of payments  
 
2.
Management of revenue / receipts  
 
3.
Commitment management / purchasing goods & services  
 
4.
Resource / cash management  
 
5.
Management of tangible assets and stocks  
 
6.
Accounting ledger (general ledger)  
 
7.
Accounting for budget institutions  
 
8.
Financial reports  
 
9.
Creation of a single register of budget institutions  
 
The Main System Center (MSC) hosting the integrated PFMS will be located at the 
STU. A Business Continuity Center (BCC) will be established in the MoF as a replica of 
the MSC and to host the FMIS for planning and decision support.  
 
All MoF, STU and KRU offices located at 27 regions and 681 districts will be 
connected to MSC and BCC in Kiev. Existing countrywide telecommunication 
infrastructure of the STU will be expanded to cover additional connectivity needs of the 
MoF and KRU. Connections from 32 line ministries and central agencies to the MoF 
central office (BCC) and STU (MSC) will also be established via State Special 
Telecommunications Network.  
 
Expected number of concurrent (internal) system users (MoF, STU, KRU offices, 
central line ministries and other government agencies) with online access right to various 
Page  6
PFMS modules is around 8,500. Total number of external system users (spending units, 
local finance directorates, local public authorities, municipalities, etc.) is expected to be 
around 50,000. Building necessary institutional capacity within the MoF, KRU and STU 
requires substantial change management activity for effective use and sustainability of 
integrated PFMS. Therefore, a large number of workshops and user training seminars will 
be organized for MoF, STU and KRU staff during implementation.  
 
MoF will be the coordinator and component manager.  
 
Component 3:  Project Management (US$1.15 million)  
 
In addition to above main components, a project management component is included to 
ensure timely and efficient allocation of resources, to carry out project procurement, 
financial management, and audit activities, to monitor and evaluate the implementation 
and to interact with all local and international entities involved in project execution. 
Treasury established a project implementation unit (PIU) while implementing the PHRD 
grant for project preparation. To ensure proper and timely implementation of the PFMP, a 
similar MoF unit (Administrative and Procurement Support Team) was established in 
June 2007. MoF will be the component manager.  
 
The Ministry of Finance (MoF) will implement the project, and coordinate the 
implementation of project activities at central and local budget organizations. An 
Interagency Working Group (IWG), chaired by the Minister of Finance, is responsible 
from the preparation and implementation of the project. The Deputy Finance Minister 
shall be appointed as the Deputy IWG Chairperson. The composition and the terms of 
reference for the IWG were approved by the relevant Government Resolutions in 2007. 
One of the important roles of the IWG is to ensure that relevant government agencies are 
fully informed about project activities and trained properly, so as to facilitate timely 
implementation of activities requiring participation of the budget spending units. IWG 
consists of all Component Managers, who will lead the component activities and on a 
regular base monitor the progress, including procurement and disbursements. Other 
project stakeholders (representatives of all the ministries and agencies in PFM domain) 
are also present within the IWG. Project Annual Work Plan (AWP) will be prepared by 
the IWG, based on inputs from Component Managers. The IWG is supported by IT 
Coordinators (the Heads of the MoF, STU and KRU IT Departments) and an 
Administration and Procurement Support Team (APST).  
 
The First Deputy Finance Minister shall be appointed as the Project Manager (PM). PM 
shall be responsible for the overall Project management. PM shall get functional and 
technical support from Component Managers (CM), IT Coordination Team (IT CT), 
Administration and Procurement Support Team (APST) and Donor Coordination Team 
(DCT). PM shall report to IWG on Project implementation progress, funds 
disbursements, procurement, financial management and other issues as well as appoint 
Monitoring Project Partners Missions. PM shall submit AWP based on proposals from 
CM, IT CT, APST and DCT for IWG consideration in compliance with Project 
Operations Manual.   
 
Page  7
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Kiev, Ukraine.  
 
Project will not involve any type of civil works or construction. The loan is for 
consultancy (advisory support), supply and installation of goods, and training activities.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
Page  8
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Cem Dener 
08/27/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Asad Alam 
08/28/2007 
Comments:  Approved as per the information provided. 
