Page  1
1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.: 39114  
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/22/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ukraine 
Project ID: P101615 
Project Name: Alchevsk Steel Mill Revamping and Modernization 
Task Team Leader: Grzegorz Peszko 
Estimated Date of Review of CFEM: 
February 8, 2007 
Estimated Date of ERPA Signing: June 29, 
2007 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Emission Reductions 
Purchase Agreement (ERPA) with the 
International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development (“
IBRD
”) acting as the 
trustee of the Netherlands European 
Carbon Facility 
Sector: Other industry (100%) 
Theme: Climate change (P); Pollution Management and Environmental Health (S) 
ERPA Amount (US$m.): 
9 
Total Carbon Revenue Amount (US$m.): 
70 
Borrower (Including IFC Corporate Lending Facility) Amount (US$m.): 944 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objectives of the project are to: i) generate and sell greenhouse gas (GHG) emission 
reductions (ERs) and transfer ERs as Emission Reduction Units (ERUs) to buyers under Joint 
Implementation (JI) mechanism by modernization of the steel making capacity in OJSC 
‘Alchevsk Iron and Steel Works’ (AISW), and ii) support a long term investment program in 
technology having environmental performance that will provide significant reductions in primary 
air emissions, wastewater discharges and solid waste generation/disposal.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
AISW is the fifth largest integrated steel plant in Ukraine and is part of the Industrial Union 
Donbass, which is the controlling shareholder for a number of plants in the iron and steel sector 
in Ukraine and Eastern Europe.  This includes the Alchevsk Coke Plant located next to AISW, 
which is AISW’s exclusive supplier of coke.   
 
Page  2
2
Beginning 2004, AISW initiated an extensive modernization program with the integrated 
objectives of applying more efficient technology, improving environmental performance, 
increasing capacity and upgrading the quality and range of steel produced.  This modernization 
program involves technology replacement or upgrade of all major components of the iron and 
steel making and finishing processes.  The program’s initial focus has been on steel production 
with the replacement of the old open hearth furnaces (OHF)
1
with two modern basic oxygen 
furnaces (converters) integrated with continuous slab casters to replace the existing blooming 
mill. The first phase of this, involving installation of one converter and continuous slab casting 
line, is to be commissioned early 2007 along with upgrading of waste water treatment and 
recirculation infrastructure. In addition, one of three blast furnaces is currently under 
reconstruction (not part of the proposed project). The second converter and continuous slab 
casting line is also currently under construction with addition of ladle furnace upgrades and 
vacuum degassing capability.  Associated with the current work are modernization and, 
specifically, installation of fugitive emission capture capability in ore handling, construction of 
two new lime kilns to replace existing facilities, all of which are due for completion in 2007. 
Downstream upgrading of rolling mill operations is also being undertaken. Planned but as yet 
uncommitted are other major upstream investments involving replacement of the existing sinter 
machines with three new higher capacity machines and upgrading of the remaining two blast 
furnaces.  The overall capacity of the plant expressed as steel production will increase from 3.6 
million tons/year to 6.9 million tons/year, including 5.3 million ton within the boundaries of the 
proposed project.. A parallel investment program is underway at Alchevsk Coke, including the 
construction of a new dry quench battery (Battery # 10) with an incremental 1 million tons/year 
of capacity commissioned in 2006, and providing capacity for both AISW and other IUD 
facilities. Associated with this are a series of renovations and additions on the older batteries 
related to upgrading aspiration systems and oven lids to reduce emissions, as well as coke gas 
desulphurization prior to its use as fuel gas. 
 
Financing of currently committed components of the modernization program is in part being 
supplied by IFC through a US$100 million direct loan and participation in a syndicated loan 
facility in the amount of US$250 million.  Active development on a separate investment in a new 
combined cycle gas turbine plant to utilize recovered off gases for on site heat and power 
generation is also being pursued with EBRD participation, and may be subject to separate JI 
carbon financing. 
 
Within this modernization program, the specific investments that are being addressed in the 
proposed carbon finance project involve those for the steel making portion of the plant, namely, 
the replacement of old OHFs, ingot casting and the blooming (slabbing) mills with basic oxygen 
converters and continuous slab casters. The GHG reductions that are obtained from the steel 
making component investments are estimated average 934,213 tons of CO
2
eq./year over a five 
year crediting period. These are derived principally from: i) reduced use of natural gas in open 
hearth furnaces in comparison with converters; ii) reduced use of blast furnace gas in blooming 
mill with saved gas being partly utilized in an existing on site combined heat and power plant to 
replace natural gas and grid electricity; and iii) reduced use of raw materials and steel in 
converters and continuous casting. 
1
The 600 MT tandem OHF/bloom caster installed in 2005 which is equipped with modern air pollution control 
equipment is to be retained 
Page  3
3
D.  Project location 
The plant is located on a long established (110 years) industrial site of 854 hectares within the 
city of Alchevsk (Population: 120,000) in Luhansk Oblast in Eastern Ukraine. It is surrounded on 
three sides by residential areas and on one side by the main slag landfill serving the plant. It is 
located on the watershed between the Lozovaya and Belaya Rivers. AISW employs 24,000 
people and along with Alchevsk Coke Plant is the primary employer in the city.  The overall 
region encompassing Lugansk and Donetsk Oblasts is the most heavily industrialized area of 
Ukraine and one of the most industrialized in Europe. This includes large scale coal mining, 
coke/chemical, ferroalloy and iron and steel production, as well as machine building and 
chemical industries.  It is characterized by poor urban air quality, surface water contamination 
and solid waste deposits both active and historic.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project overall implementing agency is Industrial Union Donbass (IUD) and through them - 
AISW.   As one of the most well established and successful industrial groups in the sector in 
Ukraine, IUD has a proven track record in the design, financing and execution of major capital 
modernization projects, including the first continuous casting line commissioned in 2006.  The 
project management approach adopted is consistent with international practice and utilizes 
established international equipment/technology suppliers operating under turnkey contracts with 
IUD and AISW providing the required local regulatory approvals interface.  
 
With respect to the capacity to implement environmental protection measures generally and 
specifically Bank safeguard requirements, IUD is supported by the Institute of Environment and 
Energy Conservation based in Kiev and AISW itself has a 16 person environmental department 
integrated into its operation.  These groups have completed the local OVOS or EIA process 
leading to the State environmental expertise approvals for the staged investment components 
covered by this carbon finance project.  In addition, they have supported a World Bank Group 
Category B environmental review undertaken by IFC as part of their loan project and the 
associated due diligence/safeguards requirements applied for it.  This includes the adoption of an 
Environmental Corrective Action Program
2
,
which is incorporated into the IFC loan applicable 
in part to the subject investment. IUD is currently establishing a corporate environmental 
management responsibility unit to coordinate environmental management activities across all its 
assets and to establish a formal Environmental, Health and Safety Management System (EHS 
MS), which will target ISO or equivalent certification.  On this basis, it is concluded that 
IUD/AISW has both the capacity and commitment to fully implement and adhere to the World 
Bank safeguard policies. This will be further reinforced through preparation and appraisal and as 
required in any conditionality applied to this operation.   
 
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr. Alexei Slenzak (ECCSD) 
Mr. Richard J. Cooke (consultant) 
 
2
“Environmental Review Summary, Project 24685”, IFC, May 2, 2006. 
http://www.ifc.org/ifcext/spiwebsite1.nsf/0/c7c3ef9e3563d70d85257162007370c3?OpenDocument
Page  4
4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
The net local environmental impact in terms of total mass of emissions of local air pollutants, 
discharges to water and waste generation per year will depend on whether the effect of doubling 
the overall production capacity will be offset by the improvements in emissions per unit of 
output due to replacing of old polluting technologies. This issue would apply both within the 
carbon finance boundary (steel making processes) and also to upstream and downstream 
processes/infrastructure that would require expansion and/or greater utilization to support 
increased steel production capacity.  The concern relates primarily to air emissions recognizing 
the poor baseline local air quality in Alchevsk.  
 
Based on a preliminary environmental safeguards review, it is anticipated that the overall 
modernization program being undertaken by IUD/AISW will provide significant improvement in 
the overall environmental performance of the beneficiary, including reduction of local pollution 
with potential public health benefits to the citizens of Alchevsk.  Notwithstanding its significant 
global environmental benefits, the proposed carbon finance project itself in the absence of or 
prior to the planned upstream investments is essentially neutral in terms of local environmental 
impact. It is expected to bring a slight reduction in total air emission, net improvement in water 
consumption and quality, but an increase in solid waste generation (albeit non-hazardous). As a 
consequence, achievement of the expected long term positive impact on local environmental 
conditions despite the increased production is conditional upon the implementation of planned 
modernization investment upstream of the steel making processes and upon ensuring that the 
technology applied meets the World Bank Group environmental guidelines and approximates the 
EU guidelines for the best available techniques (BAT) prepared under the IPPC Directive. This 
includes modernization of the sinter plant as the major overall source of particulate emissions, as 
well as revamping of the blast furnace and the coke batteries at Alchevsk Coke. Consistent with 
the approach adopted by IFC, the project conditionality needs to reflect these requirements.   
 
In assessing this impact for purposes of screening the project and determining the Category to be 
applied, the Project team will carefully review environmental audit of the company conducted 
for the IFC loan, IFC environmental review and environmental management plan 
(Environmental Corrective Action Plan) included in IFC loan agreement, as well as 
environmental assessments provided by the project sponsor and required under Ukrainian 
Page  5
5
legislations. These sources will be verified and updated as necessary using site visits as well as 
interviews with AISW staff and project developers. 
 
Neither the proposed carbon finance operation, nor the overall investment program will require 
any expansion on the new land area. All investments are being undertaken within the enterprises 
existing boundaries. As such it will not trigger any involuntary resettlement from adjacent 
residential areas. However, the Bank team takes note that the IFC assessment indicates that 
historical residential development exists in the pre-existing sanitary protection zone around 
AISW’s facilities. It originated in the soviet times where AISW was a state owned enterprise and 
was one of the “regulatory fictions” common in Soviet Union that were never intended to be 
enforced by authorities. Recognizing that although unlikely, theoretically re-settlement of this 
population could be required, the Environmental Corrective Action Plan adopted as a condition 
of the IFC loan seeks to have this zone reduced through agreement with authorities after 
completion of the overall investment program will improve environmental performance. This 
essentially aims to mitigate potential future resettlement. In any case, the project does not 
directly seek to strengthen enforcement capacities of the government for such action. During the 
safeguards review meeting the team was advised to track probability of enforcing relocation 
from the future smaller and cleaner sanitary zone. If it continue to be low, than the appraisal 
stage ISDS will indicate that the O.P 4.12 is not triggered. 
 
Environmental Category:
 
B
This is considered a Category B project based on the determination that any negative incremental 
environmental impacts that would result both directly and indirectly from it are limited and can 
be mitigated by the project design and by conditionality applied to it. It is anticipated that the 
overall investment program that the project is part of will provide significant improvement in the 
overall environmental performance of the beneficiary with direct improvement in environmental 
conditions in the local community. The project serves to strengthen the overall program and to 
facilitate other investments required for it. Given that some of the most substantive benefits are 
related to reductions in the currently high particulate emissions from traditional iron and steel 
making technology, it is also anticipated that a direct consequence of the project will be public 
health benefits. 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A. Actions needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues and prepare to 
mitigate them: 
 
The initial draft Environmental Safeguards Review that has been prepared will be elaborated and 
finalized as the EA and EMP required for a Category B project.  This will be incorporated into 
the Project Documents and disclosed per Bank procedures.  This document will include 
specification of the agreed mitigation measures that will be required.  In this regard, the project 
will coordinate the monitoring of key measures with the provisions already established in the 
IFC Environmental Corrective Action Program adopted by IUD. This will specify environmental 
performance standards for key components both within the steel making processes and upstream, 
particularly related to closing the existing sinter plant and either replacing it or utilizing 
purchased raw materials.  It should also be noted that direct mitigation of upstream impacts may 
Page  6
6
be supported by proceedings from a second JI project or from a sale of Ukraine assigned amount 
units under Article 17 of the Kyoto Protocol (so called Green Investment Scheme). The GIS 
option for the metallurgical industry is under active consideration with the support of the World 
Bank technical assistance activity “International Emissions Trading Institutions and Pilot GIS” 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
 
The project in both the preparation and implementation stage will be subject to stakeholder 
consultations and disclosure of project safeguard documents as required under the World Bank 
procedures on ‘Application of Bank Safeguard Policies to Carbon Finance Transactions’.  The 
public consultation will specifically include affected workers in beneficiary enterprise and the 
local community, consistent with AISW’s current practice of communication within the 
community.  
 
C.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER)
3
and PAD-stage ISDS:  
 
As for Carbon Finance operation, no QER is necessary.  The target date for the PDD-stage ISDS 
is 10 April 2007. 
 
D
Specific studies and their timing
4
anticipated to be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: 
 
No special studies will be needed 
 
IV. 
AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
To be completed following the PCN Review 
 
V.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr. Grzegorz Peszko 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr. Ronald N. Hoffer 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mrs. Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
 
Comments:   
3
If required 
4
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
7
