Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC777 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/29/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ukraine 
Project ID: P071072 
Project Name: Aligning Industrial Development with European Environmental Standards 
Project 
Task Team Leader: Grzegorz Peszko 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 5, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: September 25, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (P);Public expenditure, financial management and procurement 
(S);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
15.00 
 
SWEDEN, GOV. OF 
0.30 
 
US, GOV. OF 
0.25
15.55 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The primary objective of the project is to improve environmental performance and energy 
efficiency of heavy industry in Ukraine. Specifically, the project will establish the capacity of the 
government to use efficient and market-friendly incentives to encourage early convergence of 
industrial enterprises with environmental performance and carbon intensity similar to European 
good practices. Should Ukraine and buyers agree on AAUs trade, the project will demonstrate 
the feasibility of establishing the industrial window of the Green Investment Scheme.  
 
The project will benefit global commons by mitigating climate change, and generate local 
public goods by improving the health of people living in industrial pollution hot spots. The 
country will attract additional foreign capital to help finance the modernization of industrial 
assets. The project will improve access of Ukrainian industry to Western markets, and will 
improve investment climate and governance.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project objectives will be achieved by establishing within the Ministry of Environmental 
Protection the capacity to monitor and enforce air pollution emission reductions in industry, and 
by developing efficient financial incentives for enterprises to improve technologies and reduce 
emissions. Project design envisages two components:  
 
I. Monitoring and Enforcement of Air Pollution Emissions in the Industry.  This component 
will build the physical and technical capacity of the State Environmental Inspectorate (SEI) to 
monitor, verify and enforce the emission reductions within the industry, which can be proposed 
as green investments to facilitate the sale of AAUs.  The system will cover the GHGs which are 
used for “hard greening”, as well as the gasses used for “soft greening” such as dust, SO2 and 
NOx. ForGHGs this will also help meet one of the eligibility requirements for domestic 
verification of Joint Implementation projects under Track 1 procedure. The State Environmental 
Inspectorate has been appointed by the Minister of Environment to be the implementing agency 
for this component, and is being reorganized to strengthen its capacity to monitor and enforce 
pollution standards. SEI has prepared a draft investment program for the content of this 
component in September 2005, which includes investments in equipment (90% of costs) and 
capacity building (10% of costs).  
 
II. Industrial window of the Green Investment Scheme. This component will co-finance a 
pipeline of energy efficiency and environmentally friendly investments in the industrial sector. 
The design of the financial mechanism will be influenced by the findings of the WB sponsored 
International Emissions Trading Options Study, and will also draw from the previous analytical 
work and experience gained by the team during project identification. Assuming that this “IET-
GIS study” leads to agreement on the establishment of a domestic financial intermediary, the 
project will be proposed as an “industrial window” of the future GIS Fund. In this scenario the 
World Bank would assist Ukraine in finding of a pool of buyers of greened AAUs and in 
generating stream of Government revenue over the period 2008-2012. The proposed operation 
would help Ukraine negotiate the “greening” methodologies for industrial pollution reduction 
projects with the buyers. It would also identify and cofinance implementation of a pipeline of 
“green” investments in industrial enterprises so as to bring a package of AAU assets to the 
market in a relatively short time.  
 
Two financial mechanisms are considered for project support. First, the project would provide 
carbon finance advance payment or loan (depending on the results of the GIS work) to the Fund. 
This will be used as seed funding and converted for emission reduction grants and disbursed to 
enterprises before the carbon finance flows upon delivery of results. Secondly, the project could 
provide a partial guarantee mechanism on payment risk by the Fund to enterprises and creditors 
either by establishing an escrow account or a partial risk guarantee facility. The selection of the 
appropriate option will be based on a detailed assessment carried out and agreed during project 
preparation.  
 
To encourage the financial sector to extend credit for underlying investment in clean 
technologies, the matching grant would be linked to credit provided by commercial banks.  The 
proposed financial mechanism would facilitate enterprises’ access to credit from local 
commercial banks, thereby leveraging a significant volume of capital investments. The concept 
of the proposed financing scheme was discussed with, and generally endorsed by local banks, the 
Ministry of Finance, and the Carbon Finance Business team of the Bank.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  3
The project will be located in the main industrial areas of Ukraine, and most likely will be 
concentrated in the Donetsk, Zaporizhzhya, Kryvyy Rih and Kharkhiv regions.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The primary safeguard policy that will apply to the Project is OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental 
Assessment) although given the diverse industrial sector and geographical locations, other 
safeguard policies may apply to individual investment sub-projects.  
 
The project is essentially an environmental initiative, the main objective of which is to reduce 
the emissions in the country's most polluting industries and therefore should have substantial 
positive environmental impacts. The overall Environmental Management Plan (EMP) developed 
for the project will provide for an estimation of these positive impacts and, where applicable, 
offsetting negative impacts that may be foreseen in the types of industrial sectors targeted and 
the generic kinds of investments envisioned. While it is premature to speculate on such impacts 
at this point, the enterprises selected for the project will be in many cases be large industrial 
complexes such as iron and steel, chemicals and power generation which will likely have 
historical environmental legacies and high ongoing pollution. These will be assessed on a sub-
project specific basis by the Environmental Authorities (Environmental Permitting Department, 
Environmental Inspection) and beneficiaries on the principal that every specific investment will 
incrementally contribute to significant reduction of local and global environmental impact.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Alexei Slenzak (ECSSD) 
Ms Nora Dudwick (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
It is proposed that the overall project be designated as a Category FI under OP/BP 4.01 in 
recognition that it involves investment of Bank funds through a financial intermediary (FI), in 
subprojects that may result in adverse environmental impacts. As such, the provisions of OP/BP 
4.01 will track through to the FI who will have responsibility for the screening sub-projects and 
ensuring consistent application of the requirements of OP 4.01 to each sub-project. The FI will 
be a public institution (GIS Fund) supervised by the Ministry of Environmental Protection and 
will ensure that beneficiary enterprises have or acquire the capacity to undertake EMPs and 
where applicable, Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for specific investments. They will 
also be bound by the Public Consultation and Disclosure requirements of OP/BP4. 01. These 
arrangements will be further elaborated during preparation and assessed during Bank appraisal 
with the bank reserving the right on all subprojects to undertake prior review of the EMP and 
where, applicable EIA.  
 
With respect to the possibility that other safeguard policies may apply to individual sub-
project's, the Bank will require that the GIS Fund has both the capability and practices in place to 
evaluate each subproject in terms of the policies and that these be strictly applied where they 
apply. The Bank will require compliance with these policies as a condition of the transfer of 
funds agreement between the Government and the GIS Fund and grant agreements between t
he 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
GIS Fund and beneficiary enterprises. Monitoring the application of the policies will be 
integrated into the Bank's oversight and supervision of the project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/08/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
By September 2006, the draft environment chapter of the operational manual will be ready.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Grzegorz Peszko 
01/19/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
01/29/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Maninder S. Gill 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
