Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/19/2007 
Report No.:  AC2894
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ukraine 
Project ID:  P096207 
Project Name:  Power Transmission Project in Support of the Energy Sector Reform & 
Development Program 
Task Team Leader:  Dejan R. Ostojic 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 20, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: September 27, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Trade facilitation and market access (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
38.00
38.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
A.2. Project Objectives  
 
The main objective of the Power Transmission Project is to improve the security, 
reliability, efficiency and quality of power supply through the rehabilitation of 
transmission substations and the strengthening of the power transmission network. The 
project will also aim to improve institutional capacity and technical capabilities of 
transmission system operator, Ukrenergo (UE), so that it can assure secure and reliable 
operation of the high voltage power grid, and, therefore, facilitate unimpeded operation 
and opening up of the electricity market.  
 
Key performance indicators that will be used to assess fulfillment of the Power 
Transmission Project in terms of results and outcomes by the end of the project and in 
comparison to parameters in the year 2005, are:  
 
-
Reduced maintenance and repair costs by US$ 0.8 million per year;  
 
-
Reduced Energy Not Served by 35 GWh per year;  
 
-
Reduced transmission losses and peak load capacity requirements by 14 MW; and  
Page  2
-
Reduced average voltage drop to less than 5% of the nominal voltage level at 330 
kV and 220 kV substations included in the project.  
 
The Power Transmission Project is the second specific investment project within the 
Energy Sector Reform and Development Program (Energy Program) prepared and 
implemented by the Government of Ukraine. The overall program objective is to improve 
the security, reliability, efficiency and quality of energy supply, and, therefore, facilitate 
unimpeded operation of the energy market, both domestically and internationally. Also, 
the Energy Program and the Power Transmission Project would support Ukraine?s 
aspirations with regard to legal, institutional, regulatory and technical harmonization and 
increasing energy trade with the EU Internal Energy Market.  
 
If successful, the Energy Program and the Power Transmission Project would support 
sustainable economic growth through the consolidation of energy sector reforms, 
improved security, reliability, efficiency and quality of energy supply and growing 
energy trade in the domestic and international energy markets.  
 
Reform and sustainable development of the energy sector is one of the highest priorities 
in restoring Ukraine? macroeconomic fundamentals, improving the investment climate 
and integrating the county into the global economy. Addressing fiscal imbalances and 
inflationary pressures in Ukraine requires hardening budget constraints, including 
strengthening financial discipline in the energy sector and timely payment of energy bills 
and taxes to the budget.  The Energy Program would help bring energy companies to 
financial solvency and eliminate further accumulation of tax and other payment 
obligations to the budget.  It will also help reduce quasi-fiscal deficit in the energy sector 
through gradual elimination of price distortions, reduction of technical and commercial 
losses, and increase in cash collections.  
 
Advancing energy sector reform and ensuring sustainable provision of reliable, 
affordable and environmentally acceptable energy services is crucial for improving the 
investment climate in Ukraine, which has a high concentration of production and exports 
in energy intensive industries.  From this point of view, key aspects of the Energy 
Program are: (i) resolution of large debts accumulated in the energy sector; (ii) reduction 
and ultimate elimination of subsidies in the sector both explicit (for coal) and implicit (for 
gas and electricity); (iii) improvement of financial solvency and corporate governance of 
state-owned energy enterprises; (iv) strengthening the independence of NERC; (v) 
improvement of security, reliability, efficiency and quality of the energy supply; and (vi) 
capacity building in the Government and sector entities.  
 
Ukraine?s location on the main corridor for energy trade between Russia and the EU 
and the country?s large energy resources and infrastructure make energy sector reform 
and sustainable development essential for integrating Ukraine into the global economy, 
including its membership in WTO.  The Energy Program supports Ukraine?s aspirations 
with regard to legal and technical harmonization and increasing integration of its energy 
market with the EU Internal Energy Market.  The Power Transmission Project will help 
Page  3
strengthen electric power grid and, therefore, facilitate the power market opening and 
access to the EU electricity market. This would improve energy security and the 
reliability of power supply in the whole region and result in significant economic benefits 
for all market participants.   
 
3. Project Description 
Total project cost (by component):  
 
-
Rehabilitation of transmission substations (US$ 157.8 million)  
 
-
Strengthening of transmission network (US$ 47.0 million)  
 
-
Stabilization of the Crimea regional power grid (US$ 23.2 million)  
 
-
UE Institutional development (US$ 8.7 million)  
 
-
Implementation of the Grid Code (US$ 1.3 million)  
 
The Power Transmission Project comprises five components:  
 
Component A: Rehabilitation of transmission substations. This component includes 
replacement of outdated high voltage equipment and installation of modern protective 
relaying and substation automation systems in (i) three 330 kV substations in the Dnepr 
regional power grid; (ii) one 330 kV and one 220 kV substation in the Donbas regional 
power grid; and (iii) five 750 kV substations.  
 
Component B: Strengthening of transmission network. This component includes 
expansion of the existing 330 kV Bar substation and construction of the 77 km long 330 
kV transmission line to connect Bar substation with the existing Dniester Hydropower 
Plant (HPP) and the Dniester Pumped-Storage Plant (PSP) which is under construction.  
 
Component C: Stabilization of the Crimea Electric Power Grid. This component 
includes upgrading of the existing 220 kV Simferopol ? Sevastopol transmission line and 
associated substations to the 330 kV voltage level and installation of high voltage 
capacitors for compensation of reactive power at 330 kV and 220 kV substations in the 
Crimea electric power grid.  
 
Component D: UE Institutional development. This component includes establishment of 
a
corporate-wide Management Information System (MIS) in UE. This component also 
includes provision of technical assistance to UE in (i) capacity building in procurement 
and project management; (ii) designing and implementing corporate-wide MIS; and (iii) 
annual auditing of project and company accounts.  
 
Component E: Implementation of the Grid Code. This component includes provision of 
technical assistance to UE in implementing the Grid Code which is under preparation by 
National Electricity Regulatory Commission (NERC) and UE.  The technical assistance 
would include support to UE in (i) drafting transmission access agreements and 
developing tariffs and procurement rules for ancillary (power system) services in the 
Wholesale Electricity Market; (ii) training UE staff in modeling and simulating new 
power market arrangements; and (iii) specifying the supporting tools such as hardware, 
software, telecommunication systems and metering.   
Page  4
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Component A: Rehabilitation of transmission substations  
 
All transmission substations exist and are currently in operation. Their locations are as 
follows:  
 
Dnieper Regional Power Grid includes refurbishment of three substations 330 kV: 
Pervomaiskaya located in Terpovskiy region of Krivoy Rog city; Yuzhnaya located at the 
territory of urban-type village Radushnoe of Krivorozhskiy region; and 
Dneprodzerzhinskaya located about 5 km from the city of Dneprodzherzinsk.  
 
Donbas Regional Power Grid includes refurbishment of the 330 kV substation Chaikino, 
located in Makeevka city, which is a suburb of Donetsk; and the 220 kV substation 
Azovskaya, located in the vicinity of Mariupol.  
 
Rehabilitation of 750 kV Substations includes five substations located across Ukraine:  
Vinnitskaya near the city of Vinnitsa; Donbasskaya about 2 km from Artemovo city and 
near the village Zaitsevskaya; Zahidnoukrainska near Zhadichev city; Dneprovskaya 
located near Krinichky train station, about 2 km from the village Bikovo; and 
Severnoukrainska near the city of Romni.  
 
Component B: Strengthening of transmission system  
 
This component includes the expansion of the existing 330 kV Bar substation and 
construction of 77 km of the 330 kV overhead line from Bar substation to join the 
existing transmission line near village Khonkivtsy about 12 km east of the existing 
Dniester hydropower plant. The Bar substation is located in a rural area with few houses. 
It is sited near Bar city waste dump and a wastewater treatment plant. Along or near the 
proposed transmission corridor, there are some small towns with old and largely 
abandoned factories, but for the most part it consists of rolling hills, large collective 
farms and some clusters of trees. There is one water crossings of river Yaltushkov.  
 
Component C: Stabilization of the Crimea Electric Power Grid.  
 
This component will be implemented in the existing transmission line from Simferopol 
to Sevastopol and at the existing Dzankoy substation located in Dzhankoi city, Feodosia 
substation located in Feodosia city, Simferopol substation located in Simferopol city, and 
Bakhchesaray substations located in Bakhchesaray city all in the Crimean peninsula.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
Mr Bernard Baratz (EASTE) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Power Transmission Project triggers OP/BP/GP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment  
 
The Power Transmission Project is in strict compliance with the Government of Ukraine 
and World Bank regulations, policies and procedures for environmental assessment (EA). 
Under Ukrainian legislation the project is not included in the ?List of Activity Categories 
and Installations which are environmentally unsafe or hazardous?. In accordance with 
World Bank environmental safeguard policies (OP/BP/GP 4.01 Environmental 
Assessment) the project has been assigned a ?Category B? rating.  
 
For the rehabilitation of substations and transmission lines, UE (the project 
implementing agency) provided the World Bank generalized Environmental Management 
Plans (EMPs) in English language that were placed in the Infoshop on June 12, 2006. 
Ukraine language versions of these EMPs were disclosed on the UE website and at the 
project sites on June 9, 2006. Prior to disclosure, public consultations were held at fifteen 
transmission substations (Component A), at three locations near the Dniester PSP 
(component B) and three locations in the Crimea (component C). The EMPs and 
documentation for the public consultations are included in the project file. The general 
EMP for substations identified chief issues for construction and operation as follows: (a) 
in the construction phase ? dust, noise, and disposal of wastes and used equipment, PCB 
identification and management (if found); and (b) in the operation phase ? 
electric/magnetic field and noise. Likewise, the general EMP for transmission line 
rehabilitation identified issues during construction as dust, noise, wastes (non toxic and 
toxic ? e.g. lubricants, oils etc.), access road construction and working camp wastes. 
During operation the chief issues addressed were noise, electric field, and bird collisions. 
The EMPs contain standard measures for management of the issues and highlights 
specific measures, consistent with international practice, in case any of the obsolete 
equipment or soil contamination at a particular site which indicates the presence of PCBs. 
Also, the EMPs specify that all designs will require Ukrainian and/or international 
standards for electric and magnetic field strengths.  
 
Page  6
For the component B, which includes a construction of new transmission line from the 
Bar substation to the Dniester PSP, a corridor specific EA was prepared. The English 
language version of the EA was submitted to the World Bank and placed in the Infoshop 
on January 11, 2007. The Ukraine language version was disclosed on the UE website and 
at the project sites on December 29, 2006. Public consultations were held at the city of 
Bar and Myrovani Kirilivtsi on 28 November, 2006. As documented in the EA report, the 
corridor does not contain any ecologic protected areas, does not cross any migratory bird 
routes, and it does not contain any rare or endangered flora or fauna, or areas of known 
significant cultural or archaeological interest. Most of the route is through open fields and 
collective farms. The chief construction issues identified are the standard issues 
associated with the any project and the operational ones are electrical and magnetic field 
effects, noise etc. The complete EA report is included in the project file. During the 
project appraisal it was confirmed that (i) the Bank's investment in the Bar-Dniester line 
is justified with or without the completion of the Dniester PSP; (ii) the first unit of the 
PSP, which is financed by Ukraine, is economically viable with or without the Bank's 
investment in the Bar-Dniester line; and (iii) nevertheless, the Bank's investment in the 
line will increase the security of operation of the first PSP unit and the regional power 
grid.  
 
The World Bank has supported Ukraine in its efforts to rehabilitate and restructure its 
energy sector through policy dialogue, technical assistance and financing since the early 
1990s. Substantial institutional capacity to implement World Bank safeguard policies has 
been developed, particularly by beneficiaries of the first power project, including 
Ukrenergo, which is the beneficiary of the proposed project. Ukrenergo is in the process 
of adopting ISO 14001, so environmental management is an important element of its 
institutional development agenda. The company is currently performing environmental 
audits at all its major substations that are organized in eight regions. At present each of 
the eight regions has one technical person with an environmental background reporting to 
the Deputy Chief Engineer of the region. In summary, institutional capacity to implement 
the requirements of the EMPs to a large measure already exists within the Borrowers? 
organizational structure.  
 
Power Transmission Project triggers OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement  
 
Except for the new Bar-Dniester transmission line and the Bar substation expansion, all 
project investments will take place on land owned and under the direct control of UE.  
The transmission line will require the acquisition of approximately 280 small parcels for 
the construction of transmission towers, approximately 1.5 ha in total, as well as acquire 
rights of way along the alignment. The exact location of the tower footprints is not 
known, so UE prepared and disclosed a Resettlement/Land Acquisition Policy 
Framework to comply with OP 4.12.  The Framework was reviewed and accepted by the 
ECA Social Team and disclosed in InfoShop.  UE will submit a land acquisition plan to 
the Bank once specific sites have been identified.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not Applicable.   
Page  7
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An EMP and Land Acquisition Framework (LAF) satisfactory to the Bank have been 
prepared and the Borrower has agreed to implement it. In addition, the project team 
environmental and social specialist reviewed the capacity of UE to implement the EMP 
and LAF and found this to be more than adequate.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are government officials (Ministry of Fuel and Energy, National 
Electricity Regulatory Commission (NERC), Ministry of Economy, and Ministry of 
Finance), local NGOs and UkrEnergo.  The Environment Management Plan and related 
information in Ukrainian language was disseminated and disclosed at the following 
public places:  
 
Dnieper Regional Power Grid:  
 
-
Dniepr-Donbas - Zaporozhie city Environmental Inspection and in the Zaporizhia 
Power Transmission Line Networks office on February 23, 2006.  
 
-
Pervomaiskaya - Krivoy Rog city Environmental Protection Department of the City 
Council and at the premises of Krivorizhia Power System Networks on February 23, 
2006.  
 
-
Kirovskaya - Krivoy Rog city Environmental Protection Department of the City 
Council and at the premises of Krivorizhia Power System Networks on February 23, 
2006.  
 
-
Yuzhnaya - Krivoy Rog city Environmental Protection Department of the City Council 
and at the premises of Krivorizhia Power System Networks on February 23, 2006.  
 
-
Dneprodzerzhinskaya - Dneprodzerzhinsk city Environmental Protection Department 
of the City Council and in Regional State Administration on February 24, 2006.  
 
Donbas Regional Power Grid:  
 
-
Mikhailovka - Pervomaysk and Stahanovo city Environmental Protection Department 
of the City Council and at Mikhailovka 330 kV substation on February 24, 2006.  
 
-
Chaikino - Makeevka city Environmental Protection Department of the City Council 
and at the premises of the Chaikino 330 kV substation on February 23, 2006.  
 
-
Tsentralnaya - Artemovo city at office of Tsentralnaya 330 kV substation and 
Environmental Protection Department in Artemovo city on March 1, 2006.  
 
-
Azovskaya - Mariupol city office of Maryupil Mainline Power Grid enterprise and 
Mariupol Environmental Inspection on February 20, 2006.  
Page  8
-
Lisichanskaya - Severodonetsk city in the office of Lisichansk 220 kV substation and 
Environmental Protection Department of the Severodonetsk City Council on February 22, 
2006.  
 
South-Western Regional Power Grid:  
 
The first public consultations and disclosure:  
 
-
Bar city environmental council and Bar city administration office and premises of 
Culture Home on February 27, 2006, and  
 
-
Myrovannoe-Kyrilovka city administration, Cultural Center and Environmental 
Inspectorate on February 28, 2006.  
 
The second public consultations and disclosure:  
 
-
Bar District Administration on December 28, 2006; and  
 
-
Myrovannoe-Kyrilovka city administration, Cultural Center and Environmental 
Inspectorate on December 28, 2006.  
 
Crimea Electric Power Grid:  
 
-
Feodosia city at Assembly Hall of Feodosia and offices of ?Krymenergo? on February 
24, 2006;  
 
-
Denisovka village of Simferopol region at Hall of Simferopol District State 
Administration and Environmental Protection Department of the Simferopol City Council 
on February 24, 2006;  
 
-
Bakhchisaray city at Bakhchisaray District State Administration and Environmental 
Council on February 22, 2006; and  
 
-
Dzankoy city at the Small Hall of the School, Dzankoy District, Kalinovka village on 
February 24, 2006.  
 
750 kV Substations:  
 
-
Vinnitskaya subsation: at Vinnitsa City Administration office and Vinnitsa 
Environmental Authorities Office on February 27, 2006  
 
-
Donbasskaya substation: at Artemovo city, Zaitseve ? Village Council office and at 
Environmental Authorities Office of Artemovo city on March 03, 2006.  
 
-
Zahidnoukrainska substation: at Zhadichev assembly hall of the Zhadichev Rayon 
State Administration and Zhadichev Environmental Protection Department on February 
23, 2006  
 
-
Dnieprovskaya substation: at Krinichky village District Council and at Environmental 
Authorities Office on March 13, 2006.  
 
-
Severnoukarinska substation: at Romni city, Secondary School of Zaruddya village 
and Romni Environmental Authorities Office on March 14, 2006.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/08/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/09/2006 
 
Page  9
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/11/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/26/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/27/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/11/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  10
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Dejan R. Ostojic 
04/12/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bernard Baratz 
04/12/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody 
04/12/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
04/13/2007 
Comments:  Cleared 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
04/19/2007 
Comments:  Approved 
