Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2643 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/30/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ukraine 
Project ID: P100580 
Project Name: Roads and Safety Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader: Michel Audige 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 21, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 27, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P);Export development and competitiveness (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
400.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
100.00
100.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main project development objective is to reduce road transport costs, and improve access 
and road safety along Ukraine's main road network through (i) rehabilitating and upgrading of 
one section of the Kyiv-Kharkiv-Dovzhanskyi motorway (M3 ), between Boryspil and Pyryatyn; 
and (ii) eliminating major black spots previously identified by the Roads Administration all over 
Ukraine.  
 
The rehabilitation and upgrade of the above section of the M3 motorway will help the country 
increase its competitiveness against alternative transit routes and support the economic growth. 
The rehabilitation will besides complement EU initiatives in the region since it has recently 
committed to fund the rehabilitation of some sections of the Western part of the M3 highway 
from Kiev to Chop located at the border with Hungary and the Slovak republic.  
 
For road users, the project would lead to better road quality, decreasing transport costs and 
improved road safety. It is also expected that the modernization of the road maintenance budget 
will allow a more efficient use of the resources allocated to the sector with the gradual 
involvement of the private sector along with regional and local agencies of the Government.  
Page  2
Key indicators. The tentative main indicators are expected to be: (i) the reduction of the number 
of black spots along the main network, (ii) the reduction in transit time and vehicle operating 
cost between Boryspil and Pyryatyn, and (iii) the reduction in the number of road crashes on the 
M3 motorway.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project cost and components. The total project cost is tentatively estimated at US$500 million, of 
which US$400 million will be funded through an IBRD loan and the remaining portion will be 
provided by the Government of Ukraine. The proposed main components are as follows:  
 
(i) 
Rehabilitation and upgrading of a 168 km section of the M3 Kyiv-Kharkiv-Dovzhanskyi 
motorway. [WB US$300 million]. The M3 motorway plays a strategic role for the country's 
transit activities between EU and Asia. The Government of Ukraine has secured a PHRD grant to 
fund consultant services for a feasibility study of the road works, initial environment and social 
assessment, engineering design, and preparation of bidding documents.  
 
(ii) 
Road safety improvement. [WB US$100 million]. The proposed project will include a 
significant program of black spot elimination and a possible support to the recently established 
National Road Safety Council. In addition to the elimination of the most critical black spots 
identified by Ukravtodor, the project will also fund the supply and installation of safety 
improvements such as vertical and horizontal signaling, cats' eyes, rumble strips and modern 
crash barriers on most critical points of the national road network.  
 
(iii) 
Technical Assistance component. [WB US$0 million]. The project could possibly include 
the funding of advisory services to: (a) promote Public-Private Partnerships in road infrastructure 
funding, (b) update current road classification, (c) modernize technical norms (based on the 
Dutch Standards design for instance); and (d) launch performance-based contracts in road 
maintenance. On request from the borrower, the Technical Assistance Component will be funded 
by the Ukravtodor but will be part of the loan agreement with relevant legal covenants.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The M3 highway is the backbone of the country's road infrastructure and a vital component of 
the economy, deriving huge revenues from transit fees. The first 100km of the proposed section 
to be rehabilitated along Kyiv-Kharkiv-Dovzhanskyi highway (M3) typically carry more than 
20,000 vehicles per day making it one of the highly frequented roads in the region. Especially 
this corridor carries a good portion of the heavy-loaded traffic transiting between Russia and the 
EU border. The 137 km section of the M3 Kyiv-Kharkiv-Dovzhanskyi highway to be included in 
the project have already been pre-identified; it is located throughout the national road network 
in-between Kyiv, Ukraine's capital and Kharkiv. This project will not involve any land 
acquisition, since works will be carried-out within the right of way.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be further clarified during project preparation. This will be the first roads operation financed 
by the Bank in Ukraine, and the Borrower through The Road Administration (Ukravtodor) has 
some experience in managing projects including safeguard requirements. The Bank will further 
Page  3
support the Borrower's capacity in dealing with Safeguard related issues. Capacity needs are 
mainly at the local level with a call for appropriate staff and training necessary to carry out sound 
environmental monitoring and safeguard compliance - an Environmental Management Plan will 
be developed to provide the implementing agency and the local authorities with the appropriate 
guidelines needed to undertake good practice environmental management of activities proposed 
under the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (ECSSD) 
Mr Dmytro Glazkov (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
A
corridor-specific Environmental Assessment, documenting baseline conditions and 
environmental risks is proposed and considered good professional practice. Based on field 
review and district-specific EIAs carried out by the borrower, and the straightforward 
maintenance and rehabilitation nature of the works, the EA category is confirmed as a B 
category.  A summary of the two EIAs is available in English and will be disclosed shortly (the 
two detailed EIAs were already disclosed in Ukraine). While the roadway passes through or 
nearby some designated protected areas (including forest land), land areas that would be directly 
affected by the works are not natural habitats and the safeguard is not triggered.  No physical 
cultural resources would be impacted and 'chance finds' provisions will be included in the 
standard bidding contracts.  
 
The borrower has requested that the project be expanded to include 20 additional kilometers 
of roadway to the east of Pyrintyn. The team will survey this section in a subsequent mission and 
confirm the relevance of existing EIA.  Measures to reduce risks to pedestrians and vehicles at 
particularly dangerous road segments ('black spots') will be reviewed for safeguards relevance.  
 
There is only one environmental specialist on staff in the roads agency and EIA/EMP work 
was carried out by a specialized institute 'Ukrainian Institute of Geochemistry and Environment'. 
Since this project will require supervision by the borrower (either directly or through a 
supervision contractor) the project will include training and capacity-enhancement on 
environmental management and compliance. The Mitigation and Monitoring Plan, for example, 
is quite generic and would benefit from improvement to reflect more quantifiable standards.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Physical resettlement of persons or households is not expected, but it is possible that "illegal" 
commercial activities near major intersections around settlements will be adversely affected 
resulting in possible loss of income. This has to be ascertained for policy applicability.  In the 
event that the investment results in the demolition 
of the kiosks and other structures and requires 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
the relocation of these commercial activities, a brief, focused Resettlement Plan will be needed 
as a condition of appraisal to guide the process of relocating the affected people.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/26/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Updated EIA Summary including Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plan.  A 
summary of the public consultations that have already been carried out will be included as 
well.  
 
Detailed EIAs in Ukrainian and minutes from all the consultations need only be disclosed in 
Ukraine. If OP 4.12 is triggered the appropriate instrument will be prepared and disclosed.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michel Audige 
08/27/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
08/28/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
08/30/2007 
Comments:  approved 
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
