Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2087 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/25/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ukraine 
Project ID: P096207 
Project Name: Power Transmission Project in Support of the Energy Sector Reform & 
Development Program 
Task Team Leader: Dejan R. Ostojic 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 13, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
150.00
150.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the Energy Sector Reform and Development Program is to improve the 
security, reliability and quality of the energy supply and, therefore, facilitate unimpeded 
operation of the energy market, both domestically and internationally. Also, the program 
supports Ukraine’s aspirations with regard to legal, regulatory and technical harmonization and 
increasing energy trade with the EU Internal Energy Market.  
 
The main objective of the proposed Power Transmission Project is to improve reliability of 
power supply through the rehabilitation of transmission substations and the strengthening of the 
power transmission network. The project will also aim to upgrade the capabilities of transmission 
system operator, Ukrenergo (UE), so that it can assure security and reliability of power supply, 
including: (a) removing critical bottlenecks in transmission networks; (b) improving operational 
stability of power grid; (c) upgrading load dispatch and system control capabilities; and (d) 
upgrading infrastructure and systems for electricity market administration.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The proposed Power Transmission Project is the second SIL in support of the Energy Sector 
Reform and Development Program. The first programmatic SIL supports the Hydropower 
Rehabilitation Project.  
 
The proposed Power Transmission Project would include the following components:  
 
Component A: Rehabilitation of transmission substations. This component includes 
replacement of outdated high voltage equipment (power transformers, circuit breakers, 
disconnect switches, surge arrestors, measurement transformers and auxiliary equipment) in (i) 
five 330 kV substations in the Dnieper Regional Power Grid; (ii) three 330 kV and two 220 kV 
substations in the Donbas Regional Power Grid; and (iii) partial rehabilitation of five 750 kV 
substations.  
 
Component B: Dnister PSP transmission connection. This component includes strengthening of 
the transmission connection of the Dnister Pumped Storage Project (PSP) with the national 
power grid at the 330 kV voltage level through the construction of the 80 km long transmission 
line Dnister PSP 
–
Bar and the extension ofthe existing transmission line Dnister HPP 
(hydropower plant) – Ladizhinska TPP(thermal power plant) to the Dnister PSP.  
 
Component C: Stabilization of the Crimea Regional Power Grid. This component includes 
several technical measures designed to increase available transmission capacity for power supply 
to the Crimea. These measures include (i) uprating the existing 220 kV transmission line 
Simferopol – Sebastopol to the 330 kV voltage level; (ii) installation of static voltage control 
(SVC) at the 330 kV Dzankoy transmission substation;  and (iii) installation of condenser 
batteries for compensation of reactive power at Feodosia, Simferopol and Bahchisaray 
transmission substations.  
 
Component D: UE institutional development. This component includes establishment of a 
corporate-wide Management Information System (MIS) in UE. This component also includes 
provision of technical assistance to UE in improving financial management, capacity building in 
procurement and project management and training for the UE staff in the UCTE/ETSO 
transmission system operating norms and practices.  
 
Component E: Implementation of the WEM Concept. This component includes provision of 
technical assistance to UE (transmission system operator) and Energorinok (ER – power market 
operator) in implementing the Wholesale Electricity Market (WEM) concept.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed transmission project will take place entirely within existing substations and the 
existing transmission rights-of-way. Specific locations (substations) will be identified during the 
project preparation on the basis of several criteria, including the current loading levels and 
congestion problems which affect reliability of the power grid; condition and age of high voltage 
equipment and transmission lines; capital costs and operating and maintenance costs associated 
with the replacement/ rehabilitation of transmission facilities. Environmental factors, such as 
presence of PCBs and other materials which may negatively affect compliance with the 
environmental norms and standards, will also be considered in prioritizing transmission facilities 
which should be rehabilitated under the proposed transmission project.   
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Bank has supported Ukraine in its efforts to rehabilitate and restructure its energy sector 
through policy dialogue, technical assistance and financing since early 1990s. Substantial 
institutional capacity to implement the Bank’s safeguard policies has been developed, 
particularly by beneficiaries of the first hydropower and system control project, including 
Ukrenergo, which is also the beneficiary of the proposed Power Transmission Project. Ukrenergo 
is in the process of adopting ISO 14001, so environmental management is an important element 
of its institutional development agenda. The company is currently performing environmental 
audits at all its major substations which are organized in eight regions. At present, each of the 
eight regions has one technical person with an environmental background reporting to the 
Deputy Chief Engineer of the region. Ukrenergo officials agreed to provide the World Bank a 
description of their institutional development needs, so that additional support could be provided 
under the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (ECSIE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Bank’s standard environmental requirements will apply to the power transmission 
project. Two general environmental management plans (EMPs): one for transmission lines and 
one for substations will be prepared for all involved locations. Any site specific issues, such as 
project location characteristics, details of the public consultation etc. or any unique site specific 
measures to be taken in order to minimize any negative environmental impact as a result of 
project implementation would be prepared as an addendum. The EMPs and any addendums will 
be disclosed to the public prior to the project appraisal.  The EMPs will also highlight specific 
measures in case any of the obsolete equipment at a particular site would contain any hazardous 
material like PCBs, mercury, etc., as to how these materials will be managed.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
TBD   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
TBD   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/15/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The TTL will provide the ECA Regional Safeguard Team with a more detailed plan for how 
consultations with affected stakeholders on the Project and EMP would be carried out. The 
EMP would be finalized after it is deemed acceptable by the Bank then it would be disclosed 
in the country and submitted to the InfoShop prior to the project appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Dejan R. Ostojic 
01/25/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
01/25/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
01/25/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
