Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/08/2006 
Report No.:  AC2035
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ukraine 
Project ID:  P085138 
Project Name:  UKRAINE METHYL BROMIDE PHASE-OUT 
Task Team Leader:  Vladimir V. Tsirkunov 
GEF Focal Area: Ozone 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General industry and trade sector (30%);Agro-industry (30%);Petrochemicals 
and fertilizers (30%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Environmental policies and institutions (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (P);Regulation and competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.10 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
4.91
4.91 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project’s development objective is to contribute to Ukraine’s 
environmentalsustainability by assisting the country in meeting key international 
environmental obligations related to MBr phase out with minimum economic 
dislocations. This specifically applies to supporting the mainstreaming of environmental 
considerations into the agricultural sector through integrated pest management (IPM) 
such that quality, productivity and economic returns in the grain sector are maintained 
and enhanced. This also supports sustainable economic growth in rural areas which 
should also positively impact poverty reduction. Similarly, the project supports 
improvement in the country’s ability to prevent introduction of pests viaimported 
agricultural products and ability to meet export standards in the most environmentally 
sound manner.  
 
The project’s global environmental objective is to reduce ozone depletion by 
eliminating MBr consumption and production, as well as the CTC production capacity in 
Ukraine and generally assisting the country in maintaining compliance with its 
obligations under the Montreal Protocol.   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project has been designed with four components intended to address specific 
priorities identified by the country in its continuing efforts to remain current with its 
international ODS phase out obligations and proactive policies in addressing this global 
issue, as well as ensuring the social and economic impacts of accomplishing this are 
effectively mitigated. These components described below:  
 
Component 1: Methyl Bromide Grain and Quarantine Sector Consumption Phase Out: 
This component covers a demonstration investment and technical assistance program for 
the phase out of MBr consumption. It is specifically directed to the grain and quarantine 
sectors which account for all of the identified current and historical MBr consumption 
and where a consequential decline in pest protection is having significant negative 
economic impacts. It is designed to prioritize integrated pest management (IPM) 
techniques where emphasis is placed on prevention of infestation through improved 
monitoring, housekeeping and storage environment procedures. Infestation response 
using environmentally sound alternative chemicals, inert gas and controlled atmosphere 
techniques will also be promoted.  
 
Four grain sector sub-components are included for demonstration investments in the 
component, tailored to the needs of the four principle operational parts of the food grain 
supply and distribution system. Here the objective is the elimination of MBr consumption 
while improving the quality and efficiency of grain production through enhanced pest 
management. These sub-components are i) Farm Based Grain Storage; ii) Central 
Elevator/Terminal Storage; iii) Grain Processing Storage; and iv) Fumigation Service 
Providers. The project will co-finance - through a Competitive Grant Scheme (CGS) - a 
portfolio of relatively small enterprise specific sub-projects in each part of this system. 
The scope of these investments and those items of equipment financed by the GEF are 
detailed in Annex 4 for each sub-component, but generally they cover a range of 
upgraded storage, cleaning and fumigation equipment and infrastructure required for 
effective IPM and the use of alternative fumigation technologies that will be more 
efficient and environmentally sound. At least one demonstration sub-project has been 
identified within each sub-component.  
 
Ukraine’s agricultural sector has a significant potential for scaling up elimination of 
MBr consumption with the help of pilot MBr consumption sub-projects through a 
Competitive Grant Scheme (CGS). The key objective of the CGS is to identify and 
support cost effective, sustainable and replicable demonstration sub-projects on a broader 
scale in Ukraine. For this purpose during project preparation a preliminary portfolio of 
potential sub-project beneficiaries has been identified. Additional potential beneficiaries 
will be identified during implementation through active solicitation of proposals. Initial 
criteria for sub-grant screening and selection, as well as arrangements for sub-grant 
evaluation and implementation through the Competitive Grant Scheme are described in 
Section C and Annex 6. More detailed arrangements of CGS functioning will be specified 
in the CGS Manual to be developed at the initial stage of the project implementation. A 
tentative portfolio of candidate enterprises in each sub-sector has been identified. In total, 
Page  3
it is estimated that some 16-18 farm based, 14-16 elevator, 10-12 grain processing and 9-
10 fumigator service provider sub-projects will be included in the final portfolio of sub-
projects funded in this component. It is likely that some or most of CGS grants will be 
linked to the activities of Agricultural Competitiveness and Food Safety Project which is 
at the advance stage of preparation and which has similar objectives.  
 
A
fifth investment sub-component involves support to the General State Inspectorate on 
Quarantine of Plants in Ukraine in the Ministry of Agricultural Policy. Its objective is to 
reduce and where possible eliminate the use of MBr in quarantine operations involving 
mandatory fumigation undertaken at border crossings and other locations as is required 
for imported agricultural products, and for export products and commodities where 
purchasing countries require assurance of a pest free condition. The sub-component 
covers investment in upgraded fumigation chambers and associated application and 
safety equipment that will allow the safer, more efficient and reduced use of MBr as well 
as facilitate the introduction of alternatives where practical. This sub-project has been 
appraised and can be implemented immediately upon effectiveness.  
 
The sixth sub-component covers the supporting technical assistance (TA) that will be 
linked into each of the five investment sub-components covering the grain and quarantine 
sector sub-projects. Its objective is to provide the training, technology transfer, 
environmental/safety tools and procedural documentation necessary to effectively utilize 
the equipment supplied as well as more broadly disseminate current pest control 
practices. The sub-component will also be used as a vehicle to advertise CGS activities, 
train potential beneficiaries and specify details of CGS implementation. The scope of this 
TA will cover training and demonstration at the working level of:  i) international IPM 
practices, ii) good operating practice and quality assurance procedures related to pest 
control in each part of the grain handling and distribution system and for quarantine 
operations, iii) safe use of alternative techniques including operational Pest Management 
Plans (PMP) for specific chemical pesticide applications where these are required; iv) 
support for the introduction of emerging fumigation technologies including consultation 
on current Ukrainian research and development efforts in the field; v) development of 
detailed guidelines and procedures for CGS implementation, and vi) training in 
developing project proposals. The delivery of this sub-component will be under the 
direction of international experts in the field in association with local experts using 
trainin
g
programs based on a “train the trainer” model as well as direct interaction with 
enterprises, workshops and field schools.  
 
Component 2: CTC Plant Closure Compensation – This component is directed at 
thepermanent elimination of CTC production capacity at “Oriana-Halev” LLC using a 
performance based compensation mechanism which includes two stages. The first stage 
involving 30% of the compensation payment is based on an appraised Closure Plan that 
has been agreed with the enterprise and Government. This Closure Plan covers the 
physical dismantling of key elements of the production facility, an Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP), along with detailed reporting, monitoring and verification 
requirements. The remaining compensation would be paid upon completing any 
Page  4
outstanding measures prescribed in the closure plan and formal documentation of its 
independent verification by the Bank. The enterprise has moved ahead to complete much 
of the agreed dismantling and closure work at appraisal. The model for this component is 
the successful compensation based closure of ODS production capacity in the Russian 
Federation undertaken by the Bank. It is also consistent with an MPMF initiative in 
China that is funding closure of CTC capacity. The enterprise has undertaken an 
EIA(OVOS) applicable to the Closure Plan and received approval for its implementation 
from the State Environmental Expertise. In this regard, the EMP that forms part of the 
agreed Closure Plan also uses the ODS closure compensation to leverage commitments 
for sustaining security, monitoring and ultimately dealing with an off-site environmental 
legacy involving Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs).  This was associated with 
historical CTC production, and occurred prior to the transfer of the overall plant from 
state ownership to the private sector.  More specifically, the MEP has also provided the 
Bank with a commitment letter respecting the environmentally sound management of the 
residual by-product stockpile of a listed waste covered by the Stockholm Convention 
(hexachlorobenzene or HCB) as a priority action item within the country’s National 
Implementation Plan (NIP) under the Stockholm Convention, and has committed to 
maintaining environmental monitoring of this stockpile.  During appraisal, a draft NIP 
priority list was presented and reviewed as confirmation of this commitment and it is 
anticipated that the NIP will finalized in Quarter 2, 2006.  
 
Component 3: Policy Development and Institutional Strengthening – The objectiveof 
this component is to ensure appropriate institutional and regulatory measures are in place 
to ensure effective and sustained implementation of MBr phase out. It will provide 
support for a number of project wide policy development and institutional strengthening 
initiatives that will promote current and future country compliance with its obligations 
under the Montreal Protocol. As such the primary counterpart beneficiary would be the 
SEI/MEP where technical support for monitoring of MBr production capacity, MBr 
consumption, and CTC production closure, technical expertise required for consumption 
sub-project appraisal, and general strengthening in compliance with international 
obligations will be supported. The latter will specifically address needed strengthening of 
capacity to effectively control and report ODS, particularly MBr import, export and 
consumption, and implementation of measures required for compliance with recent 
amendments to the Montreal Protocol. Additionally, it will support institutional 
strengthening in MinAgPol and other stakeholder agencies through updating of detailed 
regulations related to grain storage, certification requirements and standards associated 
with pest control and permitted technologies to allow full implementation of IPM and 
alternative pest control practices. Some technical assistance resources within this 
component will also be directed to a public information program targeting primarily user 
groups in the rural community. Annex 4 provides a scope description of each element of 
this component and what is to be financed.  
 
Component 4: Project Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation – This 
componentcovers counterpart project implementation support generally and specifically 
the project implementation support team within SEI undertaking project coordination, 
Page  5
procurement and financial management functions associated with the investment sub-
project portfolio and technical assistance initiatives.  
 
The table below summarizes the structure of the project by component and sub-
component along with estimated costs.  
 
Component/Sub-Component 
Total Costs  
 
(US$ m) 
% of Total 
Counterpart Financing  
 
(US$ m) 
% of Counterpart Financing 
GEF Financing  
 
(US$ m) 
% of  
 
GEF Financing  
 
Component 1: MBr Grain and Quarantine Sector Consumption Phase Out 
7.210
 
72.0 4.110 84.0 3. 
100 
60.8 
 
 
1.1
Farm Based Grain Storage Investment (16-18 Sub-Projects) 
1.480  14.3 
0.520
 10.6 
0.960 
18.8 
 
 
1.2
Central Elevator/Terminal Storage Investment (14-16 sub-projects) 
3.090  30.9
 
2.310 47.1  0.780 15.3  
 
1.3
Grain Processing Storage Investment (10-12 Sub-Projects) 
0.630  6.3 
0.220
 4.5 
0.410 
8.0 
 
 
1.4
Fumigation Service Provider Investment (9-10 Sub-Projects)  0.980  9.8 
0.760
 15.5 
0.220 
4.3 
 
 
1.5
State Quarantine Service Capacity Strengthening 
0.430  4.3 
0.200  4.1
 0.230 
4.5 
 
 
1.6
Grain Sector Operating Technical Assistance   0.600  6.0 
0.100  2.0 
0.500
 9.8 
 
 
Component 2: CTC Plant Closure Compensation 
1.200  12.0 
0.200  4.1 
1.000
 19.6 
 
 
Component 3: Policy Development and Institutional Strengthening 
1.250  12.0
 
0.500 10.0  0.750 14.7  
 
3.1
MBr Production Monitoring 
0.200  2.0 
0.100  2.0 
0.100  2.0  
 
3.2
Competitive Grant Scheme (CGS)  Preparation and Appraisal Support and CGS 
Administration 
0.400 4.0 
0.100 2.0 
0.300 5.9  
 
3.3
Regulatory Strengthening - Pest Control and Related Chemicals 
0.350  3.5
 
0.150 3.1 
0.200 3.9  
 
3.4
Public Information 
0.150 1.5 
0.075 1.5 
0.075 1.5  
 
3.5
Preparation for Future Montreal Protocol Obligations  0.150  1.5 
0.075  1.5
 0.075 
1.5 
 
 
Component 4: Project Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation 
0.350  3.5
 
0.100 2.0 
0.250 4.9  
 
Total Project Costs 
10.010 100.0  4.910  100 
5.100  100   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
In general, the project’s geographical coverage encompasses almost all of Ukraine and 
specifically those regions where grain production and processing is undertaken.  
Component 1 of the project is anticipated in involve investments almost every Oblast 
Page  6
where this type of agricultural production is undertaken as well as in processing and 
handling infrastructure in several large cities and various Black Sea ports. 
Notwithstanding this coverage, the main focus will be rural areas where issues of income 
disparity and poverty exist, and where agricultural productivity and sustainability in the 
post Soviet period are concern.  
 
The exception to the above is Component 2 which is specific to an industrial site near 
Kalush in the Ivano-Frankivsk Region of Western Ukraine.  This region is generally 
considered less economically active with greater dependence on subsidence agriculture 
and resource extraction (forestry) than other areas where large scale agricultural and 
industrial activities predominate. The project’s focus is within one of the relatively few 
large industrial complexes in the region, but one that has undergone the process of 
rationalization and restructuring to allow it to continue in a market economy.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Vladimir V. Tsirkunov (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project’s primary focus on MBr phase out would strengthen the 
environmental sustainability of agricultural activity in rural areas through enhanced crop 
protection using IPM techniques and reduction of the historical dependence on large scale 
chemical use for grain fumigation.  This should also have positive social impacts through 
increasing economic activity and income levels within the rural community.  The only 
negative impacts of the project’s activities in this are could be associated with workers 
handling chemical fumigants used as substitutes for MBr, recognizing their impacts are 
generally less acute than MBr and the use is lower and in less concentrated forms.  
 
The closure of CTC production capacity has potential environmental impacts associated 
with it in that environmentally sound management of residual on-site contamination and 
by-products is required. However, social impacts associated with the closure of CTC 
Page  7
production and limitation of latent MBr production are in fact minimal since these 
facilities were not in production and in the case of the CTC plant may be positive given 
the enterprise’s development of new facilities on the site.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
In the long term, the project should contribute to the sustainability and economic viability 
of agricultural and associated down stream processing activity, as well as enhance food 
security generally. It may also potentially indirectly stimulate industrial activity in the 
chemical industry. This would inevitably stimulate development of various types that 
could have environmental impacts, although none would be sufficiently linked or 
predictable to allow analysis at this time.  
 
An indirect impact associated with the CTC close project is the revelation of and 
stimulation of a public policy response to the presence of an offsite past environmental 
liability (PEL) associated with the historic operation of the facility being closed when it 
was under state ownership. This involves the presence of a landfill based storage facility 
containing 11,000 MT of HCB, a persistent organic pollutant controlled by the 
Stockholm Convention.  The leveraging of a public policy response to this PEL with 
upgraded monitoring and the prospect of clean up action represents a positive impact of 
the project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No general alternatives to undertaking the project were considered given the immediate 
need of the country to address the MBr issue given its international phase out obligations 
and the impacts of increasing grain infestation. However, a number of alternative design 
approaches were considered for the project.  
 
Initially, the project was intended to focus on closure of MBr production and have a 
secondary focus on consumption phase out. However, it was realized that significant MBr 
demand existed and there was an immediate need for alternative pest control measures 
was recognized. At the same time it became apparent that continued production was 
unlikely based on the condition of the shut down Saki facility and the absence of a 
economic basis for its re-opening.  
 
The design of the consumption phase out component considered the option of 
concentrating resources on one or more large demonstration investment sub-projects that 
would support a domestic research and development program using, for instance, an inert 
gas (nitrogen) as an empty space and bulk commodity fumigant. While one of a number 
of emerging non-ODS fumigation technologies, evaluation of experience with it 
elsewhere as well as the status of it development in Ukraine indicates that concentrating 
resources in this technology would have significant risks. It would also not have offered 
the coverage and immediate benefits in the grain sector that the more broadly distributed 
interventions supporting a basic IPM approach throughout the sector would have.   
 
Page  8
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project is rated as Environmental Assessment Category "B" and is subject to OP4.01. 
Additionally, it involves Pest Management and is subject to OP 4.09.  
 
The environmental assessment (EA) conducted by the project team during project 
preparation and appraisal indicates that the project would generate significant 
environmental benefits and minimal adverse environmental impacts.   The major positive 
environmental benefits from the project stem from the incremental global impact of 
reduced current and future emissions of two potent ozone depleting substances (MBr and 
CTC).  
 
Component 1 of the project addressing phase out of MBr consumption in the grain and 
quarantine sectors will have local environmental benefits which will be obtained by 
promotion of reduced chemical use and more sustainable agricultural practices through 
implementation of IPM techniques for crop protection. Where alternative chemical 
fumigants are used these will be internationally accepted and generally involve less risk 
than MBr. However, the project makes specific provision for the supply of personal 
protection and monitoring equipment as well as training on the safe use of such 
substitutes.   The supporting institutional technical assistance in Component 3 will also 
have benefits by removing regulatory barrier’s to more environmentally friendly crop 
protection techniques through upgrading local regulations to allow the certification and 
application of environmentally superior techniques and substitute technologies utilized 
elsewhere. While the range of small scale investments proposed in Component 1 through 
Competitive Grant Scheme are considered to have little potential negative environmental 
impact by their nature, each investment sub-project’s remains subject to the Ukrainian 
EIA/OVOS process and other legislation governing worker protection.  The beneficiary’s 
capacity to capitalize on the environmental benefits of this component is considered 
adequate given the level of technical assistance provided and the strong economic 
incentives that exist to find alternative low cost crop protection approaches.  
 
Component 2 of the project does entail some potential negative environmental impacts 
that do require management, specifically the potential for the mismanagement and spread 
of persistent organic pollutants that may remain in process equipment and on the site 
associated with the closed CTC production facility. The agreed closure plan contains an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) that addresses the capture and secure storage of 
any contamination associated within the site.  At appraisal the project team verified that 
these measures had been undertaken during closure operations already completed by the 
enterprise, including the analysis of equipment and the site for residual contamination 
and the establishment of a secure monitored storage of residual CTC contaminated 
materials on site. In terms of capacity to plan and implement the EMP, the enterprise has 
demonstrated such capacity and given the level of monitoring and potential to be subject 
to compensation repayment for non-compliance there is confidence that this will 
continued to be applied.  
 
Page  9
While not directly related to the closure of the facility, the closure plan also makes 
provision for upgrading of infrastructure and monitoring of the historical underground 
storage facility containing HCB by-product which was produced prior to 1998 during 
historical CTC production. Furthermore, conditionality has been attached to the project’s 
funding which requires the Government to both maintain monitoring of this site and to 
include it as a priority for action in Ukraine’s NIP under the Stockholm convention. At 
appraisal, the project team confirmed this is being included as a priority action in the 
draft NIP and that the Government is seeking an Implementing Agency partnership with 
the Bank to finance its management through a future GEF project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The principal project stakeholders are the owners and employees of the various 
beneficiary enterprises in the grain sector that will undertake sub-projects under 
Component 1 of the project and those who will have the opportunity to replicate these 
sub-projects across the respective sub-sectors.  Secondary stakeholders are the various 
agencies involved in oversight of the agricultural sector, local administrations in rural 
areas and the rural population generally.  In the case of Component 2, the principal 
stakeholders are the enterprise and its employees as well as the local municipal 
administration and health and environmental regulatory bodies.  The indirect association 
of this component with a significant local PEL also leads to the identification of the 
general population around this site as significant stakeholders in the activities that the 
current project has and may leverage.  
 
The preparation and appraisal activities to date have involved extensive direct 
consultation with enterprises, industry associations, local administrations and the various 
agencies that are potentially affected by the project. Within specific enterprises, it is 
understood that employee consultation has occurred. This is particularly true for “Oriana-
Halev” LCC where employee engagement has been important in obtaining records and 
the planning of replacement production facilities. Similarly, their has been direct 
involvement of the local administration, health authorities and State Environmental 
Expertise in the review of closure plans and in discussions on public policy action 
respecting the PEL from past ownership and production.  
 
During project implementation the intention is that this type and level of consultation 
continue.  Resources are allocated specifically for public information programs targeting 
the rural community. This will target the on farm activities specifically to promote IPM 
and safe selective chemical use for stored product fumigation. The technical assistance 
resources focuses on training and dissemination of IPM related techniques directed at a 
grass roots level in the rural community, using a range of vehicles including formal 
training, on-site instruction and one on one assistance, as well as printed material for 
broad distribution.  In the case of Component 2, employee and community consultation 
and information is included in the EMP as an embedded requirement in the legally 
binding closure plan. It is anticipated that public consultation associated with the 
associated PEL at Kalush will be addressed through the dissemination and consultation to 
Page  10
be undertaken during the NIP preparation and subsequently in the course of the clean up 
program that will be proposed for international assistance.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/28/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/12/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/04/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Page  11
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Vladimir V. Tsirkunov 
01/04/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Vladimir V. Tsirkunov 
01/04/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
01/09/2006 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
 
Comments:   
