Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/16/2006 
Report No.:  AC2597
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uruguay 
Project ID:  P095520 
Project Name:  UY Promoting Innovation to Enhance Competitiveness 
Task Team Leader:  Kristian Thorn 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 12, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: April 16, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSHE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General industry and trade sector (50%);Tertiary education (40%);Central 
government administration (5%);General finance sector (5%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (P);Technology diffusion (P);Export 
development and competitiveness (P);Small and medium enterprise support (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
25.25 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
5.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
1.25
6.25 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) is to strengthen Uruguay's capacity to 
generate, transfer and adapt knowledge and technology by: (i) improving the institutional 
framework for science, technology, and innovation (STI); (ii) strengthening the supply 
side through investments in human capital and high-quality research teams; (iii) building 
the demand side by supporting technology transfer and private sector innovation; and (iv) 
enhancing linkages between the supply and demand side by stimulating cross-sectoral 
and international research collaboration and mobility of researchers between public 
institutions and the productive sector.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component one: Support STI policies and institutional strengthening. The component 
would help establish a coherent policy framework for science, technology, and 
innovation (STI); consolidate and improve existing policies and programs; develop a 
strong monitoring and evaluation capacity; and raise awareness of STI among 
stakeholders. It will achieve the above through three subcomponents: (i) support the 
Page  2
development of public STI policies; (ii) establish and support the National Research and 
Innovation Agency; and (iii) setup and support the STI Observatory.  
 
Component two: Enhance capacity to generate knowledge and manage technology. The 
component would strengthen the capacity to develop new knowledge by (i) promoting 
excellence in science and technology research in priority areas; (ii) increasing the stock 
of advanced human capital and ensuring the early integration of young researchers in 
research networks and the private sector; and (iii) strengthening priority technical tertiary 
education programs.  
 
Component three: Promote innovation and technology transfer to the productive sector.  
The component would: (i) seek to introduce new instruments to promote technology 
transfer and accelerate the adaptation of new technologies and innovations by firms in 
key clusters; and (ii) promote high impact innovations by fostering new collaborations 
between the productive sector and knowledge institutions such as universities and 
research centers.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project would support tertiary institutions, government laboratories and private 
companies located throughout the territorio of Uruguay.  Most activities is likely to be in 
the capital area.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project has been assigned an environment Category "C" rating from the 
regional safeguards team. Uruguay has adopted sound environmental regulations. 
Notably, Uruguayan laboratories are required to comply with the principles of the 
Stockholm Accord on persistent organic pollutants (adopted in December 2003), an 
international agreement that sets high standards for the protection of human health and 
the environment.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
No 
Page  4
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
No 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Kristian Thorn 
11/09/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
11/09/2006 
Comments:   
