Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2505 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/11/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uruguay 
Project ID: P101432 
Project Name: UY OSE Modernization & Systems Rehabilitation - APL2 
Task Team Leader: Carlos E. Velez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 15, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 13, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSFW 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (60%);Sanitation (40%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
46.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
16.00
16.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective for APL-2 is to increase the efficiency, coverage and sustainability of 
water supply and sanitation services in Uruguay through:  
 
-
Improved efficiency and effectiveness of OSE  
 
-
Treated water pumping capacity further increased and Unaccounted for Water (UfW) reduced  
 
-
Increased sewage treatment and a new strategy for sewerage expansion.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The second phase of the OSE Modernization and Systems Rehabilitation project is expected to 
comprise of the following components, consistent with the original APL program design 
(amounts in parentheses show OSE's suggested use of loan proceeds):  
 
Component 1: OSE's institutional renewal (about US$ 15 million)  
 
This component will finance OSE's Senior Management's flagship initiative for institutional 
change and administrative reform of the utility (program VECTOR). The program VECTOR's 
objectives are to improve coordination, customer satisfaction, efficiency and institutional 
Page  2
strengthening. This component will help instill a culture of consumer orientation, quality and 
efficiency, and help optimize organizational processes to cut costs, time and improve 
productivity. Key sub-components will include (i) deepening internal benchmarking to stimulate 
internal regulation and competition; (ii) modernization of information systems and management 
systems (including commercial, financial and HR systems); (iii) decentralization of decision-
making to regional departments; and (iv) strengthening laboratory capacity.  
 
Component 2: Rehabilitation of drinking water systems (about US$ 25 million)  
 
The heart of this component is to reduce Unaccounted for Water (UfW) and increase revenue 
collection. Lessons learned from APL-1 have shown that, in order to address the high levels of 
UfW, technical and institutional interventions will need to go hand in hand. As part of the 
program VECTOR's institutional reforms (see above), innovative initiatives will be rolled-out in 
selected areas, including Montevideo to help align commercial and engineering incentives to 
tackle UfW. This integrated UfW package will also continue to finance essential physical 
investments (replacement of distribution pipes, valves and household connections; replacement 
and refurbishment of water meters; and systematic leak detection and repair). This UfW strategy 
will be accompanied by initiatives to improve drinking water quality and water security through 
the further modernization of the Aguas Corrientes water treatment plant.  
 
Component 3: Expansion of sewerage systems (about US$ 4.5 million)  
 
This component will pursue the demand-driven expansion of sewerage networks initiated in 
APL-1, albeit at a reduced scale. Much of the sewerage expansion work originally planned for 
APL-2 has already been undertaken under APL-1, which went from targeting 4 to 12 cities in the 
Interior. Moreover, the government wants to review, in collaboration with OSE, the 
appropriateness of the existing sanitation coverage standards (see Section 1) before engaging in 
further large-scale infrastructure investments. Under APL-2, this component will complete the 
requested sewerage expansion works in five of these cities. It will also seek to stimulate demand 
for more household to connect to the existing network, to ensure both household coverage and 
the return on existing investments is maximized. Feasibility studies for the treatment of residual 
liquids will also continued to be carried out to prepare for the construction of three Sewerage 
Treatment Plans under the floating APL-4.  
 
Component 4: Program administration and coordination (about US$ 1.5 million)  
 
Technical assistance will continue to be provided to help implement the project. The APL1 
Project Implementation Unit will remain in place.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Uruguay (Montevideo and the Interior)   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
OSE has a long history of working with the World Bank, and has an extensive experience of 
dealing with safeguards. OSE's safeguards experience was further enhanced during the APL1. It 
Page  3
is particularly important to note the creation during APL1 of an environment unit within OSE. 
As agreed during the initial design of the APL program, OSE expects to further strengthen this 
environmental unit during APL-2.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Catherine Signe Tovey (LCSFW) 
Mr Jose Alexandre Monteiro Fortes (LCSFU) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
A
preliminary EA was carried out for the entire APL program (APL1, APL2, APL3 and 
APL4). No major issues were identified. Project-specific EA for APL2, focusing on construction 
works, is under preparation. This EA will include the following componentes: (i) an evaluation 
of the adequacy of environmental management rules of the first phase for similar works, with 
recommendations for any strengthening measures based on lessons learned during ALP1; (ii) An 
assessment of all potential impacts associated with the planned investments, as well as 
identification of any mitigation measures, with a particular assessment of potential impacts on 
any known cultural resources (including adequate "chance find"procedures), natural habitats, and 
human resettlement.  The results of the preliminary screenings (which have already verified that 
none of these impacts will occur through any of the project's investments) will be clearly 
documented in the EA.  (iii) An Assessment of OSE's capacity to manage the project safeguards 
and proposed capacity building measures.  (iv) An Environmental Management Plan, including 
(a) any identified mitigation measures for specific investments as needed, (b) standardized 
environmental rules for contractors, (c) implementation responsibilities during construction and 
operation phases, (d) monitoring arrangements, (e) capacity building measures, and (f) an 
implementation schedule with an adequate budget.  In addition, "chance find procedures" for 
cultural heritage will also be included in the Environmental Management Plan to safeguard 
against potentially impacting physical cultural property whilst undertaking civil works (OP/BP 
4.11). (v) A summary of the consultation process.  
 
No major adverse environmental impacts are expected in this phase. As in APL1, most 
impacts are likely to be site-specific.  Just as with APL1, no further safeguards are expected to be 
triggered.  No sensitive issues regarding natural habitats have been identified and the project will 
not require any involuntary resettlement.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
To ensure safeguards compliance in the event that artifacts of cultural significance are 
discovered during the course of construction, the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) 
should include adequate "chance find" procedures.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/05/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The EA was initiated by OSE following the identification mission, and will be completed at 
least 10 days before the Decision-Meeting.  
 
A
social assessment of the project's objectives, including a stakeholder analysis and social 
risk assessment, will also be included in the final PAD   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Carlos E. Velez 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
11/16/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
