Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/29/2006 
Report No.:  AC2635
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uruguay 
Project ID:  P101124 
Project Name:  Uruguay Additional Financing Foot & Mouth Disease Emergency 
Recovery Loan 
Task Team Leader:  Alvaro J. Soler 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 7, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 21, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSER 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Animal production (50%);Agricultural marketing and trade (45%);Health (5%) 
Theme:  Other rural development (P);Export development and competitiveness (P);Other 
communicable diseases (P);Natural disaster management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
6.50 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
3.05
3.05 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objectives of the proposed scaling up additional financing activities are in line with 
the original project development objectives, although with an expanded coverage through 
the addition of activities encompassing other (non-FMD) transboundary diseases. The 
new revised DO for the project, reflecting both sets of activities, is:  
 
(a) to contain and mitigate the impact of any FMD outbreak in the Borrower?s territory 
through:  (i) vaccination of cattle; (ii) strengthening of the monitoring and surveillance 
capacity of the Borrower to prevent future outbreaks from spreading beyond the directly 
affected area; and (iii) identification of alternative markets for the beef produced in the 
Borrower?s territory in the short-run and restoring the Borrower?s presence in the 
premium beef market in the long-run; and  
 
(b) to prevent the introduction of other transboundary animal diseases of large economic 
importance.   
 
3. Project Description 
The activities that will be implemented, with the support of the proposed additional 
financing and counterpart funds, would include:  
Page  2
Strengthening MGAP's Monitoring, Surveillance and Control System (US$7.43 million, 
of which US$5.06 million are Bank financed): activities under this component would 
include: (i) upgrading existing laboratories to improve their capacity for diagnosis and 
sample testing (US$947,500); (ii) upgrading and expanding existing sanitary barriers 
(US$360,000); and (iii) support for scaling-up of the Voluntary Pilot Plan for Individual 
Livestock Traceability to be consistent with the universal, mandatory Animal 
Identification and Registration System (SIRA); and scaling-up and full decentralization 
of the National Livestock Information System (SNIG), to consolidate its operation at the 
national level and upgrade its capacity to manage the additional information that will 
result from the implementation of the universal animal tracking system as well as develop 
an operational link with the existing National Animal Health Information System (SISA) 
(US$5.89 million)  
 
Training, Education and Awareness (US$1.08 million, of which US$1.03 million are 
Bank financed): activities under this component would include: (i) training of veterinary 
professionals, working both in the public and private sector, in diagnosis of FMD (900 
professionals), BSE (900 professionals), and Avian Flu (100 professionals) 
(US$105,000); (ii) organization of simulated outbreaks of FMD and Avian Flu to train 
staff and test the effectiveness of emergency plans drawn up by Government , in 
coordination with the Ministry of Public Health and poultry producers (US$72,000); (iii) 
organization of various events to increase the awareness among producers of the risks of 
potential outbreaks of transboundary diseases and key measures to be adopted in case of 
an actual outbreak, with special reference to FMD (4,000 producers) and Avian Flu 
(1,800 producers) (US$97,000); (iv) training for the implementation and operation of the 
scaled-up PTI and SNIG, which would benefit 130 MGAP staff, 1,500 field operators of 
the systems, and some 40,000 producers (US$711,500); and (v) communication and 
information campaign on the merits of the Animal Identification and Registration System 
(SIRA) and new expanded National Livestock Information System (SNIG) (US$60,000).  
 
Project Coordination and Management (US$0.45 million, of which US$0.41 million are 
Bank financed): to finance additional operation and management cost of the project 
activities implemented under the additional financing proposal, including short-term 
consultants for studies and technical support.  
 
As already highlighted, all of the above activities will contribute to the implementation 
of the regional animal health initiative supported by the World Bank with FAO support, 
to combine efforts to combat FMD and other transboundary diseases.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
As in the Original Project, the project area includes rural areas nationwide.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber (LCSEN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project supports capacity building and surveillance activities, which are not expected 
to result in any large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. The only potential 
environmental impact associated with the project stems from the use of chemical 
disinfectants as part of the sanitary barrier activities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect or long tem impacts are foreseen.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Given that project-supported sanitary barrier activities will involve the handling of 
chemical disinfectants, the project is classified as a Category B.  As such, the project 
design aims to ensure compliance with the requirements of the Bank policy on 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01). Specifically, the project Operational Manual 
includes provisions for the safe handling, storage and use of chemicals in accordance 
with OMS standards and national laws. These provisions are considered sufficient, and 
their implementation is supported through the project activities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Stakeholders include the general public, who will benefit from a robust program to 
monitor, prevent and contain FMD and other transboundary diseases of economic 
importance.  Likewise, stakeholders include farmers and technical staff and managers 
from local and national government working on rural development and economic issues.  
Page  4
The Operational Manual will be made publically available through the InfoShop and the 
local government in accordance with the Bank?s Disclosure Policy.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/29/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/29/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/29/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
No 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  5
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alvaro J. Soler 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mark E. Cackler 
 
Comments:   
