Page  1
1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information 
Date prepared/updated:  April 12, 2006 
 
 
 
 
  Report No.: AC2412 
 
1. 
Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uruguay 
Project ID:  P094495 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
Project Name:  Montevideo Landfill Gas Recovery Project 
Task Team Leader:  Horacio Terraza 
Estimated Appraisal Date: 04/12/2006 
Estimated Board Date: N/A 
Managing Unit:  LCSES 
Lending Instrument:  N/A 
Sector: Solid Waste 
Theme: Climate Change, Pollution Management and Environmental Health   
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
Spanish Carbon Fund Amount (US$m.): 7.0 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 
Environmental Category: B 
Is this a transferred project 
Yes [ ] 
    No [x] 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [x] 
    Repeater [ ] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [x] 
2. Project Objectives: 
The objective of the Montevideo Landfill Gas Recovery Project is twofold: at global level to 
help mitigate climate change through the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from the 
Montevideo Landfill and at local level to improve public health through the installation of an 
LFG flaring system at the landfill. The flaring system will improve air quality through the 
reduction of hazardous trace gases contained in LFG and reduce the risk of uncontrolled fires 
and explosion at the landfill. Indirect development objectives include raising awareness of 
climate change and demonstrating the feasibility of better solid waste final disposal practices 
aligned with Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) and carbon finance possibilities in the 
Southern Cone. 
3. Project Description: 
Montevideo Landfill Gas Recovery Project consists of the design, implementation and 
monitoring of a gas extraction, tre
atment and flaring facility in Montevideo’s landfill. Such 
facility will allow capture and destruction of methane generated in the landfill. Under agreements 
negotiated at the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), more 
specifically under the Kyoto Protocol, abatement of greenhouse gas emissions in developing 
Page  2
2
countries can generate certified emission reductions (CER) that can be sold in the international 
market. Emission reductions generated by Montevideo’s project will be independently certified, 
with 1.0 million of such CERs to be sold to the Spanish Carbon Fund (SCF). 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis: 
The project will be located in the Municipality of Montevideo. Its focus is the existing controlled 
landfill in Montevideo, which is limited to the west by ‘camino Felipe Cardoso’, to the north by 
‘camino Cepéda’ and to the east and south by a perimetral path of 2000 meters. Total surface 
area is around 120 hectares, located inside 
Centro Comunal
 N
o
9. The area is not completely 
urbanized, but borders a suburban zone. Natural soils are mainly clay with good impermeability. 
 
The project initially will explore LFG generated in cell 6/7. This cell covers nearly 29 hectares 
and has been in operation since 1990 in distinct phases. From 1990 to 1994, only cell 6 was 
operating; from 1994 to 1998, only cell 7 was filled; and from 1998 to 2005, both cells were 
filled simultaneously, creating the single cell 6/7. 
 
Cell 6/7 is being closed because it has already reached capacity. In 2002 filling started in cell 8, 
which is separated from cell 6/7 by a public road. Waste disposal is expected to continue in cell 8 
until 2011. 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
Horacio Terraza: task-team leader, senior environmental specialist. 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
There are no major adverse impacts arising from the project. Minor impacts will be mitigated 
according to the EIA, which has been prepared and revised by the task team. The EIA has been 
Page  3
3
publicly available since February 1, 2006, through Montevideo’s official website: 
www.montevideo.gub.uy. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 
the project area: 
 
None detected. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts: 
 
None. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: 
 
An EIA was carried out for the project. The impacts identified, as well as the corresponding 
mitigation measures, are shown in the following table. 
Impact Description 
Proposed Mitigation 
Measure 
Responsible for 
Mitigation 
Implementation 
Noise Slightly 
negative, 
mostly during 
construction; during 
operation also, but to a 
lesser extent. 
Enforce adequate 
Individual Protection 
Equipment by 
operators and limit the 
exposure to noise 
according ISO 18.000. 
Private firm in 
charge of LFG 
flaring plant 
operation and 
maintenance. 
Odor Slightly 
negative, 
mostly during wells 
drilling (early stages of 
the project). 
Schedule tasks in a 
way that wells 
surroundings are 
immediately sealed 
after drilling. Enforce 
adequate individual 
protection equipment 
use by operators. 
Private firm in 
charge of LFG 
flaring plant 
construction. 
Particulate matter 
Slightly negative, both 
in construction and 
maintenance.  
Installation and 
adequate control of 
filter equipment during 
operation. Water 
spraying over non-
asphalted roads as to 
avoid dust. 
Private firm in 
charge of LFG 
flaring plant 
design and 
construction. 
Page  4
4
Gases 
Very positive. During 
wells’ drilling, slightly 
negative (gases may 
escape). 
Schedule drilling 
operations adequately 
and seal wells’ 
surroundings 
immediately after 
drilling. 
Private firm in 
charge of LFG 
flaring plant 
construction. 
Water 
No negative impacts in 
underground water; 
positive impacts in 
surface water. 
Adequately dispose 
extracted leachate. 
Private firm in 
charge of LFG 
flaring plant 
design and 
operation and 
maintenance. 
Fauna and flora 
No impacts on fauna or 
flora. 
 
Soil 
No major impacts. 
Minimal impacts due 
to the installation of 
the plant. 
 
Visual 
Probably the major 
negative impact of the 
project. 
Installation of forest 
screen will mitigate 
this impact. 
Montevideo 
municipality. 
Hygiene and safety at 
work 
Strong positive 
impacts, due to better 
air quality and less risk 
of explosions. 
 
Employment Positive 
impacts 
during construction 
and operation; negative 
impacts during closure.
Awareness raising 
Positive impacts, 
contributing to 
awareness raising 
regarding better solid 
waste management and 
global climate change. 
 
In order to complete the existing EIA and to better understand the current environmental 
conditions and environmental compliance of the controlled landfill and its implications, the task 
Page  5
5
team hired an environmental audit to check (i) closure plan; (ii) landfill compliance with 
environmental and/or sanitary permits; (iii) existence of mitigation measures at landfill design 
stage; (iii) sitting according to existing land-use plans; (iv) monitoring plan in place. 
 
The main findings were: 
 
·
There is a closure plan for the site; 
·
The site complies with three out of five regulations that apply; 
·
There are mitigation measures proposed for the impacts caused by the waste disposal 
activities. Nevertheless, their implementation is not systematic; 
·
The site complies with the land-use plan of Montevideo. 
 
The Municipality of Montevideo will take advantage of the implementation of the project and the 
revenues from the emission reductions commercialization to improve the site conditions and 
enforce the systematic execution of the mitigation measures. The task team is providing technical 
assistance to make sure the outcome is in line with Bank’s policies. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people: 
 
The municipality of Montevideo organized a stakeholder consultation meeting for this project on 
October 5, 2005. The session was open to the general public, and around 75 people attended the 
meeting. 
 
Some of the organizations and institutions that were represented at the meeting are: municipality 
of Canelones; national environmental body – Dirección Nacional de Medio Ambiente; national 
energy body – Dirección Nacional de Energía; Ministry of Cattle, Agriculture and Fishery; 
Spanish International Organization for Cooperation; Fichtner; LKsur; AIDIS; Consorcio 
Ambiental del Plata; CEUTA; Aborgama, CAVO; Unión Ibirapita; C.S.I.; Organización San 
Vicente; GEA Consultores Ambientales; CEMPRE; Unión Clasificadora de Residuos Urbanos; 
among others. 
 
During the event, a presentation about the core idea of the project took place, and some 
preliminary results from the project’s EIA were also presented. At the end of the session, the 
participants were invited to make questions and comments. Questions were mainly related to the 
possible impacts of the project’s construction, without other major issues being raised. Basic 
questions about CDM projects were also posed. 
 
Complementing the above mentioned procedure, the EIA has been published by the Municipality 
of Montevideo on www.montevideo.gob.uy, as previously mentioned. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
November 21, 2005 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
February 1, 2006 
Page  6
6
Date of submission to InfoShop 
February 8, 2006 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
N/A 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
N/A 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
N/A 
Safety of Dams: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety of 
Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is 
finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including 
EMP) report? 
Yes [ x ]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review 
and approve the EA report? 
Yes. 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP 
incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes. 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or 
degradation of critical natural habitats? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ x ] 
If the project would result in significant conversion or 
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does 
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the 
Bank? 
 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management 
issues? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ x ] 
Page  7
7
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ x ] 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by the 
regional safeguards team?  Are PMP requirements 
included in project design? If yes, does the project team 
include a Pest Management Specialist? 
 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to 
cultural property? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ x ] 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate 
the potential adverse impacts on cultural property? 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been 
prepared in consultation with the Indigenous People? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ x ] 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit 
review the plan? 
 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the 
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional 
Social Development Unit? 
 
OP/BP 4.12 
–
Involuntary Resettlement
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ x ] 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit 
review and approve the plan / policy framework / policy 
process? 
 
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional 
issues and constraints been carried out? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ x ] 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to 
overcome these constraints? 
 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if 
so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ x ] 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the 
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and 
approved by the Bank? 
 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been 
prepared and arrangements been made for public 
awareness and training? 
 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [ x ] 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the 
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the 
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared 
and sent? 
 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
 
Page  8
8
Page  9
9
