Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2787 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/23/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uruguay 
Project ID: P095571 
Project Name: UY Power Sector Interconnection Project 
Task Team Leader: Lucio Monari 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 24, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 11, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General energy sector (100%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
61.00 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
29.00
90.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Bank sees high potential in promoting cross-border trade in electricity, in addition to 
fostering regional integration and cooperation.  The Bank has significant experience in financing 
energy integration and transmission projects, which, together with its ongoing policy dialogue 
with Uruguay and the Government of Brazil in the energy sector, will facilitate the realization of 
the proposed power project.  
 
In connection with this new strategy, and evidencing the interest of Uruguay in borrowing from 
the Bank, the CAS, approved in May 2005, includes a US$70 million loan for the power sector 
and possibly for urban transportation.  The Bank and the GoU have agreed that this loan will 
focus exclusively on the electricity sector.  The project will contribute to the CAS objective of 
sustaining growth by attracting increased investment, particularly in infrastructure.  
 
The project's objectives are to improve energy supply security by diversifying sources of energy 
supply, and enhance the reliability of the Uruguayan transmission system by connecting its 
current East end to the regional transmission system.  The proposed project would support the 
Page  2
medium-term components of the government's strategy for the power sector, i.e. the development 
of a power interconnection with Brazil.  
 
Performance Indicators:  
 
-
Increase in cross-border exchanges of electricity between  
 
Uruguay and Brazil  
 
-
Decrease in the marginal cost of supply in Uruguay  
 
-
Increase in the reliability of power supply in Uruguay   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Since 2004, the Governments of Uruguay and Brazil have undertaken studies to assess 
alternatives for strengthening power interconnection between the two countries.  The investment 
and O&M costs of about 20 alternatives were compared, and, on July 5, 2006, the two 
governments signed a Memorandum of Understanding to improve the power integration between 
their countries.  They agreed to the construction of a 500 MW interconnection (converter and 
500 kV transmission line) between the electric substation of San Carlos near the eastern coast of 
Uruguay and the Presidente Medice node, in the area of Candiota in Brazil. Total investment 
costs of the project (estimated at US$160 million) would be entirely financed by Uruguay, which 
would then be in charge of the commercial and technical management of the interconnection. 
Imports would take place when purchase costs in Brazil (under the existing regulatory regime) 
are lower than marginal costs in Uruguay, in effect substituting expensive or inefficient 
generation of diesel or fuel oil-based plants  in Uruguay with cheaper hydropower (only from 
"vertimiento") or thermal energy (non-running power stations) from Brazil.  Preliminary 
simulations of marginal costs and electricity flows made by UTE confirm the financial viability 
of the proposed interconnection. Technical groups have been established to develop the 
necessary electrical and environmental studies.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would include the construction of a 390 km, 500 kV transmission line and 500 MW 
frequency converter  between Uruguay and Brazil.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The GoU has a fairly recent law on Environmental Impact Assessment (Law No. 16466) that is 
well developed.  For its part, UTE has company policies for limiting human exposure to 
electromagnetic fields and for imposing easements, which it has been able to apply successfully 
in its operations.  Some due diligence may be needed, however, to ensure that current Borrower 
standards are fully consistent with those of the Bank, particularly in the area of compensation for 
any land acquisition that may be needed for the project.  Similar due diligence may be needed on 
the Brazilian side.  It should be noted that UTE's overall performance in the past few years has 
been consistently good, with the exception of the economic crisis period of 2001-03, which 
negatively affected the operational and financial performance of the power utility.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr George Campos Ledec (LCSEN) 
Mr Kennan W. Rapp (LCSSO) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The alignment of the power transmission line segment between San Carlos and Melo, 
Uruguay is already known. UTE chose this alignment following an analysis of alternatives that 
included criteria to minimize the crossing of (i) wetlands or flood-prone areas; (ii) sites of high 
tourism potential; and (iii) small landholdings. This analysis (UTE, Interconexion Electrica de 
Gran Porte Entre Uruguay y Brasil: Antecedentes, Alternativas y Caracteristicas del Proyecto 
Seleccionado, November 2006) is in the Project Files. Based on this alignment, the appropriate 
Environmental Category is B, since (i) the right-of-way (ROW) will not cross protected areas, 
extensive forests or other highly sensitive areas and (ii) no new access roads will be needed. The 
alignment of the transmission line segment between Melo, Uruguay and Presidente Medici, 
Brazil is not yet known. It is most likely that this segment (and hence the overall project) will 
also qualify as Category B, although it is conceivable that (if highly sensitive areas or new roads 
were to be involved) it could be Category A.  The Melo-Presidente Medici alignment, along with 
the overall Environmental Category, will be determined in the near future (well before 
appraisal).  The Environmental Assessment (EA) report will cover the entire transmission line 
(as well as the Melo frequency converter station), based on terms of reference acceptable to the 
Bank.  However, the EA may comprise separate reports for the Uruguayan and Brazilian 
portions.  Public consultations on the draft EA reports (involving all types of stakeholders) will 
be held within both Uruguay and Brazil, in a manner consistent with OP 4.01.  The EA will also 
include an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for mitigation of any adverse environmental 
impacts, including environmental rules for contractors that will be reflected in all civil works 
bidding documents and contracts.  The Bank will seek assurances from UTE and the relevant 
Brazilian authorities that the Bank will be allowed to supervise the environmental and social 
aspects of power line construction within Brazil.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The remaining natural habitats within the known San Carlos-Melo transmission line right-of-
way (ROW) comprise mostly natural grasslands (modified by livestock grazing), with strips of 
native gallery forest along stream crossings.  The power line and its ROW will not significantly 
affect these natural habitats.  No trees less than 3.5 meters tall will need to be cut within the 
ROW; most of the native gallery forest trees are shorter.  The EA will verify whether the ROW 
would cross any significant bird concentrations (such as at freshwater wetlands?the line would 
not pass near the coast).  If so, the EA will recommend whether plastic coils or other devices 
should be placed on any of the transmission lines to increase their visibility and thus minimize 
bird collisions.  Any other possible natural habitats issues along the Melo-Presidente Medici 
ROW will be assessed after the alignment has been identified.  Should Brazilian law requires that 
0.5% of the cost of large infrastructure projects be invested in protected areas and similar 
conservation activities, the Task Team will endeavor to ensure that this law is properly applied 
for the Brazilian portion of the Melo-Presidente Medici transmission line.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
The San Carlos-Melo transmission line, as well as the Melo frequency converter station, 
would not significantly affect natural or plantation forests. Any potential effect on forests of the 
Melo-Presidente Medici transmission line will be assessed after the alignment has been 
identified.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
No archaeological, historical, paleontological, nor sacred sites have been found in the area of 
influence of the San Carlos-Melo transmission line and Melo frequency converted, and none are 
likely in the area of influence of the Melo-Presidente Medici transmission line.  Nonetheless, the 
EMP will include chance finds procedures within the environmental rules for all civil works 
contractors, so that they will know what to do if archaeological remains or fossils are discovered 
during construction.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The ROW for the 390 km transmission line will not cross any indigenous territories in 
Uruguay; in Brazil, the ROW has yet to be defined.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
In Uruguay, the project will require limited amounts of land acquisition in the ROWs and for 
the frequency converter in Melo. In addition, as UTE defines the final alignment, easements will 
likely be required so that work crews have unrestricted access to areas needed for constructing 
and servicing the towers for the power lines. The imposition of land acquisition and easements 
could lead to adverse socio-economic impacts for local residents in the form of lost assets and/or 
income. Should the results of the preliminary studies on land acquisition highlight associated 
negative impacts, UTE will have to arrange for the preparation of the appropriate resettlement 
instrument.  This is likely to be a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), given that the alignment in 
Uruguay is likely to be fully defined prior to appraisal.  The alignment of the transmission line 
segment between Melo and Presidente Medici, Brazil is not yet known.  Therefore, the choice of 
instrument for Brazil depends on whether the final alignment is defined during project 
preparation.  At this point, it seems that a Resettlement Policy Framework is the more likely 
option.  Regardless of which instrument is prepared, due attention will have to be paid to the 
cross-border coordination of resettlement actions in key areas (such as the consultation and 
participation of affected people), and to differences in each country?s legal and procedural 
frameworks.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/14/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Bank expects to review the EA terms of reference in March 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Lucio Monari 
03/21/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
03/21/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Susan G. Goldmark 
03/23/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
