Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/14/2007 
Report No.:  AC2696
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uruguay 
Project ID:  P097604 
Project Name:  UY Institutions Building TAL 
Task Team Leader:  Mario Francisco Sangines 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 13, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 3, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSPS 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  General public administration sector (75%);Central government administration 
(25%) 
Theme:  Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Tax policy and 
administration (S);Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
12.10 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1.93
1.93 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the proposed Uruguay Institutions Building Technical Assistance Loan 
(IBTAL) is to improve the Borrower's public sector performance by: (i) supporting its 
public sector modernization program in the areas of customs administration, monitoring 
and evaluation, performance-based budgeting, and e-government; and (ii) strengthening 
its institutions involved with the design and implementation of public policy reforms in 
the areas of taxation, promotion of the business environment, and social protection.   
 
3. Project Description 
The TAL comprises six main components in addition to overall project management. Of 
these six main components, three are aimed at supporting institutional strengthening of 
core public administration; and three are aimed at supporting institutional Strengthening 
for Policy Implementation as follows:  
 
Institutional Strengthening of Core Public Administration  
 
Component 1 - Strengthening Customs Administration's Human Resources 
Management. This component is designed to support the modernization of the customs 
Page  2
administration (Direccion Nacional de Aduanas) through improvements to its human 
resources management functions.  This is part of a broader Customs modernization effort 
by the GoU, which will include major technical assistance support from the IADB in the 
short to medium term.  
 
Component 2 - Improving Institutional Planning, Monitoring, and Evaluation. This 
component is designed to enhance public sector performance and transparency by 
supporting the establishment of the institutional framework that will underlie effective 
Government direction of its M&E functions; improvements to the design, 
implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of central government programs; and civil 
society engagement and participation in the M&E processes.  
 
Component 3 - E-Government. This component will strengthen the coverage of e-
Government applications to add transparency and efficiency to the interaction between 
the public sector and individuals and companies.  It will focus on developing policies and 
regulations, developing and integrating systems and databases, improving registries and 
the establishment of standards with particular emphasis on e-procurement and a 
transactions (tramites) portal.  
 
Institutional Strengthening for Policy Implementation  
 
Component 4 - Support to BPS for institutional strengthening and implementation of tax 
and social protection reforms. This component will support strengthening of the Social 
Security System's (Banco de Prevision Social - BPS) institutional capacity, including 
those areas necessary to: (i) implement the personal income tax, and (ii) undertake 
structural improvements to the social protection system via the implementation of an 
Integrated Social Information System (Sistema de Informacion Integrada para el Area 
Social - SIIAS).  
 
Component 5 - Support for Capital Markets and Corporate Transparency Reforms. 
Activities under this component are designed to help government authorities address 
several major challenges associated with reforming the institutional, legal and regulatory, 
and infrastructure framework underlying capital markets, and to strengthen the corporate 
financial reporting framework in order to boost private investment, enhance financial 
sector stability and improve the governance of state-owned enterprises.  
 
Component 6 - Support for Bankruptcy Regulation Reforms. This component seeks to 
address several implementation aspects before the new Insolvency and Corporate 
Restructuring Law comes into force, namely: (i) preparation of a project of regulations to 
the new insolvency law, including a report on procedural changes needed to support its 
implementation; (ii) logistical support for court implementation; and (iii) activities for 
awareness, outreach, and promotion of best practices.  
 
Project Administration  
 
Page  3
Component 7 - Project Coordination and Strategy Development.  This component is 
geared to finance the following three areas: (i) staffing and operations of the project 
coordination unit (PCU) in the Ministry of Economy and Finance; (ii) support to the 
Presidential Commission for the Transformation of the State (Coordinacion de la 
Transformacion del Estado - CTE) in monitoring and evaluating the overall reform 
process; and (iii) studies and other consultancies to be determined during project 
implementation according to procedures set forth in the operational manual.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Montevideo, Uruguay   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mario Francisco Sangines 
03/14/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Fernando Rojas 
03/14/2007 
Comments:   
