Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2346 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/01/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uruguay 
Project ID: P050716 
Project Name: UY 2nd Health Sector Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Luis Orlando Perez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 11, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: October 9, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSHH 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The operation would seek to support Government efforts to further strengthen its current health 
policy framework and health delivery by focusing on solving the inadequacy of the current 
system to respond to the changing epidemiological profile, in which NCDs have become 
prevalent and the need to protect and strengthened priority public health programs within a solid 
framework of stewardship and regulation.  
 
In this context, the specific development objectives of the proposed operation would be:  
 
(i) To improve the capacity of the MSP to make informed decisions about prevention and 
control priorities and to monitor the impact of NCDs interventions;  
 
(ii) To implement a National Health Promotion and Prevention Strategy related to NCDs 
focusing on NCDs education, social mobilization, and advocacy; and  
 
(iii) To expand accessibility and quality assurance of primary health care services related to 
NCDs detection and treatment.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project components  
 
The operation would consist of four components:  
Page  2
Component 1. Strengthening MSP's capacity to address the changing country epidemiological 
profile; Component 2. Improving quality of primary care services for prevalent NCDs; 
Component 3. Supporting the health insurance reform design process; and Component 4. Project 
management. These components are synchronized with activities to be undertaken by the three 
main directorships in the MSP: DIGESA, ASSE and DIGESE.  
 
Component Description  
 
Component 1 - Strengthening of the MSPs Capacity to Address the Country's Changing 
Epidemiological Profile. This component would strengthen the Ministry of Public Health (MSP), 
so it can exercise its stewardship of Uruguay's health system by improving essential public 
health functions related to NCDs. Finance would be provided for technical assistance, training 
and incremental operating costs within three sub-components, with the MSPs Directorate 
General of Health (Direccion General de Salud - DIGESA) being responsible for the overall 
coordination of the activities within this component.  
 
Component 2 - Improving Quality of Primary Care Services for Prevalent NCD's: This 
component would strengthen the capacity of Uruguay's public health system in the screening and 
control of prevalent NCDs i.e., hypertension, cardiovascular disease, diabetes and three 
preventable cancers. It would also improve problem resolution at the primary care level; thus 
enhancing the efficiency of the overall sector. The Health Services Administration 
(Administracion de Servicios de Salud del Estado - ASSE , the agency within the MSP 
responsible for providing medical care to those without social security or private health 
insurance coverage, would be responsible for the implementation and coordination of the 
activities in this component. This component would finance technical assistance, the purchase of 
medical and ITC equipment, training and the incremental operating costs related to the 
implementation the component.  
 
Component 3 - Supporting the Health Insurance Reform Design Process: This component 
would provide technical assistance for the design of the overall policy framework and the system 
of incentives of the new health insurance. Activities within this component would be the 
responsibility of the Health Secretariat (Direccion General de Secretaria DIGESE), the agency 
within the MSP that is now responsible for conducting the health reform strategy.  
 
Component 4 - Project Management. This component would cover Project's operating 
expenses.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would focus on enhancing the services delivery capacity of primary health care 
facilities as well as secondary referral centers. These would include the purchase of key medical 
equipment for detection and treatment of NCDs as well as other pathologies required and 
differential diagnosis of NCDs.  
 
Project activities would include:  
 
Page  3
1. Primary care facilities ASSE depending from the sanitary regions of Montevideo, Canelones 
East and West, San José, Tacuarembo, Treinta y Tres and Rio Negro;  
 
2.  All the second level referral ambulatory facilities - totalizing 11 in Great Montevideo's 
sanitary regions and 41 in the inland sanitary regions, and  
 
3.  Five high complexity facilities with second level referral ambulatory role for certain NCDs 
nationwide.  
 
The medical equipment with potential minimal environmental impacts will be located in the 
second level referral ambulatory facilities mentioned in points 2 and 3 above.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
MSP has a clear set of policies and procedures consistent with an appropriate environmental 
management. Health equipment to be procured ( low complexity Rx diagnostic equipment)is 
subject to comply with all environmental licenses and permits required by Law, and to follow the 
MSP allowances procedures.  
 
The MSP Environmental and Occupation Health Division have already built in procedures to 
screen and assess environmental sensitivity of procurement, so that particular recommendations 
can be made to improve or to mitigate environmental impacts  
 
The MSP have an adequate legal framework for enviromental safeguard policies and a adequate 
enforcement of the legal regulations and control capacity.  
 
The MSP health care providers (public and private) already have adequate health care waste 
management, storage and disposal systems   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Marcelo Hector Acerbi (LCSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental impacts are expected to be positive in the long run, as the components and 
equipments financed by the project will help to improve already existing health quality and 
services by strengthening MSP's capacity to address the country's changing epidemiological 
profile; improving quality of primary care services for prevalent NCDs; and supporting the 
health insurance reform design process.  
 
Nonetheless, some of the new medical equipment to be procured may have potential 
temporary negative environment impacts. In particular, the potential impact is related to human 
exposure to low complexity Rx diagnosis equipment (radiation.  
 
In addition, expanding health coverage for Non Communicable Diseases (NCDs) would be 
expected to result in marginal additional health care waste in primary care health.  
 
The environmental evaluation concluded that the project did not include works. No 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
resettlements will take place, and no natural habitats or cultural heritage areas will be affected.  
 
There are not identified neither expected any potential large scale, significant and/or 
irreversible negative impacts   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/23/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Luis Orlando Perez 
03/08/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keith E. Hansen 
06/01/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
