Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/07/2007 
Report No.:  AC2985
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uruguay 
Project ID:  P050716 
Project Name:  UY Non Comunicable Diseases Prevention Project 
Task Team Leader:  Luis Orlando Perez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 11, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: October 9, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSHH 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
10.00
10.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The operation would seek to support the Government's efforts to further strengthen its 
health delivery services and the current health policy framework for NCDs.  
 
In this context, the specific development objectives of the proposed operation would be:  
 
(i) To expand accessibility and quality assurance of primary health care services related 
to selected NCDs early detection and medical care; and  
 
(ii) To avoid and reduce exposure to selected NCDs risk factors as well as their medical 
effects.  
 
The indicators corresponding to the Project's development objectives include:  
 
[X] Percent of selected NCDs (hypertension, diabetes, and obesity / overweight) cases 
diagnosed by primary care teams under follow-up.  
 
[X] Percent of women betwee 50 and 69 years of age that had a mammogram in any 
given year.  
Page  2
[X] Number of newborn with disability under follow-up by Early Detection Treatment 
Units in any given year/ estimated number of newborn with disability  
 
[X] percent population with risk factors screening in under project departments   
 
3. Project Description 
The operation would seek to support the Government's efforts to further strengthen its 
current health policy framework and health delivery services for NCDs.  To reach those 
objectives, the project would focus on to create an adequate incentives framework to 
health system actors to match the new health needs of the population and to strengthening 
stewardship and regulation of NCDs' public health programs.  
 
The operation would consist of four components: Component 1 - Stregthening MSP's 
capacity to address the country's changing epidemiological profile; Component 2 - 
Improve accessibility to quality care services for prevalent NCDs in public primary care 
facilities; Component 3 - Implementation of the "Previniendo"Pilot Program; and 
Component 4 - Project management   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project would focus on enhancing the capacity of primary health care facilities as 
well as secondary referral centers. These would include the purchase of key medical 
equipment to detection and treatment of NCDs as well as other pathologies required as 
differential diagnosis of NCDs.  
 
Project activities would include:  
 
1. Primary care facilities ASSE depending from the sanitary regions of Montevideo, 
Canelones East and West, San José, Tacuarembo, Treinta y Tres and Rio Negro;  
 
2.  All the second level referral ambulatory facilities - totalizing 11 in Great 
Montevideo's sanitary regions and 41 in the inland sanitary regions, and  
 
3.  Five high complexity health care facilities that has also a second level referral 
ambulatory role for certain NCDs nationwide.  
 
The medical equipment with potential minimal environmental impacts will be located in 
the second level referral ambulatory facilities mentioned in points 2 and 3 above.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Marcelo Hector Acerbi (LCSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental impacts are expected to be positive in the long run, as the components and 
equipments financed by the project will help to improve alsready existing health quality 
and services by strengthening MSP's capacity to address the country's changing 
epidemiological profile; improving quality of primary care services for prevalent NCDs; 
and supporting the health insurance reform design process.  
 
Nonehteless, the funcioning and mantenance of some quipment to be procured may 
have very temporal negative environment impacts, which can be avoided or mitigated 
through Environmental Management Protocols defined by the package of regulatory 
instruments implemented and supervised by MSP.  In particular, the potential impacts 
include: (i) human exposure to high complexity equipment (radiation) and (ii) disposal of 
waste from health facilities.  
 
The environmental evaluation concluded that the project did not include works. No 
resettlements will take place, and no natural habitats or cultural heritage areas will be 
affected.  
 
There are not identified neither expected any potential large scale, significant and/or 
irreversible negative impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are not identified neither expected any potencial largarge scale, significant and/or 
irreversible negative impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No apply.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Evaluation.  
 
An Environmental Evaluation was carried out by the Uruguayan Department of 
Environmental and Occupational Health, focused on the follow main areas: (a) 
compliance with environmental legislation; (b) Existing environmental management 
systems and capacity assessment of the environmental unit of MSP; (c) Review of 
existing mechanisms (protocols) and tools to carry out environmental activities; and (d) 
potential negative and positive impacts.  
 
The report concluded that the project did not include works. No resettlements will take 
place, and no natural habitats or cultural heritage areas will be affected.  
 
Regarding the new Rx diagnosis equipment to be procured by the project, potentially, it 
would have very limited and very temporal negative environmental impacts, which can 
be avoided or mitigated through Environmental Management Protocols defined by the 
package of regulatory instruments implemented and supervised by MSP.  
 
Regarding to any marginal additional health care waste in primary care health the MOH 
health service providers targeted under the project already have adequate health care 
waste management, storage and disposal systems that can adequately accommodate any 
additional waste that would occur as a result of the expanded coverage for Non 
Communicable Diseases.  
 
Environmental Screening  
 
During project preparation, in May 2007, a Bank mission lead by the Environmental 
Management specialist from the LCSSD/LCC7C took place to (i) assess current 
environmental and social practice and procedures regarding MSP interventions; (ii) verify 
the level of institutional strengthening of MSP environmental unit; and (iii) conduct an 
environmental screening of a set actions to be financed during the Second Health 
Development Project.  
 
The assessment also concluded that all the project components have a very low, almost 
inexistent, environmental and social risk, considering the sensibility of the environment 
and the category of activities to be developed. The mission concluded that the 
environmental impact of the proposed project can and should continue to be managed by 
the existing environmental protocols mandatory for each health centre in Uruguay and 
supervised/monitored by MSP.  
 
Identification of potential environment and social impacts  
 
During the increase of the national health system capacity to attend selected Non 
Communicable Diseases, the contaminants that may be produced, as an indirect impact 
linked to the use of new and more equipment, include waste from materials and residual 
Page  5
products as well as pathologic waste. In both cases the health systems as well as the solid 
waste management system are well coordinated and enabled to continue with best 
practices implementations. MSP confirmed that the country is prepared to process a 
hypothetical increase in the solid waste generation originated by an expanded health 
system.  
 
Institutional Capacity  
 
MSP has a clear set of policies and procedures consistent with an appropriate 
environmental management. Health high complexity equipment to be procured is subject 
to comply with all environmental licenses and permits required by Law, and to follow the 
MSP allowances procedures.  
 
The MSP Environmental and Occupation Health Division have already built in 
procedures to screen and assess environmental sensitivity of procurements, so that 
particular recommendations can be made to improve or to mitigate environmental 
impacts  
 
Environmental Management  
 
The compliance of legal framework for hospitals and medical equipment acquisitions 
include a set of terms of reference indicating the need to implement safety protocols. 
These procedures have already been tested, demonstrating an important and solid 
advance in the environmental and safety work management capabilities of MSP.  
 
All equipment to be procured will have to comply with all country environmental 
permits and should identify the environmental risks attached to all functioning and 
maintenance activities, and set up the mitigation measures including the organization and 
resources allocation, if required.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders would be the beneficiaries of the public health system.  The 
environmental evaluation mission reviewed the Environmental Evaluation report 
prepared by MSP which includes information about compliance with legal framework, 
existing environmental management systems and potential impacts, and found it 
acceptable.  The consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies would be done through 
the MSP, using its web page; departmental and local information system to beneficiaries.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/01/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/05/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/07/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
 
 
Page  6
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Luis Orlando Perez 
06/07/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Marcelo Hector Acerbi 
06/07/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keith E. Hansen 
06/07/2007 
Comments:   
