Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/02/2007 
Report No.:  AC2899
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uruguay 
Project ID:  P101432 
Project Name:  UY OSE Modernization & Systems Rehabilitation - APL2 
Task Team Leader:  Carlos E. Velez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 7, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (60%);Sanitation (40%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
18.00
18.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to ensure Uruguayans receive more accountable, 
customer orientated and better value for money, water and sanitation services.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: OSE?s institutional renewal  
 
1. 
This component will finance OSE?s Senior Management?s flagship initiative for 
institutional change and administrative reform of the utility (program VECTOR). The 
Program VECTOR?s objectives are to improve OSE?s transparency, accountability, 
client responsiveness and efficiency. This component will help instill a culture of 
consumer orientation, quality and efficiency, and will help optimize organizational 
processes to cut costs, time and improve productivity and coordination, within a new 
organizational structure ? and culture. In order to facilitate reform, Program VECTOR 
will in effect be responsible for the coordination and integration of a series of discrete 
project based initiatives on behalf of Senior Management. Investments are concentrated 
around 3 lines of activity: Institutional change; technological updates and optimization of 
organizational processes and investments in regional infrastructure Program VECTOR, 
with the help of a Change Management consultancy, will support individual project 
managers lead the reform process in each area, from the participatory development of a 
Page  2
strategic vision, the optimization of technical processes, the formulation of appropriate 
new administrative norms, budgets and staffing requirements, process validation, staff 
training and finally implementation.  
 
2.
Activities supporting institutional change include change management activities 
to support staff during the reforms; a deepening of the internal and external performance 
benchmarking initiated under APL1 (including a tightening of protocols, expansion of 
service quality indicators, and more sophisticated dissemination);  mainstreaming 
strategic planning tools based on reliable indicators for all managers; the development of 
OSE?s own code of ethics and business conduct; and the promotion of innovation 
through Regional staff exchanges and seminars. The optimization of organizational 
processes to enhance OSE?s operational and administrative efficiency include the 
integration of commercial and operational systems; the modernization of human 
resources management and liquidation of assets; the application of up to date financial 
management and procurement systems; and the roll-out of Geographical Information 
Systems. The project will be supporting OSE?s decentralization efforts by enhancing its 
regional environmental laboratory capacity (through the construction and staffing of 10 
regional laboratories). The project will also continue efforts initiated under APL1 to 
strengthen OSE?s environmental unit.  
 
Component 2: Water supply  
 
3.
Reducing Unaccounted for Water (UfW) and increasing revenue collection is at 
the heart of the APL2 project. OSE?s strategy is described in its Plan of Action for 
Unaccounted for Water Reduction Program. This Plan is an integral component of the 
Program VECTOR?s program to improve OSE?s management and efficiency. Both the 
Plan?s operational activities and Program VECTOR?s commercial initiatives will need to 
be implemented jointly, in close coordination. As part of the program VECTOR, a series 
of innovative initiatives will be tested in selected pilot sectors, including Montevideo, to 
help align commercial and engineering incentives to tackle UfW. The performance of 
these various initiatives will be carefully monitored based on a sophisticated UfW 
indicator system which will enable the distinction between physical and ?commercial? 
water losses. Once the costs benefits have been positively assessed, successful initiatives 
will then be rolled out throughout OSE. Efforts to improve UfW will also focus on 
shifting company culture, and raising consumer awareness to promote a national culture 
of paying for water (including communications campaigns focused on large consumers or 
newly regularized settlements).  This integrated UfW package will also continue to 
finance essential physical investments (replacement of distribution pipes, valves and 
household connections; replacement and refurbishment of water meters; and systematic 
leak detection and repair).  
 
4.
This UfW strategy will be accompanied by initiatives to improve drinking water 
quality and water security through the further modernization of the Aguas Corrientes 
water treatment plant. The rehabilitation of Aguas Corrientes Treatment Plant is now 
almost finalized. Under APL2, 8 more rapid gravity filters will be built, along with the 
adaptation of the tank accelerators (including conventional flocculation units and high-
rate sedimentation basins).  
 
Component 3: Expansion of sewerage systems  
Page  3
5. 
This component will pursue the demand-driven expansion of sewerage networks 
initiated in APL-1. Much of the sewerage expansion work originally planned for APL-2 
has already been undertaken under APL-1, which went from targeting 4 to 17 localities in 
the Interior. Of the 27 works contracts awarded, 19 have been completed, and 8 are still 
under execution with OSE?s own financing. Under APL-2, this component will complete 
the requested sewerage expansion works in five of these cities. Following the completion 
of these works, the government now wants to review, in collaboration with OSE, the 
appropriateness of the existing sanitation coverage standards.  
 
6.
This component will also seek to stimulate demand for more household to connect 
to the existing network, to ensure both household coverage and the return on existing 
investments is maximized. This will be undertaken as an impact evaluation pilot, which 
will carefully assess the effectiveness of different strategies in increasing household 
connection rates. The pilot will focus on all cities which received a new public sewer 
extension under the APL1. Alternative strategies will be applied to each locality, to test 
whether financial incentives, social mobilization or both, will provide the most effective 
increases in household connections. Partial subsidies to support in-house reconfiguration 
costs will be financed through Output Based Aid based on selected criteria to be defined 
at appraisal. A 1 million dollar fund will subsidize an estimated 20,000 household 
connections.  
 
7.
Feasibility studies for the treatment of residual liquids (including in Colonia and 
Mercedes) will also be carried out to prepare for the construction of Sewerage Treatment 
Plans under the APL3.  
 
Component 4: Project administration and coordination  
 
8.
Under APL2 this component will continue to provide funding for the following: 
project management; supervision and engineering support; staff exchanges and seminars; 
and audits. The APL1 Project Implementation Unit (ARAPFE) will remain in charge of 
coordinating all external financing, including the implementation of APL2.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Uruguay (Montevideo and the Interior).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Catherine Signe Tovey (LCSUW) 
Mr Jose Alexandre Monteiro Fortes (LCSUW) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No significant adverse impacts are anticipated.  
 
A
preliminary EA was carried out for the entire APL program. No major issues were 
identified. Project specific EA for APL2, focusing on construction works, has been 
finalized. This EA includes the following components:  
 
(i) An evaluation of the adequacy of environmental management rules of the first phase 
for similar works, with recommendations for any strengthening measures based on 
lessons learned during APL1;  
 
(ii) An assessment of all potential impacts associated with the planned investments, as 
well as identification of any mitigation measures, with a particular assessment of 
potential impacts on any known cultural resources (including adequate ?chance find? 
procedures), natural habitats, and human resettlement. The results of these screenings 
confirmed that none of these impacts will occur through any of the project?s investments 
and are documented in the EA.  
 
(iii) An assessment of OSE?s capacity to manage the project safeguards and proposed 
capacity building measures.  
 
(iv) An Environmental Management Plan, including (a) any identified mitigation 
measures for specific investments as needed, (b) implementation responsibilities during 
the construction and operation phases, (c) monitoring arrangements, (d) capacity building 
measures, and (e) and implementation schedule with an adequate budget. OSE?s Works 
Environmental Manual (Manual Ambiental de Obras), which was developed during APL 
1
will continue to be taken into account in the official tendering announcements 
concerned with the works. The Works Environmental Manual (standardized 
environmental rules for contractors) contains ?chance find procedures? for the safeguard 
of physical cultural property.  
 
No major adverse environmental impacts are expected in this phase. As in APL1, most 
impacts are likely to be site-specific. No sensitive issues regarding natural habitats have 
been identified and the project will not require any involuntary resettlement. Specific 
Page  5
safeguards triggered by the Project are (i) OP 4.01 ? Environmental Assessment; and (ii) 
OP 4.11 ? Physical Cultural Resources.  
 
Regarding works in the city of Colonia, the EA evaluated the impacts of an area that is 
considered to be a cultural heritage site for the benefit of humanity. It is expected that 
extending the wastewater networks and strengthening the main collector system will not 
affect the protected zone. A stretch of around 200 meters of impulsion piping exists in the 
public area adjacent to the Amortization Zone (Cautela). OSE has formally consulted the 
?Cultural Heritage Commission for the Nation? (CPCN) which declared itself to be in 
favor of the works, requesting that prior archaeological research should be undertaken 
along the relevant stretch. In addition, in order to conform to the Physical Cultural 
Property, ?chance find procedures? will be adopted as set out in the environmental 
construction manual (Manual Ambiental de Construcci?n) to be included as part of the 
works contract. The participation of an archaeologist during the execution of the works 
will be requested in bidding documents.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No anticipated indirect/long term impacts are anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
None   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
OSE has a long history of working with the World Bank, and has an extensive experience 
of dealing with safeguards. OSE?s safeguards experience was further enhanced during 
the APL1. It is particularly important to note the creation during APL1 of an environment 
unit within OSE. As agreed during the initial design of the APL program, OSE expects to 
further strengthen this environmental unit during APL-2.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
A
public consultation was successfully carried out on 17 April.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/19/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/09/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/01/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  6
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Carlos E. Velez 
04/30/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Jose Alexandre Monteiro Fortes 
04/23/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Catherine Signe Tovey 
04/30/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Leanne Farrell 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
 
Comments:   
