Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2617 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/14/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uruguay 
Project ID: P097604 
Project Name: UY Institutional Building TAL 
Task Team Leader: Mario Francisco Sangines 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 19, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSPS 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (75%);Central government administration 
(25%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Tax policy and 
administration (S);Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
13.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objectives of the proposed Uruguay Institutions Capacity Building Technical Assistance 
Loan (TAL) are two: (i) to achieve improvements in the efficiency and effectiveness of the 
public sector administration, and (ii) to ensure adequate implementation and sustainability of 
public policy reforms.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The TAL would consist of the following components: (1) Customs Modernization; (2) Capacity 
Building for Efficiency in Expenditure; (3) E-Government and Information Society; (4) Support 
for Established Policy Initiatives; and (5) Project Coordination and Strategy Development.  
 
Component 1: Customs Modernization. This component would support the modernization of 
the Customs administration (Direccion Nacional de Aduanas), focusing primarily on human 
resources management and, to a lesser extent, improved Customs procedures. Estimated cost: 
$350,000.  
Page  2
Component 2: Capacity Building for Efficiency in Expenditure. This component would support: 
(i) capacity building for improved monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and clearer linkages 
between results and budget allocations; (ii) improvements to the accounting process and its 
linkages with the budget; and (iii) efforts to reduce the volatility in the budget through improved 
management of legal claims against the State.  Estimated cost: $2.5 million.  
 
Component 3: E-Government and Information Society.  This component would support the 
design of strategies to improve the quality of information and the establishment of an E-
government and Information Society, as well as improving the quality control of information and 
its more efficient use.  It would also focus on e-procurement and support of the animal tracking 
system.  Estimated cost: $1.0 million.  
 
Component 4: Support for Established Policy Initiatives. This component would provide 
technical assistance, including consultancies, training, and institutional modernization, for the 
successful implementation of ongoing policy reform initiatives being supported through the 
Bank's series of Development Policy Loans.  The operation would specifically support measures 
in the areas of tax reform, legal framework for bankruptcies, social protection, and capital 
markets.  Estimated cost:  $6.95 million.  
 
Component 5: Project Coordination and Strategy Development. This component would: (i) 
support all necessary project coordination and monitoring and evaluation activities at the MEF 
and related entities, (ii) support and strengthen the activities of the Comision Presidencial para la 
Transformacion del Estado to design, control, track, and evaluate improvements in public 
management; and (iii) provide technical assistance for the development of new strategies, 
policies, or programs in public sector reform and modernization. Estimated cost: $2.2 million.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Montevideo, Oriental Republic of Uruguay   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Not applicable since the project is not expected to trigger any Bank safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
U
-
Not Rated (for all adjustment operations except for SECA) 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/22/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not applicable since the project is not expected to trigger any Bank safeguard policies.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mario Francisco Sangines 
12/14/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
12/14/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Fernando Rojas 
12/14/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
