Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2362 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/23/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uruguay 
Project ID: P095520 
Project Name: UY Promoting Innovation to Enhance Competitiveness 
Task Team Leader: Kristian Thorn 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 12, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 17, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSHE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Tertiary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project would contribute to the high level objective of enhancing the 
competitiveness of Uruguay?s economy and stimulating growth by adding value to production 
and diversifying exports. Concretely, the project would seek to strengthen Uruguay?s capacity to 
generate, transfer and adapt knowledge and technology by (i) improving the policy framework 
for innovation; (ii) strengthening the supply side through investments in human capital and high-
quality research teams; (iii) building the demand side by supporting technology transfer and 
private sector innovation; and (iv) enhancing linkages between the supply and demand side by 
stimulating cross-sectoral and international research collaboration and mobility of researchers.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would achieve the above objectives through three components: (i) Support for 
Innovation Policies and Institutional Strengthening; (ii) Enhancing Capacity to Generate and 
Transfer Knowledge; and (iii) Promoting Quality and Technology Transfer to the Productive 
Sector  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Support for Innovation Policies and Institutional Strengthening: The component 
would help to establish a coherent policy framework; consolidate and improve existing policies 
and programs; develop a strong monitoring and evaluation capacity; and raise awareness of 
innovation among stakeholders. It will achieve the above through two subcomponents: the 
establishment of the National Innovation Agency and the Innovation Observatory. The former 
will be responsible for project implementation.  
 
Sub-component 1.1: The establishment of the National Innovation Agency would require staff 
training; development of management information systems that will foster an efficient and 
transparent implementation of innovation programs; studies; and dissemination activities to 
promote various innovation instruments to potential beneficiaries. The subcomponent would also 
support the project implementation unit.  
 
Sub-component 1.2: Support for the Innovation Observatory would involve the development of 
monitoring and impact evaluation methodologies incorporating international best practices; 
evaluation and benchmarking studies; stakeholder surveys; policy papers to improve sectoral 
policies and develop new instruments; activities to disseminate studies and raise awareness 
among the general public and the private sector; staff training; and management information 
systems to support the above. In addition, the component could possibly support office 
equipment and building refurbishment for both entities.  
 
Component 2: Enhancing Capacity to Generate and Transfer Knowledge: The component 
would strengthen the capacity to develop new knowledge by promoting (i) excellence in 
research; (ii) the training of young researchers and their early integration in research networks 
and the private sector; and (iii) strengthening priority tertiary education programs.  
 
Sub-component 2.1: The Excellence in Science and Technology Research subcomponent would 
provide grants to universities and other research centers of excellence through open competition. 
It will include several lines to fill different needs: (a) support for large projects conducted by 
research teams of the highest caliber; (b) support for smaller projects in underdeveloped areas of 
strategic importance to Uruguay; (c) support for science and technology projects with high social 
impact; and (d) support to promote the participation of Uruguayan researchers in international 
research groups of excellence including the establishment of networks with highly-skilled 
nationals living overseas. The subcomponent would seek to improve upon previous programs by 
inter alia strengthening the peer reviewer system; providing training opportunities for young 
researchers; supporting the procurement of critical equipment; reducing the administrative 
burden imposed on researchers; and promoting links with international research groups.  
 
Sub-component 2.2: The Formation of Advanced Human Capital subcomponent would support 
graduate and postgraduate studies in accredited national and foreign programs relevant to 
enhancing the contribution of science and technology to Uruguay's economic development, 
including scholarships for master and doctoral students that participate in high quality research 
centers or undertake a substantial part of their thesis work in a private company. In addition, it 
will support the early integration of researchers in the system by cofinancing the insertion of 
young researchers in academia, centers of excellence and the private sector. The latter will fill an 
important gap in the current system by discouraging the migration of highly qualified researchers 
Page  3
and building capacity in the private sector to innovate. Scholarships and other funding will be 
awarded through open competition.  
 
Sub-component 2.3: The subcomponent for Strengthening Priority Tertiary Education 
Programs. The subcomponent would support the establishment or strengthening of technical 
tertiary education programs that are considered of high priority for the private sector but have not 
been sufficiently developed or fall short of international quality standards. The subcomponent 
would be demand driven and would prioritize programs that are developed in consultation with 
private companies and where the academic center is located in close proximity to the productive 
sector. It would provide funding for designing curricula, staff training, scholarships to finance 
visiting international professors, laboratory equipment, and possibly refurbishment of buildings.  
 
Component 3: Promoting Quality and Technology Transfer to the Productive Sector: The 
component would seek to enhance the innovative capacity of firms and promote the adoption of 
new technologies and higher quality standards. It will involve three subcomponents: (i) 
Development of Sector Technology Centers and Quality Services; (ii) Cooperative Research; and 
(iii) Technological Upgrading and Commercialization  
 
Sub-component 3.1: The subcomponent for Sector Technology Centers and Quality Services 
would seek to transfer technology, primarily to SMEs, through the creation or strengthening of 
specialized technology services. Moreover, it would promote the development and adoption of 
new quality standards by strengthening the Instituto Nacional de Calidad, the Laboratorio 
Tecnologico de Uruguay (LATU), the OUA, and other key institutions participating in the 
system. Co-financing from industry would be used to provide an incentive for existing centers 
and institutions to improve quality and offer services based on private sector demand. Support 
could involve staff, technical assistance, laboratory equipment, and development of linkages with 
similar international centers.  
 
Sub-component 3.2: The subcomponent for Cooperative Research would seek to enhance 
linkages between universities, government laboratories, and the private sector to accelerate the 
transfer of knowledge to the private sector and undertake research and development, and 
research training, in areas of importance to the private sector. Matching grants would be offered 
for research projects comprising the participation of academic/research centers and two or more 
firms. All entities participating in a partnership would be required to commit resources.  
 
Sub-component 3.3: The subcomponent for Technological Upgrading and Commercialization 
would provide matching grants to support the design, development, and commercialization of 
new technologies and/or products; enhance production and management processes; and adopt 
higher quality standards by SMEs. It will also support the design and commercialization of new 
products and technologies by start up firms.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would support tertiary institutions, government laboratories and private companies 
located throughout the territory of Uruguay. Most activity is likely to be in the capital area.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  4
No safeguard policy issues have been identified. The project is expected to have a neutral or 
positive impact on the environment. Only research projects and programs that are 
environmentally sound will receive funding. Uruguay has adopted sound environmental 
regulations. Notably, Uruguayan laboratories are required to comply with the principles of the 
Stockholm Accord on persistent organic pollutants (adopted in December 2003), an international 
agreement that sets high standards for the protection of human health and the environment.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Reidar Kvam (LCSEO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/12/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N.A   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Kristian Thorn 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
 
Comments:   
