Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1967 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/09/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uzbekistan 
Project ID: P090105 
Project Name: Ferghana Valley Water Resources Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Masood Ahmad 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 28, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: September 27, 2007 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (80%);General water, sanitation and flood protection 
sector (20%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Other rural development (S);Participation and 
civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 
FOREIGN MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS (UNIDENTIFIED) 
15.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project’s main objectives are to improve water productivity and overall water resources 
management.  Improved water productivity will be understood to mean greater agricultural 
output per unit of water used, and will be achieved through rehabilitation of drainage and 
irrigation systems, improved groundwater management, and measures to support local 
agricultural producers and communities. Improved overall water resources management will be 
measured through increased quantity and reliability of flows in Syr Darya basin on the basis of 
Water Balance studies.  The project’s objectives would contribute to CAS goals of increased 
agricultural production, employment and incomes, living standards and environment.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project Components.  The gross agricultural area in the three participating tumans (Rishtan, 
Baghdad and Altyrayk) in the Ferghana Oblast of Uzbekistan is about 63,000 ha from which the 
project interventions would cover an area of about 30,000 ha.  However, project benefits would 
extend to a much larger area.   However, project benefits would extend to a much larger area. 
Page  2
The project interventions are primarily to improve the drainage and off-farm irrigation systems 
that are largely “public goods”. Improvements in the remaining parts of the FV would be covered 
under subsequent phases of the program. The project is likely to consist of the following 
components:  
 
Component A: Improvement of Irrigation and Drainage Systems. This would consist of re-
construction and rehabilitation of the drainage system in the project area that would improve 
drainage conditions and intercept water coming from the higher lands, reducing waterlogging 
and soil salinization.  The water intercepted would be of a good quality, and it can be discharged 
back into the river for reuse downstream.  Selective improvements in the irrigation and drainage 
channels over an area of about 30,000 ha would be undertaken to improve crop yields and to 
reduce water losses.  Drainage benefits may extend to a much larger area approximately 40,000 
ha to 60,000 ha. Under this component technical assistance would also be provided to the local 
institutions in overall water resources management, irrigation and drainage systems deigns, 
rehabilitation, and operation and management.  The Oblast, Raion and project area level 
institutions would be strengthened including introduction of modern tools for irrigation 
scheduling, conjunctive use of surface and groundwater resources and management of drainage 
effluent.  
 
Component B: 
Groundwater Development. The project area is underlain with fresh 
groundwater.  Much of the area is under artesian pressure due to high water application on the 
adjacent higher lands.  The groundwater aquifer beneath adjacent high lands appears to be 
connected to the low lands in the valley.   The existing groundwater wells would be rehabilitated 
and additional wells would be installed to lower the groundwater level, thus improving 
conditions for cropping and reducing extensive damage to the private and public infrastructure.  
Many of these wells will operate with artesian pressure, however, on some wells pumps would 
be installed. The groundwater from these wells would be reused for irrigation in the project 
area/Ferghana Valley conjunctively with surface water and excess water would be discharged 
into the drainage system flowing back to the river for use further downstream. Groundwater 
development would not only provide drainage benefits but also improve the overall irrigation 
efficiency and timeliness in meeting crop water demand, hence considerably increasing the crop 
yields.  
 
Component C: Community and Agricultural Development Support. The component would 
include development of effective Water Users’ Associations (WUAs) for improving operation 
and maintenance (O&M) and water management, and promotion of improved irrigation and 
agricultural practices.  Necessary technical assistance and training would be provided for the 
development and effective operation of WUAs.  The capacity of Oblast and Raion level 
irrigation institutions would be strengthened enabling them to develop and work with the WUAs.  
The component would also include training in improving irrigation practices, land leveling and 
establishment of demonstration plots, demonstrating improved agricultural and irrigation 
practices and crop husbandry.   Moreover, the project would selectively include some income 
generating activities such as food processing, canning of fruits and other agricultural products, 
and sericulture and silk production to enhance the value of the commodities produced in the 
project area.  
 
Page  3
Component D, Project Management, and Monitoring and Evaluation.  This would include: (a) 
support for project management, design and construction supervision; and (b) monitoring and 
evaluation of the project impact, covering physical, agricultural, social and economic impacts.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Ferghana Valley (FV) is spread over three countries of Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Uzbekistan.  
It has the most fertile soils in Central Asia and the highest population density. The total irrigated 
area in the FV is about 1.4 million ha., about 66% in Uzbekistan, 24% in Kyrgyzstan and 10% in 
Tajikistan.  The total population in the valley is about 10 million of which about 7 million are 
living in the Uzbek part of the Valley.  Therefore, FV is a very important area for Uzbekistan, 
though it occupies only 4% of Uzbekistan’s territory, more than 27% of Uzbekistan’s population 
lives there.  About 37% of the arable land and five out ofcountry’s ten largest cities are in the 
FV.  The main crops in FV are cotton (0.6 million ha) and grain (mainly wheat about 0.5 million 
ha). The FV is plentiful in fruits and vegetables production, fodder and livestock activities which 
are very important income earners for the population. The FV has abundant surface water 
resources, as well as a significant amount of renewable ground water resource.  In fact, the valley 
has excessive water resources and hence drainage in many areas is a major problem, constraining 
the agricultural production.The project would cover improvement in the water resource 
management, especially drainage system improvements in three tumans (districts) in the 
Ferghana Oblast of Uzbekistan.  The total gross agricultural area in the three participating 
tumans (Rishtan, Baghdad and Altyrayk) is about 63,000 ha., from which the project 
interventions would cover an area of about 30,000 ha., but project benefits including the 
associated income generation activities would extend to a much larger area.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Uzbekistan has environmental assessment procedure mechanisms for investment projects, 
including a State Environment Expertise Review.  The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) under 
the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources (MAWR) is responsible for preparation and 
implementation of the FWRMP.  This particular unit has a long standing experience in project 
preparation and implementation of safeguard policies under other ongoing project and in the 
water sector of the country.  Under the Bank/IDA funded projects, this will be the third project 
that the PIU is managing, the other two projects include, Karshi Pumping Cascade Rehabilitation 
Project and the ongoing Drainage, Irrigation and Wetlands Improvement Project both of which 
were rated as category A.  Therefore, adequate project preparation and implementation capacity 
exists in the country, and in the implementing agency.  In addition, Implementation of 
environmental and safety mitigation measures (e.g. covering pollution prevention, protection of 
natural resources, and worker and public safety) will be required from all contractors who will 
have to follow guidelines for environmentally sound construction practices.  These requirements 
will be included in bidding documents and meeting them will be a contractual obligation, which 
will be supervised by construction supervision consultants (the Engineer).  Moreover, the staff of 
the local Environmental agencies would regularly visits project sites to monitor the performance 
of the contractor with regard to environmental conditions.  
 
It should be highlighted that the project would reverse the environmental and land degradation 
caused due to mismanagement of land and water resources and inadequate drainage and hence 
would have an overall positive environmental impact.The project itself is in fact an 
Page  4
environmental management/mitigation program for controlling waterlogging and soil salinization 
by improving the drainage system and water use efficiency on the irrigated land.  Thus there are 
no major concerns that may need to be addressed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Frank Van Woerden (ECSSD) 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
Mr Shahridan Faiez (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental Assessment (EA) will be carried out to ensure that the improvement and 
rehabilitation works will be environmentally acceptable and cause no or minimum damage to the 
environment.  The EA will include an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) aimed at 
enhancing the environmental benefits of the project.  In accordance with the Bank guidelines, the 
tasks under the EA will include: (i) analysis of policy, legal, and administrative framework 
relevant to the proposed project; (ii) collection and analysis of the baseline data on the 
environmental issues and their trends, including issues identified during the implementation; (iii) 
identification of possible negative and positive environmental impacts of the proposed project 
and propose mitigating measures as required; (iv) development of key criteria for environmental 
quality monitoring in the project implementation areas; and (v) review of the guidelines 
developed under project for environmentally sound construction practices, and making 
improvements as needed.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
The Project triggers OP 7.50 as project area lies in Syr Darya Basin which is international 
waterway of which Uzbekistan is a riparian.  The project works are of rehabilitation nature and 
would not result in changes in water quantity or quality, affecting interests of any other riparian.  
Also there is an existing Water Sharing Agreement among the riparian states that governs 
quantity and quality of the Syr Darya.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/15/2007 
Page  5
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/15/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environmetal Assessment Studies will start on and around April/May, 2006 and will be 
completed by February 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Masood Ahmad 
01/01/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
01/17/2006 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards at the PCN stage 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
02/01/2006 
Comments:  Approved 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
