Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/29/2007 
Report No.:  AC2864
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uzbekistan 
Project ID:  P104304 
Project Name:  Uzbekistan - Avian Influenza Project 
Task Team Leader:  Maurizio Guadagni 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date:  
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Health (50%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other communicable diseases (P);Rural 
policies and institutions (S);Health system performance (S);Participation and civic 
engagement (S) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.25 
 
Avian and Human Influenza Facility 
2.96
3.21 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Project is to minimize the threat posed to humans by Highly 
Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) infection and other zoonoses, and to prepare for, 
control, and respond to influenza pandemics and other infectious disease emergencies in 
animals and humans.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A. Public Awareness and Information  
 
Support in development of a communication program aimed at minimizing the risk of 
an avian influenza outbreak and its spreading, by ensuring that citizens understand the 
threat, and are aware of the symptoms, with a view to influencing their behaviors in order 
to protect themselves and their community before, during, and after an HPAI emergency.  
 
Component B. 
 Animal Health  
 
Page  2
Support in prevention, control and total eradication of HPAI among animals through: (i) 
strengthening field disease surveillance and diagnostic capacity of the veterinary 
laboratory; (ii) enhancing animal health planning and coordination capability for HPAI 
prevention; and (iii) strengthening HPAI emergency outbreak containment plans, 
including the establishment of the Compensation Fund.  
 
Component C. 
Human Health  
 
Support for (i) strengthening national public health surveillance systems and diagnostic 
capacity of existing polymerase chain reaction equipment; (ii) enhancing public health 
program, planning and coordination; (iii) strengthening health care system's response 
capacity; and (iv) reducing the potential impact of an emergency pandemic influenza 
virus in humans.  
 
Component D. 
Implementation Support, Monitoring and Evaluation  
 
Strengthening the Recipient’s capacity for Project implementation, monitoring and 
evaluation, including audit, procurement, disbursement and financial management 
activities, including financing of Incremental Operating Costs and consultants for the 
preparation of eventual new projects.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
So far, no avian influenza case has been reported in the country. Therefore, the project 
strategy is based primarily on preventing the entry of HPAI, and introducing rapid and 
effective containment procedures in case of an outbreak. Project location is consistent 
with this strategy. The project focuses on high risk areas, most notably the areas 
surrounding resting sites for migratory birds, as well as border crossings.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr David M. Colbert (LCSSD) 
Ms Amy Evans (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The initial ISDS classified this as a Category “B” project, triggering the Bank’s safeguard 
policy for Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01). The EA confirmed 
the Category “B” designation for the project, finding that the anticipated environmental 
and social impacts of the project’s investments in animal health (i.e. equipment for 
culling and disposal of poultry, rehabilitation of veterinary laboratories) and human 
health (i.e. rehabilitation of laboratory and hospital space for AI diagnosis and patient 
treatment) trigger the safeguard policy. However, the EA found no significant, 
irreversible, cumulative or long-term adverse impacts. On the contrary, the EA identified 
a
preponderance of positive project impacts and only minor negative impacts that could 
be effectively prevented or mitigated through application of appropriate preventive 
actions or mitigation measures.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project’s prevention-focused, public sector capacity-building activities are expected 
to have positive long-term environmental and social impacts by improving Uzbekistan’s 
readiness for dealing with outbreaks of AI in domestic poultry. Certainly project 
investments in facility improvements, equipment, laboratories and training of appropriate 
personnel will improve the safety and effectiveness of existing AI handling and testing 
procedures by ensuring that they meet the international standards established by the 
World Organization for Animal Health. This will be reinforced by the mainstreaming of 
environmental safeguards into the veterinary service’s protocols and procedures for 
culling and disposal of animals during AI outbreaks, as well as the decontamination of 
animal production facilities/areas. Furthermore, the upgrading and institutionalization of 
appropriate laboratory bio-safety practices and procedures will ensure international best 
practice in bio-safety at medical and laboratory facilities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Given the potential threat of an AI outbreak to domestic poultry and public health, there 
were no real alternatives (to the project’s prevention-focused, public sector capacity-
building activities and investments in facility improvements, equipment, laboratories and 
personnel training) to be considered.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In order to comply with the Bank’s EA safeguard policy and the Uzbek requirements for 
state ecological expertise, the Grantee undertook preparation of an EA and EMP for the 
project, with assistance provided by an FAO environment officer. During preparation of 
the EA and EMP, the borrower’s principal implementing agencies, MAWR and MOH, 
amply demonstrated both the capacity and the willingness to plan and implement the 
Page  4
range of preventive actions, mitigation measures and monitoring activities recommended 
by the EA and included in the EMP.  
 
The main EMP recommendations are summarized below:  
 
(a) To provide training and PPEs to veterinary staff, particularly at the oblast and raion 
level, on culling, transport and disposal of infected poultry, farm waste and other 
materials; and  
 
(b) To provide training to veterinary staff, SES laboratory personnel and hospital 
workers on management of laboratory and medical waste.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key institutional stakeholders include the principal GOU implementing agencies, the 
MAWR and the MOH, as well as the SCNP, which provides environmental oversight. 
Other stakeholders include the commercial poultry sector, individual poultry farmers and 
farm families.  
 
The preparation of the EA and EMP included consulting many of the relevant 
stakeholders and beneficiaries of the project during the environmental screening phase in 
November 2006: meeting with officials in the MAWR, the MOH and the SCNP, as well 
as with officials from the commercial poultry sector. The draft EA and EMP were 
subsequently presented to relevant stakeholders and beneficiaries at a roundtable meeting 
in Tashkent on March 20, 2007 where interested institutional parties had the opportunity 
to review the recommendations of the EA and EMP and provide comments. The EA and 
EMP were then made available to the public in Uzbekistan and are now being placed in 
the Bank’s Infoshop in Washington, D.C.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/09/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/25/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/31/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Maurizio Guadagni 
06/27/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Amy Evans 
04/25/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari 
04/30/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Amy Evans 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
06/28/2007 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Maninder S. Gill 
06/29/2007 
Comments:   
