Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1810 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/09/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uzbekistan 
Project ID: P095263 
Project Name: Bukhara Samarkand Solid Waste Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Janis D. Bernstein 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 1, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 31, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Solid waste management (100%) 
Theme: Municipal finance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.50
1.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
To provide a satisfactory level of citywide solid waste management services, while improving  
the technical, financial, and institutional basis for the future operation and development of each 
city's solid waste management system.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed investment would be based on the successful experience of the Tashkent SWM 
Project.  However, the design of the new project will vary slightly to take into account the 
lessons learned in Tashkent and the urgent equipment needs of Bukhara and Samarkand.  A key 
lesson from implementing the Tashkent SWM Project is that it was impossible to obtain an 
accurate estimate of the total quantity of waste generated until a weigh bridge was installed at the 
landfill.  In Uzbekistan, as in many other countries, the tendency has been to overestimate the 
amount of waste generated when planning for system improvements.  Thus, the proposed 
investment is designed to be implemented in two phases.  The first phase would finance urgently 
needed equipment to prevent the system from total collapse, and the purchase of a weighbridge 
for the landfill so that each city could obtain an accurate estimate of the total waste being 
generated.  The first phase also would finance the preparation of a strategic MSWM plan (see 
below).  Once the total amount of waste generated is known, and a strategic MSWM plan is 
Page  2
finalized, the project would finance the remainder of the equipment and other investments.  
Taking into account an assessment of solid waste conditions and management in both cities, it is 
estimated that the total investment cost would be approximately $17.6 million.  It is proposed 
that the project would receive financing from an IDA credit of $16 million.  
 
Component I:  Phase I (US$5.6 million)  
 
.
Sub-Component 1:  Urgent Investments.   Based on the results of a rapid technical 
assessment, the project could finance up to half the current requirements for equipment.  A 
conservative level of investment in Stage 1 is recommended to improve the existing situation 
without fully meeting the estimated requirements for the city until the strategic MSWM plan 
defines the Phase 2 investment plan.  The technical assessment confirmed that the types of 
equipment and bidding documents used in Tashkent are readily adaptable to the situation in both 
cities, and can be prepared prior to Board approval.  
 
.
Sub-Component 2: Strategic MSWM Plan.  The plan would cover a 20-year period 
addressing operations; organizational and institutional arrangements; and legal, regulatory, and 
enforcement systems.  The plan will produce the system design and operational plan, which may 
include a two bin source separation system and waste processing to reduce landfill requirements 
and allow each city to obtain financing from the Carbon Fund.  The plan also will include a 
Medium-Term Investment Plan covering all project investments and components relating to 
institutional development, financial sustainability, and public information and awareness-raising.  
 
.
Sub-Component 3:  Detailed Feasibility and Engineering Design.  This component would 
follow the Strategic MSWM Plan and include preparation of detailed specifications and bid 
documents for Phase II investments.  
 
.
Sub- Component 4:  Environmental Analysis and Follow-Up Social Assessment.  This 
component will include development of a comprehensive Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) for the second phase of the project, follow-up stakeholder consultations as needed, and 
preparation of TOR for public information and awareness-raising plans.  
 
Component 2:  Phase II Investments (US$ 11.1 million)  
 
.
Sub-Component 1:  Institutional Strengthening.  This component will include technical 
assistance and equipment for modern utility and financial management.  
 
.
Sub-Component 2:  Equipment.    On the basis of the medium-term investment plan, 
Phase II will finance the remainder of the solid waste collection bins and vehicles (including 
specialized equipment for biomedical and other special waste).  If included within the context of 
this project, Phase II would finance cesspit cleaning equipment, street cleaning equipment, 
landscaping equipment, computers, and other equipment for meeting project objectives.  
 
.
Sub-Component 3: Landfill Closing and Improvement.  This sub-component will finance 
the upgrading of a landfill in each of the project cities as well as the closing of one or more 
landfills in an environmentally safe and socially acceptable manner as well as waste processing 
and operational equipment.  There is potential to incorporate solid waste composting to obtain 
carbon credits through the World Bank's Carbon Finance Program.  
Page  3
.
Sub-Component 4:  Central Repair and Maintenance Facility.  The facility will involve 
either new construction or adaptation of an existing facility.  
 
Component 3:  Project Management Support (US$.8 million)  
 
This component will finance project management for a period of 5 years.  The financing would 
cover the costs of:  (a) hiring local consultants, including a Project Director located in Tashkent;   
two Hokimiyat Project Coordinators (one in each city), procurement specialist to be located in 
Tashkent, accountant/financial management system specialist (Tashkent); secretary/interpreter 
(Tashkent); (b) short-term consultants with expertise in international financial management,  
procurement, and social assessment, among others; (c) capacity building; and (d) operating 
expenses for smooth management of project implementation activities. Consultants will need to 
be located in Tashkent in order to be able to interact effectively with the relevant national 
agencies involved in project implementation (for example, Minister of Foreign Economic 
Relations, Customs, commercial bank, Cabinet of Ministers, Minister of Finance).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The cities of Bukhara and Samarkand in Uzbekistan.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
While capacity in the past has been generally weak, the country has strengthened its capacity 
during the past few years.  The World Bank provided an IDF grant "Improving the Environment 
Management Capacity of the Republic of Uzbekistan" that among other issues addressed the 
need to upgrade environmental assessment capacity in Uzbekistan through:  
 
(a)  
Preparation and adoption of revised and improved policies, regulations, procedures, 
methodologies, and guidelines, as well as training programs to improve EIA/SEE effectiveness 
and efficiency.  To encourage more active public participation in the EIA/SEE process, the State 
Committee for Nature Protection (SCNP) developed and submitted to the Cabinet of Ministers 
for approval a draft amendment to the Law on State Ecological Expertise passed in 2001 that 
spells out a procedure for conducting public ecological expertise and public hearings, and 
includes a provision making them mandatory in any EIA/SEE process.  While the concepts of the 
public ecological expertise and public hearings were already mentioned in the Law on State 
Ecological Expertise, there previously were no procedures for implementing, or any legal 
requirement for making the public ecological expertise and public hearings mandatory in 
EIA/SEE; and  
 
(b)  
Training of a large group of public and private sector specialists responsible for the 
EIA/SEE process.  The training was organized by a non-profit training institution in Moscow to 
familiarize the local experts with the best international EIA practices.  The training consisted of a 
three-phase program carried out overseas and in Uzbekistan.  The training established a pool of 
skilled EIA experts in Uzbekistan.  
 
Notwithstanding the steps taken to strengthen capacity for handling environmental safeguards, 
it is envisaged that consultants financed under the phase I technical assistance component will 
assist both Hokimiyats in meeting their environmental safeguard responsibilities.   
Page  4
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Janis D. Bernstein (ECSSD) 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The urgent investments in solid waste collection and other equipment do not involve 
environmental risk.  Due diligence on upgrading and closure of currently used landfills will be 
covered in the draft EMP; revised during implementation as specific designs are prepared.  
Provisions for "chance finds" will be included in EMP.  Project funds will be used to design a 
new landfill for Bukhara. Although the project does not provide financing for constructing the 
landfill, an EA may be prepared under this project to start appropriate due diligence.  
 
CULTURAL PROPERTY  
 
Although the project locations are two historically significant Silk Road cities, the project is 
not expected to have any adverse effects on any cultural properties -
–
to the contrary, the 
removal of waste piles will enhance the aesthetic quality of the historic parts of these two cities 
and improve sanitary and environmental conditions.  
 
INVOLUNTARY RESETTLEMENT  
 
All civil works are expected to be on government-owned land; no land acquisition is 
expected.  Income-generating activities of "rag-pickers" will not be negatively affected.  OP/BP 
4.12 is therefore not triggered.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/30/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Prior to appraisal, the Draft Environmental Management Plan will be revised and disclosed 
under Component 1; sub-component 4.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Janis D. Bernstein 
12/19/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
12/22/2005 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
01/09/2006 
Comments:  Cleared -- the Bank has experience in SWM support in Uzbekistan and a team 
experienced in this field 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
