Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/06/2006 
Report No.:  AC1939
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Venezuela, Republica 
Bolivariana de 
Project ID:  P085458 
Project Name:  Venezuela-Expanding Partnerships for the National Parks System 
Task Team Leader:  Juan Pablo Ruiz 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 7, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: February 27, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Forestry (100%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (P);Indigenous peoples (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(S);Environmental policies and institutions (S);Other economic management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.00 
 
FOREIGN PRIVATE COMMERCIAL SOURCES (IDENTIFIED) 
0.00
20.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project Development Objective is to implement an effective co-management model 
in the Canaima National Park (CNP) project area supporting natural resource risk 
prevention, sustainable natural resource use practices and preservation of cultural and 
biological diversity.  The Global Environmental Objective is to ensure conservation and 
sustainable use of the CNP project area's globally important biodiversity.  The CNP 
project area, to include CNP and 2.6 million hectares of buffer zones is located in the 
ancestral lands of the Pemon and other smaller indigenous groups. The emphasis of this 
project is on prevention rather than restoration.   
 
3. Project Description 
Consolidating CNP and effectively integrating indigenous communities in the Park's 
decision making and benefit-sharing processes is a priority to the Bolivarian Republic of 
Venezuela and a strategic objective to be used in the consolidation of Venezuela's 
National Park System. Long-term conservation of the National Park System and its 
Page  2
associated ES requires a new integrated management model that effectively mitigates 
threats and prevents future natural resource degradation.  
 
Total project cost is US$26.0 million, US$6.0 million of which is being requested from 
the GEF. The project will have four components: (i) Implementation of Co-Management 
Model; (ii) Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Use Programs; (iii) Indigenous 
Life Plan Implementation; and (iv) Project Management and Replicability. The first 
component of the project is primarily concerned with developing the institutionality and 
tools for moving forward with a new co-management scheme in the CNP project area, 
including long-term financial sustainability, and effective participation. The second and 
third components finance on-the-ground investments, including those focused on 
biodiversity conservation/sustainable NRM, and those proposed and executed by 
indigenous groups and contained within their own Life Plan.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Canaima National Park (CNP), located in southeastern Bolivar State and spanning 3 
million hectares, hosts nearly 120 endemic genera, 2 endemic families and 117 
endangered species (Huber, 1997). CNP's massive table-top mountains, known as tepuis, 
were classified by Dinerstein et. al (1995) as one of two Globally Outstanding and 
Relatively Intact ecoregions in Latin America. Indeed, CNP was declared a Natural 
World Heritage Site in 1994 due to its singular scenery and globally valuable species 
such as endemic plants and animals restricted to montane and tepui formations.  
 
The project area (CNP project area) will include CNP and 2.6 million hectares of buffer 
zones  known as Areas under Special Administration Regimes (ABRAE). Total ABRAEs 
span 18.3 million hectares of continuous natural habitats acting as a major biological 
corridor for genetic flow in the Guyana Shield (spanning parts of Colombia, Venezuela, 
Brazil, Guyana, Suriname and French Guyana). Additionally, CNP's well-conserved 
watersheds supply 45% of the hydric resources of the Caroni River, the most important 
hydroelectric resource in the country.  
 
Although 85% of CNP is comprised of pristine natural habitats with relatively intact 
vegetation, the park faces many threats to its unique biodiversity and fragile ecosystems, 
including roads, growing tourism, deforestation, mining and colonization. The national 
parks institute (INPARQUES) manages an area 50% larger than El Salvador and equal to 
Belgium with scarce financial resources and a poor institutional presence. An effective 
management model is essential to integrate two key stakeholders (the Indigenous 
Federation of Bolivar State, or FIEB, and state-owned hydroelectricity company CVG 
EDELCA), leverage substantial financial and institutional resources and counteract 
degradation of CNP's outstanding biodiversity.  
 
The project area is located in the ancestral lands of the Pemon and other smaller 
indigenous groups. Indigenous inhabitants in CNP are estimated at 28,000 to 30,000, 
95% of which belong to the Pemon culture. Key priorities for these communities, 
included in an Indigenous Life Plan drafted during project preparation, are to conserve 
Page  3
their lands' natural resources, support environmentally-friendly production and obtain 
land titles. Recent land demarcation and titling efforts have been supported by provisions 
in the 1999 National Constitution, laws regulating collective territorial ownership 
(including the Guaicaipuro Mission), and support from NGOs such as The Nature 
Conservancy (TNC).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy (LCSEO) 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01).  The project is classified as Category B, 
requiring a partial Environmental Analysis. The EA, which was undertaken by 
INPARQUES, found that as the project will result in improved conservation of 5.6 
million ha supporting globally significant biodiversity, project activities are expected to 
be environmentally beneficial. While the project could result in minor environmental 
impacts associated with implementation of subprojects (such as ecotourism, sustainable 
agriculture, artisan production, construction of small-scale park-related infrastructure, 
and possibly other activities consistent with the management plan) such impacts will be 
managed through a process that includes environmental assessment of subprojects, 
including screening subprojects and sites to minimize potential impacts. Likewise, the 
project will take efforts to refurbish existing facilities rather than build new ones, where 
possible, and ensure that Project investments are selected according to established 
strategies developed by the Co-Management Committee, reflecting lessons learned in 
related GEF projects.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) and Forests (OP 4.36).  The project is fully consistent with 
the Bank's Natural Habitats and Forests policies. It would not cause, nor facilitate, any 
significant loss or degradation of forests or other natural habitats. On the contrary, the 
project is intended to arrest current levels of biodiversity and natural vegetation cover 
Page  4
degradation by improving the protection and management of natural habitats and forests 
within the project area. Through Component 1, the project will: (i) design a participatory 
co-management structure and elaborate a Co-Management Plan for CNP, integrating 
indigenous communities' traditional values and knowledge and (ii) support capacity-
building and training for key stakeholders, including Park personnel. Such activities are 
intended to result in improved natural habitat conservation and management. Through its 
Component 2, the project will undertake threat mitigation, biodiversity and socio-
economic monitoring, conversion of unsustainable use practices and restoration activities. 
The Park's Monitoring System will contain key indicators to monitor the restoration and 
preservation of natural habitats and forests in CNP in support of the Bank?s Policies. 
Component 3 (Indigenous Life Plan Implementation) will support productive, yet 
environmentally sustainable sub-projects and capacity-building activities, seeking the full 
integration of the indigenous communities to CNP's decision making and management 
and incorporating ancestral practices regarding fire and sustainable forestry management. 
As mentioned above, all subprojects supported through the project will be screened to 
ensure they do not result in unintended environmental impacts to natural habitats.  
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09).  The project is fully consistent with the Bank's Pest 
Management Policy. The project will support the use of biological or environmental 
control methods and reduce reliance on synthetic chemical pesticides within CNP, as part 
of its biodiversity conservation strategy. When working with indigenous groups, the 
project will support the use of cultural practices. The project will support controlling 
pests primarily through environmental methods and will support organic production. 
When this is not feasible, the project implementation team residing in the Co-
Management Committee will finance the use of pesticides for control of disease vectors, 
following IPM Bank application. Procurement of pesticides will be consistent with a 
'positive list' included within the project's Operational Manual, and the project includes 
technical assistance funds to support training in Integrated Pest Management (IPM). The 
Co-Management Committee will be responsible for the application of the Bank's IPM.  
 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03).  Some of the conservation areas to be supported under 
the project contain significant archaeological, historical, or other cultural patrimony. The 
preservation of cultural sites or relics will be considered a crucial element in CNP's Co- 
Management Plan. All activities financed will be developed under the CNP Co-
Management Plan, where the preservation of important cultural sites or archaeological 
property is considered crucial within CNP. Chance finds or known cultural sites affected 
by the project will be referred to the appropriate government agency that deals with 
antiquities and cultural heritage. The project will also protect indigenous peoples' 
intellectual property when framed as ancestral knowledge of their natural resources. The 
project will support studies to properly identify cultural sites and indigenous knowledge 
and design measures to support their protection, which will be included in the project 
Operational Manual.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12).  According to the information provided (PAD, 
Social Assessment and Plan de Vida PEMON) and as stated by the document titled 
Mitigacion de Impactos Potenciales en las Condiciones de Vida, the preliminary social 
Page  5
assessment confirmed that the activities to be included in the Management Plan within 
the Protected Area do not involve restrictions to natural resource use that could 
potentially impact local indigenous communities. No physical displacement of any 
people will take place under the project.  The operationalization of the Plan de Vida as 
part of CNP's Co-Management Plan will assess the magnitude of such restrictions, and 
will include a Monitoring System for the project's implementation, according to each 
community's case. The project will put in place capacity building for indigenous 
organizations and communities, will support land titling studies and sustainable 
livelihood activities. At the institutional level the project will support participatory 
project implementation and supervision by legitimate indigenous peoples representatives 
(FIEB/ Comite), and will establish a system for monitoring social conflicts.  
 
However, in the event that the ways of life of communities inhabiting in or near the 
project area might be affected through restraints on natural resource use, the Process 
Framework, to be included in the Operational Manual, describes the procedures that will 
be followed to ensure that the quality of life of affected persons will not be negatively 
affected. This will be achieved primarily through the participatory development and 
implementation of the park's Co-Management Plan through which alternative livelihood 
mechanisms will be supported (including sustainable production systems and 
ecotourism).  
 
Indigenous Peoples (O.D. 4.20).  The project is being undertaken together with the 
indigenous communities, comprised mainly by the Pemon culture, and the FIEB. The 
project will not cause any adverse effects on Indigenous Peoples residing in or near 
project areas. Project execution would support co-management agreements and their 
implementation in CNP, conservation activities with indigenous communities, and local 
welfare improvements through access to training and productive projects. The project has 
a
framework of cooperation and indigenous community participation. Through the early 
involvement of indigenous community members and leaders, the project incorporated this 
framework at project design and defined participatory implementation arrangements. The 
Indigenous Life Plan developed during the PDF-B stage reflects the consensus reached 
on project activities and agreements among indigenous communities. This framework 
seeks consensus to define specific actions aimed at the welfare improvement of 
communities and the conservation of protected area. An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) 
was developed and approved by the Bank describing the measures taken to ensure there is 
no impact on indigenous groups, and outlining potential conflict resolution mechanisms 
in the unlikely event that conflicts arise.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect or long term negative impacts are expected as a result of the project.  On the 
contrary, the positive environmental and social impacts --summarized from the IPP-- 
include:  
 
For indigenous peoples: benefits will be both direct and indirect: (i) traditional 
indigenous zoning plans to develop sustainable practices and biodiversity conservation 
Page  6
within the park and buffer zones will be reflected in the park's Zoning and Use Plan; (ii) 
environmental sub-projects will benefit local indigenous peoples and result in enhanced 
conservation of natural resources; (iii) cultural and traditional knowledge will be 
preserved through educational programs; (iv)  land tenure will be more secure through 
technical training and elaboration of documents  for legal demarcation and titling, and (v) 
capacity will be enhanced through training on natural resource management, ecotourism 
and sustainable productive projects.  
 
For governmental agencies: the project will promote participation in decision-making 
processes when following up on the execution of co-management agreements  
 
For all social groups in the project area: the project will improve their living conditions 
through:  
 
-Establishing long term conservation of the National Park System  
 
-Promoting broad stakeholder participation and co-management  
 
-Creating and enhancing co-management capacity.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
A
Life Plan (Plan de Vida) was developed with indigenous leaders as well as a workshop 
on Safeguard Policies, where all project activities and impacts were discussed with local 
communities and consensus was reached regarding indigenous community involvement 
in the project.  
 
Regarding potential environmental impacts, the project will: i) consolidate core areas by 
designing and implementing the Co-Management Plan, ii) undertake conservation, 
restoration and adequate management strategies to safeguard existing forests; iii) monitor 
vegetation cover by implementing measures that prevent its reduction, and iv) assist in 
the conversion of unsustainable practices.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
During the preparation of the project and the various workshops held, the World Bank 
Safeguards were communicated, increasing support among the beneficiaries and key 
stakeholders, namely the FIEB, INPARQUES and CVG EDELCA, during the 
elaboration of the Life Plan.  
 
Additionally, with regard to indigenous peoples, the following indicators will be used to 
measure project effectiveness and participatory strategy:  
 
-Activities underway in the CNP project area addressing at least 30% of the Indigenous 
Life Plan's cultural preservation objectives, as evidenced by baseline, MR and EOP 
socio-economic surveys  
 
-Indigenous zoning and use plan elaborated with leaders by PY2, consistent with CNP's 
Zoning and Use Plan, and disseminated to 8 sectors by PY5.  
 
-10 cultural strengthening, scientific and traditional education projects executed and 
meeting social, ecological and economic sustainability criteria by PY5.  
Page  7
-Necessary technical studies undertaken to support indigenous land demarcation and 
titling in at least 35% of CNP by PY2 and 100% by EOP.  
 
-Extensive/unsustainable cattle ranching expansion stopped in areas under threat, 
compared to baseline, by PY5.  
 
-12 productive projects (i.e., ecotourism and agro forestry) executed and meeting social, 
ecological and economic sustainability criteria, by PY5.  
 
-Increase in the number of indigenous people involved in sustainable production 
practices (i.e. ecotourism and agroforestry) by PY4.  
 
These indicators will be achieved through culturally appropriate processes, in 
accordance with consultations that took place with indigenous peoples' leaders and 
community members.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are:  the National Parks Institute (INPARQUES), Electrificadora del 
Caroni (CVG Edelca), and Federacion Indigena de Bolivar (FIEB).  
 
Extensive stakeholder consultation and disclosure of the Bank's SPs took place during 
project preparation and will continue throughout project implementation, particularly 
among indigenous men and women, who were specifically targeted. These included 
phased consultations. The first phase included eight workshops attended by 613 
indigenous representatives. The second phase included workshops to disseminate and 
validate results and which were attended by representatives from 99 communities. In both 
phases, workshops were attended by 95% of the communities' leaders (ex-captain 
generals, community captains and elders). Workshops were conducted in Spanish and 
local languages. The information collected in the process defined the environmental 
component of the Life Plan, as well as the formulation of programs and projects. The Life 
Plan includes five components that cover a number of topics, some of which will be 
financed by the GEF and others to be financed by other governmental institutions.  
 
The IPP, Resettlement Framework and EA will be disclosed locally and through the 
InfoShop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/06/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/06/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/06/2006 
 
Page  8
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/06/2006 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/06/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/06/2006 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
N/A 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Yes 
Page  9
Manager review the plan? 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
No 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Juan Pablo Ruiz 
10/19/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Douglas J. Graham 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
 
 
Comments:   
