Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/12/2006 
Report No.:  AC1615
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P079663 
Project Name:  Mekong Regional Health Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  Samuel S. Lieberman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 15, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 9, 2006 
Managing Unit:  EASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (90%);Non-compulsory health finance (10%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Population and reproductive health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
7.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project aims to improve health services in the Mekong region and to enhance access 
to and coverage of these services, especially for the poor through: (i) strengthening the 
health financing policy framework and increasing the financial accessibility of health 
services for the poor and near-poor; (ii) improving the availability and quality of curative 
care, including responsiveness to changing disease patterns; (iii) increasing the capacity 
of preventive health activities; and (iv) building the capacity of the health workforce. The 
project therefore blends support for demand for health care services among the poor and 
near poor with outlays that address supply-side opportunities and needs while  building 
physical and human resource capacity.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of five components:  
 
Component 1:  Protecting the Poor and Near Poor (US$8.00 million)  
 
This component aims to support the central and provincial government efforts to ensure 
access to health care services for poor and near-poor households.  To this end, it will 
support capacity building for the management of provincial HCFPs by providing decision 
makers and staff training and consulting services for the HCFP to help develop 
management models; find ways to identify newly defined target beneficiaries; strengthen 
Page  2
coordination and collaboration among involved agencies; improve the flow of 
information; and develop an information technology system. It will also mobilize 
technical assistance to help MOH and VSS identify key issues and constraints for the 
shift from supply- to demand-side financing. To foster the expansion of health insurance, 
the component will support coverage of catastrophic health care costs for the poor and 
near poor through pilot schemes in three to four provinces.  It will inject resources to 
finance above-ceiling health costs as well as consulting services to identify eligibility 
criteria, benefits packages, and other parameters. It will also support assessments and 
impact evaluations. Pilot schemes will be undertaken in other provinces, resources 
permitting.  
 
The component will also support enrollment of the near-poor in the voluntary health 
insurance scheme. The project will develop a financing support model that introduces 
improvements into the recently adjusted voluntary health insurance scheme. It will then 
support selected provinces in testing the model through direct financing for capitation 
payments to help lower the costs for the near poor of enrolling in voluntary health 
insurance. It will also finance evaluations of implementation experience and impact as 
well as support replication or scaling up.  
 
Finally, the component will support innovative pilot schemes to improve the 
effectiveness of the HCFPs. Such schemes could establish targeting mechanisms to better 
reach ethnic minority people, ensure access to services for mobile populations such as 
migrant laborers, or set-up public-private partnerships in health care for the poor. 
Provincial health departments will prepare work programs with a detailed description of 
the pilot schemes they wish to undertake. The project will also finance evaluations of 
these innovative pilots.  
 
Component 2. Curative Care Quality and Capacity (US$38.0). This component aims to 
improve the quality and capacity of hospital services in the Mekong region. The 
component will support investment in equipment for provincial hospitals and the regional 
hospital (RH) and in a region-wide hospital information system (HIS). The provincial 
hospitals will be supported through a two-stage investment. The first stage will ensure 
that provincial hospitals can provide an essential level of care, and the second stage will 
allow provincial hospitals to expand selected clinical services in response to demand. The 
regional hospital will be supported through investment in essential specialty services, 
based on patient demand, to fulfill its designated role as a referral and teaching center. 
The hospital information system will be supported through investment in software, 
hardware, and training to improve information about the performance of individual 
hospitals and about disease patterns for health planning across the region. To complement 
these hospital investments, the project's HCFP component provides demand-side support 
and the human resources development component provides the necessary training inputs.  
Ultimately, the component will result in improved patient outcomes by improving quality 
of care and will reduce out-of-pocket household expenditures on health care by reducing 
referral and bypassing rates.  
 
The two-stage investment process is a distinctive feature of the proposed Project. In the 
second stage, provinces will submit equipment proposals for review by the Central 
Page  3
Project Management Unit and Regional Advisory Committee. The review will consider 
expected trends in demand for services as well as projected numbers of poor, supply 
constraints, and performance of the province in the project. These proposals will guide 
the reallocation of funds between provinces, between components, and between items of 
equipment within the component. This process will therefore provide flexibility in project 
allocations, link support to demand and performance, and promote competition among 
provinces.  
 
Component 3:  Preventive Health (US$6.5 million)  
 
This component helps build the capacity of t
he
region’s preventive health system to 
address long-standing and emerging infectious disease threats as well as new health 
challenges arising from economic growth in the region.  It will invest in laboratory 
capacity and will support the implementation of an improved surveillance system in the 
Mekong’s 13 Provincial Preventive Medicine Centers (PPMCs).The investment in 
laboratory capacity will be through equipment for essential services in all provinces and 
for more advanced services in the Can Tho PPMC. Support to the region’s surveillance 
system will be through financing computer hardware and installation of surveillance 
software.  These investments will be complementary to reforms in the Preventive Health 
system at the national level and to investments in the remaining provinces of Vietnam 
through the ADB Preventive Health Services project. In particular, national-level 
surveillance software will be developed under the ADB project.  Satisfactory completion 
of this software will be a condition for Project disbursement for surveillance.  
 
Component 4:  Human Resources Development (US$8.0 million)  
 
This component aims to improve the capacity of the health workforce to deliver quality 
health services, especially for the poor and near-poor.  It will do this by financing training 
activities for health teams at different levels of the health system, by supporting the 
CTUMP in delivering and organizing priority training activities, and by piloting non-
training human resources (HR) initiatives.  Importantly, this component provides the 
training inputs to complement investments in the Curative Care and Preventive Health 
components to ensure efficient use of new equipment.  Training activities for local health 
staff will be determined through a bottom-up planning exercise looking at linkages to 
services for the poor and near-poor, skill gaps based on demand and projected population 
growth, and skills needed for project-financed equipment. Support to the CTUMP will 
include training teaching staff to develop new or supplementary teaching capacities 
crucial for the training needs of local health staff, and the provision of essential teaching 
equipment. Non-training HR initiatives will include an HR planning exercise to help pilot 
provinces understand the existing HR situation and to make strategic choices in 
addressing labor market constraints, including schemes to bring in health workers from 
outside to address staff shortages in poor areas.  It will also finance an HR information 
system for planning, monitoring and evaluation in the region.  Each initiative will 
initially be piloted in one or two provinces and findings and lessons learned will be 
shared among all 13 provinces at the mid-term and a second-round of proposals from 
other provinces will be considered.  
 
Page  4
Component 5.  Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$6.0 million). This 
component will support the establishment and operations of the Central Project 
Management Unit (CPMU), Local Project Management Units (LPMUs), and Regional 
Advisory Committee (RAC) by funding: (i) consulting services to cover technical issues 
as well as procurement, financial management, and disbursement; (ii) training of project 
management staff; (iii) provision of office equipment; and (iv) incremental operating 
costs. This component will also finance data collection through baseline, mid-term, and 
end-of-project data.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project would be implemented in the 13 provinces of the Mekong Delta Region.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
D.1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.  
 
Environment. The project would not have any significant environmental impacts. The 
project is financing equipment and training to improve health care diagnosis and delivery, 
which would have positive environmental health outcomes. The project?s support for 
medical equipment would lead to an increase in medical waste and therefore the need for 
its proper handling and disposal. A Medical Waste Management Plan was developed by 
the Borrower to address these issues, and the main recommendations have been 
incorporated into the project design for implementation.  
 
Social. The proposed project will improve access to and use of quality health services in 
the disadvantaged Mekong region, especially for the poor. It will support the HCFP and 
Page  5
upgrade health care system and improve preventive health services in the region. The 
project will contribute to achieving the central goal of the health sector of Vietnam in 
ensuring access, equity and quality in health care. The main beneficiaries will be the poor 
and also rural-based low-income persons, who are not currently beneficiaries of the 
government HCFP. The project would contribute to poverty reduction by improving 
health status and also labor force capacity of the poor and near poor people.  
 
According to the 2003 figures, 12.36% of the Mekong region?s population belongs to 
one or more ethnic minority groups. The three largest groups are Khmer (more than one 
million), Chinese (about 202,000) and Cham (13,000). The project will have no adverse 
impacts on these, rather they will benefit from the project. An Ethnic Minorities Policy 
Framework (EMPF) has been developed to provide guidance for measures to ensure that 
they will fully participate in and benefit from the project in a manner culturally 
appropriate to them. An Ethnic Minority Development Plan for the whole project will be 
developed before project starts.  
 
An EMDP is being prepared based on the principles and guidance of the Policy 
Framework. Initial consultations with the ethnic minority groups and preliminary 
analyses of the culture, health and socio-economic situation of the ethnic minorities in the 
project areas indicated the need for the EMDP to focus on identifying all the possible 
impediments of the ethnic minorities from meaningfully participating in the project and 
receiving culturally appropriate benefits. These may include language limitations, 
differential health care needs/habits or generally low level of education of the ethnic 
minorities in the project area, etc. The EMDP will also propose the mitigation measures 
of these possible impediments to maximize the opportunities for the ethnic minorities to 
participate in and benefit from the project.  
 
The project will not finance civil works. The remaining construction activities of the 
regional hospital and planned renovation work of the PPMCs will not involve additional 
land acquisition, and so there is no issue of resettlement.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment. The Borrower prepared a draft health care waste management plan 
(HCWMP). The HCWMP covers regulatory requirements for medical waste 
management, the institutional arrangements for their implementation, and specific 
practices at the health care facilities that will receive assistance under the project. The 
HCWMP also provides recommendations for improving the handling and disposal of 
Page  6
medical waste, to be implemented under the project, and the topics of handling and 
disposal of medical waste will be included in the university training program. Vietnam?s 
legal and institutional framework for environmental and social safeguards has shown 
significant improvement in recent years, however institutional capacity remains weak.  
 
Social. The Borrower prepared an Ethnic Minority Policy Framework (EMPF). The 
EMPF will guide the preparation and implementation of Ethnic Minority Development 
Plan (EMDP). It sets out objectives and guidelines for the design and implementation of 
project provisions regarding ethnic minorities to ensure they receive project benefits that 
are culturally appropriate and gender and inter-generationally inclusive.  It also provides 
guidance for processing documents required during preparation, implementation, and 
evaluation of the project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main stakeholders are local inhabitants typically from lower income groups who use 
hospital and preventive health services supported by the project. Stakeholders also 
include the key relevant institutions of 13 Mekong provinces (i.e., Provincial People?s 
Committees, Provincial Health Bureaus, and other involved provincial institutions), 
CTUMP, Regional Hospital, Vietnam Social Security and MOH. Extensive consultations 
with different stakeholders including representatives of ethnic minorities have been 
carried out during project preparation. A framework for consultation has been be 
included in EMPF to guide further consultation with ethnic minorities during project 
implementation process to ensure they will fully participate in and benefit from the 
project. Disclosure of EMPF has been done in accordance with the Bank requirements.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/08/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/12/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/11/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/08/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/12/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/11/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  7
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Samuel S. Lieberman 
12/20/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Phillip Brylski 
12/21/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Lan Thi Thu Nguyen 
12/21/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
12/21/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Fadia M. Saadah 
12/21/2005 
Comments:   
