Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/24/2007 
Report No.:  AC2995
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P096418 
Project Name:  Land Administration Project 
Task Team Leader:  Susan S. Shen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 5, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASRE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (P);Other public sector governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
25.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
5.00
30.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective is to increase access to land information system by all 
stakeholders through development of an improved land administration system in selected 
provinces of Vietnam.  This objective will be achieved through ensuring that land users, 
including businesses and households, have access to more efficient and reliable services 
from land administration.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will finance, over a period of five years, the following main components and 
activities in nine provinces  
 
Component 1.  The Modernization of the Land Registration System Component would 
support the development of an accurate, current, and complete information system to 
support land registration through (i) completing and updating all cadastral mapping 
showing all land parcels; (ii) completing and updating all records for land ownership and 
land use; (iii) developing and implementing information communication technology 
Page  2
(ICT) to store, access and update land registration and land use information; and (iv) 
supporting the implementation of data standards and protocols.  
 
Component 2. The Improvement of Land Registration Service Delivery Component 
would support improvement of land registration office service delivery; provision of 
access to land registration and land use data through all land registration offices; and 
implementation of a program to promote awareness by the public of land information 
availability and participation in the processes to complete and update land records and 
surveying.  Under this component, nationally consistent service standards and 
mechanisms for data access would be developed and implemented.  To address the 
sustainability of funding for land registration service delivery, this component would 
undertake a study on different financing models.  
 
Component 3. The Support to Project Management and M&E Component would 
support overall implementation of the project through activities aimed to strengthen 
project management capacity and enhance monitoring and evaluation to provide timely 
feedback for management actions.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Nine provinces will participate in the project.  Three are located in the Mekong Delta area 
(Tien Giang, Ben Tre and Vinh Long), three in the Central Coastal area (Binh Dinh, 
Khanh Hoa and Quang Ngai) and three in the Red River Delta (Ha Tay, Hung Yen and 
Thai Binh).  There are around 250,000 ethnic minority people from 8 ethnic groups in the 
project provinces.  The three project provinces located in the South Central Coast include 
upland districts with a high to very high share of indigenous peoples in the population. 
The project would only support registration of urban, residential and agricultural land.  
Forestry land, other land planned for forest sector use and land under dispute are being 
addressed separately, and out of the scope of the project.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Issues:  
 
The project is rated category C since it poses minimum environmental risks.  The 
project is expected to have positive environmental impacts through improving the quality 
and quantity of environment-related information in the land register which will be 
available to key stakeholders including the government ministries, NGOs, and others.  
Increased information sharing among agencies is expected to lead to improved planning 
and programming in government tasks ranging from land use planning to natural disaster 
prevention and management.  
 
Social Safeguards:  
 
By modernizing the process of land administration in Vietnam, it is expected that the 
gap in available information between household residents (including ethnic minorities) 
and enterprises will be reduced since land registration and land transactions will be a 
more transparent.   Not only is this expected to increase the competitive edge of smaller, 
private businesses (since they will be able to make more informed investments thereby 
enabling them to compete with State or the larger, corporate sectors.  The project is also 
expected to enable rural and remote households to avail of similar land 
registration/tranaction systems such as those available to urban residents.  While land use 
planning is not a design aspect of the project, access to land use plans and land 
registration systems will increase as a key domain of information.  With earlier 
information on upcoming projects and possibly higher compensation levels, those 
affected by land development projects, especially the rural and urban poor, would be in a 
position to make better preparation to secure alternative housing and livelihood 
opportunities.  
 
The project will fund the re-issuance of land use right certificates in areas which 
currently do not have up-to-date land surveys. It will also, in some cases, issue 
certificates in newly surveyed areas.  The social development outcomes of these are as 
follows: (i) the new certificates (in the names of both husbands and wives) are expected 
to strengthen the status of women vis a vis their land rights and social status; (ii) 
households (especially female headed) could secure loans by mortgaging individual land 
parcels whereas existing certificates covering multiple land parcels constrain access to 
credit; and (iii) in urban areas, the development of the formal land market could trigger 
development of housing options appropriate to the urban poor such as low-income rental 
housing.  
 
The project is also expected to lead to positive social outcomes for the ethnic minorities 
living in the uplands of South Central Coast included in the project area, mostly in Quang 
Ngai Province (as of preapraisal).  The project provides an opportunity to pilot land 
administration services in the provinces in general, but also specifically for upland areas 
Page  4
where ethnic minorities live and land administration services are currently lagging 
behind, adding to the issue of land disputes between ethnic communities and enterprises 
or migrants.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
A
risk that modernization of land administration supported under the project might 
further deepen differences between land user categories was identified early during 
project design.  It relates to the fact that weaker stakeholder groups (which includes the 
poor and ethnic minorities) typically have less access to land information and services.  
To address this issue, the project design specifically accounts for the categories of the 
poor and vulnerable (ethnic minorities in uplands, women etc).  
 
Some accidental alteration of existing land use rights as a result of updating land survey 
and cadastral records might occur in areas with active land conversion out of agriculture. 
To avoid this, an enhanced participation process has been integrated into the project 
implementation manual and will be disseminated through project training courses.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The possibility of financing only the mapping, surveying, and collection of data for land 
records and not the issuance (or re-issuance) of LURCs was considered and rejected.  
Project support to LURC issuance will among other positive consequences facilitate 
greater transparency and accountability in the land administration system, because the 
implementing entities will be required to fully account for the outputs of surveying and 
land records updating.  A participatory mechanism to avoid any alteration of existing land 
use rights is being designed for inclusion in the land registration process as well as a 
grievance mechanism to back up the legal complaint system.  
 
The possibility to deliver more simple services specifically tailored to the lower capacity 
of upland areas was considered and rejected since the legal framework in Vietnam favors 
full territory coverage with consistent public services.  Instead, the project's progress 
monitoring system allows for early identification of districts potentially lagging behind in 
service provision and one of the studies looks at the financial sustainability of services 
with attention to these districts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In Vietnam, the regulatory framework for dealing with environmental and social 
safeguard issues has become more aligned with WB standards over the last ten years.  
The creation of the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment in 2002 has focused 
attention on environmental/social issues related to environmental protection and land use.  
Continuous capacity development of MONRE is being supported by a number of donors 
including Sida and ADB.  
 
Page  5
The Borrower has undertaken formal consultation with ethnic minority stakeholders at 
national, district and commune levels.  An Ethnic Minorities Peoples Planning 
Framework (EMPF) has been prepared since specific project activities in each of the 
districts will only be planned after the project has started.  Specific measures have been 
included in this framework.  They will increase interaction between land administration 
staff and indigenous communities.  Indigenous peoples will access relevant information 
on land from locally-designed grassroots activities with translation into local languages in 
combination with videos and other modern media.  The national land administration 
website will make legal and administrative information on topics of relevance to land and 
indigenous peoples broadly available to those serving as information providers for ethnic 
minority areas.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
A
participatory social assessment was undertaken during project preparation.  The 
findings from this confirmed the interest among stakeholders to gain improved access to 
information and services in two priority topics: (i) land registration and (ii) land use 
plans.  The public awareness and communication subcomponent has been designed on 
the basis of the preferences and communication constraints indicated in the survey.  
During preparation, national and international NGOs have been invited to attend three 
national stakeholder workshops.  Individual consultations have taken place.  The Center 
for Legal Research and Services, LERES, a national NGO active in promoting the 
issuance of joint husband and wife land use right certificates with World Bank support, is 
one of the NGOs that have participated during project preparation.  The project builds on 
this initial successful initiative to expand issuance of these improved certificates on a 
large scale.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/03/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/04/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/18/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  6
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Susan S. Shen 
10/19/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
10/19/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Claude Saint-Pierre 
10/17/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
10/19/2007 
Comments:   
