Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
1
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 6, 2007
 
Report No.: 40848
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P104528 
Project Name: East Meets West Foundation 
(EMWF) GPOBA Vietnam Rural Water Supply 
Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Xavier Chauvot de 
Beauchêne 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: September, 2007 
Managing Unit: GPOBA 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Rural Water Supply and Sanitation 
(90%);Sub-national government 
administration (10%) 
Theme:  Access to improved piped rural water 
supply services 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  Mrs. Hoa Thi Mong Pham (Social) and Ms. 
Trang Thi Phuong Nguyen (Environmental).  
GPOBA Amount: Base case scenario US$3 million, high case scenario: US$5 million 
Other financing amounts by source: co-financing from final users  
US$0.5 million 
B.  Project Objectives 
 
The project development objective is sustained improvement in water services in the project-
assisted communities (communes and hamlets).  Affordable and reliable water service, coupled 
with improved hygiene and sanitation behavioral change (HSBC) will lead to better quality of life 
from improved environmental sanitation and improved community health, particularly for the 
rural low-income families, many of whom now have very limited access to sufficient quantity of 
good quality water that is reliable and affordable.  The proposed project will build upon EMWF’s 
ten years of experience providing technical and management support to construct 93 piped 
water systems in the Central Region provinces where this project will be implemented. 
 
The overall outcome of the project will be improved community health and socioeconomic 
status. A complementary EMWF-financed program will further improve community 
environmental sanitation conditions through a targeted program supporting construction of 
sanitary latrines, and improved hygiene and sanitation behavioral change (HSBC).  The HSBC 
program will build upon the availability of clean water to encourage project beneficiaries to 
construct and use sanitary latrines, and properly dispose of solid waste and household waste 
water.  These interventions are expected to produce: 
 
1
Guidance for achieving 
compliance with Bank’s ten safeguard policies is provided in Sourcebooks and 
Guidebooks accessible through the “
safeguards
”
Intranet site. 
Page  2
·
Health benefits from reduced exposure to environmental risks posed by unsafe water 
(reduced morbidity and mortality rates 
–
especially in infants); 
·
Economic benefits from reduction in medical expenses to treat water borne diseases, 
increased productivity and capacity to work due to reduced morbidity and associated 
reduction in sickness related absence from work, reduced household expenditure of 
clean water (water tariff lower than cost of many alternative sources). 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
The project will consist in subsidizing development of rural water schemes in order to provide 
access to safe, reliable and financially sustainable water services in rural areas of Vietnam. It 
will focus initially on the mainly coastal provinces of Quang Nam, Quang Tri, Quang Binh, and 
Thua Thien Hue, and other provinces may be added in later years of the project, depending on 
funds availability.  The EMWF Clean Water Program is already underway in each of those 
provinces.  As a result, EMWF has developed substantial political capital that will help expedite 
active support and cooperation from the local authorities, who play important roles in mobilizing 
communities to participate not only in the consultation process, but also to encourage 
beneficiaries to support the need for full cost recovery water tariffs and consumption based 
payments.  
 
Each water system will consist of a water treatment plant, storage tower, pumps, drilled 
boreholes (or other suitable water collection such as small surface water diversion gravity flow 
systems, or rainwater catchment), water treatment (e.g. de-sedimentation, filtration, flocculation, 
aeration where iron is a problem, chlorination, and improved in-house water storage and 
filtration where required), electrical controls, and transmission and distribution pipelines through 
the community service area.  
 
During the first year, the project is expected to develop schemes in 20 communities, with an 
average number of beneficiaries ranging from about 2,000 – 6,000 persons (approximately 400 
-
1,500 households - HHs).  EMWF will provide support for system design, procurement of all 
required goods and materials, community consultation, motivation and training, identification 
and training of water managers, and technical assistance for major repairs or extension 
planning, if and when required.  Every HH wishing to connect to the water system will meet the 
following obligations:  
 
·
Pay for the water meter, valves, pipe and fittings from the distribution line to their house, 
and dig the trench for their own house connection (supervised by EMWF Construction 
Supervisors to make sure all HCs are properly installed and leak-free); 
·
Contribute labor for digging and backfilling the transmission and distribution pipeline 
trenches, the labor for which will be equitably divided among all the participating HHs;  
·
Pay in full each month the cost of piped water consumption as indicated by their 
household meter, based on a water tariff that will be calculated (and periodically updated 
as necessary) to cover the full anticipated cost of maintenance, repair and salaries for 
water managers; and 
·
Be willing to participate in the hygiene and sanitation behavioral change (HSBC) 
promotion activities. 
 
Local government will provide the following at no cost to the project: 
 
Page  3
·
All land required for the water storage tower, all associated equipment and a small office 
for the water managers, and rights of way for the water pipelines; 
·
Legal access to water sources to be developed (including groundwater) 
·
Convenient access to a power transformer with good quality and reliable electricity (to 
maximize the longevity of the electrical equipment, especially the pumps); and 
·
Active support for project promotion in the beneficiary communities, and within local 
government decision-making agencies. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project activities will take initially place in the provinces of:  Quang Nam, Quang Tri, Quang 
Binh, and Thua Thien Hue.  The project has identified 20 suitable communities for the first year 
of operation, based on community willingness and ability to pay, feasible water source 
(adequate quantity, quality, proximity, and legal access). The remaining communities will be 
identified during implementation. Additional provinces may be added in the later stages of the 
project. 
 
E.  Bo
rrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
Based on its 15 years of working experience in Vietnam, and ten years implementing the Clean 
Water Program, EMWF’s institutional capacity for community consultation, established 
relationships with the local authorities at all levels, water engineering design, supervision, 
construction, operation and maintenance, and training of technical specialists (two local Water 
Managers are hired to operate, maintain and repair each system, and collect and allocate water 
tariffs), EMWF is well qualified to carry out this proposed project.  In addition to its current 12 
full-time staff (not including numerous pipe fitters and storekeepers, nor the 196 trained Water 
Managers – two responsible for O&M at each of the 94 CWP piped water systems), the EMWF 
Clean Water Program (CWP) is now in the process of expanding its staff to include the following 
additional staff: water design engineer, electrical engineer, environmental specialist, three 
additional construction supervisors, two additional site supervisors, and an MIS specialist.  
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[
X] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
4.01)  
The project triggers the World Bank’s Environmental Assessment Policy 
(OP4.01). A framework EA has been prepared to evaluate potential negative 
impacts of the Project. It concluded that there are potential safety, construction, 
and operation related adverse impacts (including water source protection, 
management of collected sediment filtered or precipitated from water sources, 
use of chlorine for water disinfection) that are minor, largely reversible, and can 
be mitigated through easily implemented measures, as described in the 
environmental management plan that has been developed. Potential 
subprojects will be screened against a negative checklist (included in the EA 
Framework) and projects triggering certain safeguard policies will be 
disregarded. In addition, as described in the EA, a short subproject EA will be 
prepared for each subproject, to ensure appropriate mitigation measures are in 
place in case any negative impacts materialize. All subprojects will be reviewed 
and approved by appropriate local authorities (DONRE).  
Page  4
Moreover, practical and simple environmental guidelines will be developed for 
the project through requirements for the construction contractors and local 
Water Managers, and associated standard operating procedures. These 
guidelines will be incorporated into the construction contracts and the project 
Operations Manual for the Water Managers (two at each site), the local 
communities, EMWF and the Bank/GPOBA. In addition, monitoring and 
reporting will be undertaken during implementation as part of the program by 
the OBA Technical Auditor, in addition to EMWF and the World Bank.
 
[
]
Natural Habitats
(
OP
4.04)  
 
[
]
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
4.12) 
The nature of the systems to be built makes it very unlikely that
 
resettlement be 
triggered. This has never occurred at any of the previous 94 rural water 
systems built by EMWF in Vietnam.  However, in case any subproject involves 
land acquisition, the project will adopt the approved Resettlement Policy 
Framework, developed under the VUWSDP and acceptable to the Bank. EMWF 
asked for appropriate Provinci
al People’s Committees’ adoption of this 
Resettlement Policy Framework in each of the four provinces concerned by the 
Project, as appropriate.
 
[
]
Indigenous Peoples
(
OP 4.10
)
Indigenous people do exist in the project 
provinces, but it is very unlikely that they will be affected by the project.  This is 
because they typically live in small and widely dispersed communities, and are 
typically unwilling to make the required cash and in-kind contributions for the 
water system construction, nor the required consumption-based monthly water 
payments.  This is in part due to the heavily subsidized services (schools, 
housing water, and electricity) already made available to them by the local 
authorities. Nevertheless, in case any subproject does involve indigenous 
people, the project will adopt the Ethnic Minority Policy Framework developed 
under the VUWSDP and acceptable to the Bank. EMWF asked for appropriate 
Provincial People’s Committees’ adoption of this Ethnic Minority Policy 
Framework in each of the four provinces concerned by the Project, as 
appropriate
 
[
]
Forests
(
OP
4.36)
.
[
]
Safety of Dams
(
OP
4.37) 
 
[
]
Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11) 
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
7.60)  
[
]
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
7.50)
.
Page  5
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[] A   [
X
]
B
[
]
C
[
]
FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to 
determine that EA category (mandatory): 
 
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-
stage ISDS would be prepared.  September 2007. 
 
B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the 
PAD-stage ISDS. N/A 
 
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed.  The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage 
ISDS. As indicated above, a framework EA has been completed; subproject EAs will 
be prepared in accordance with the guidelines set in the framework EA, upon 
identification of each subproject.  
 
IV. APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Name: Xavier Chauvot de Beauch
êne Date: 
August, 
6 
2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Name: Panneer Selvam 
Date: August 7, 2007 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Name: Patricia Veevers-Carter 
Date: August 6, 2007 
Comments 
