Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2555 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/27/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P099460 
Project Name: Demonstration of PCB management and disposal 
Task Team Leader: Helen Chan 
GEF Focal Area: Persistent Organic 
Pollutants 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 15, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 9, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (70%);Power (30%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P);Environmental policies and 
institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
13.39 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
11.26 
 
SWITZERLAND: SWISS AGENCY FOR DEV. & COOP. (SDC)0.60
11.86 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective is to put in place a PCB management system that reduces the risks to 
Vietnam's people and ecosystems posed by contamination from unmanaged PCBs. The project's 
impact on policy and institutional development will include a strengthened and more operational 
policy framework, better rationalized institutional roles and responsibilities, and improved 
awareness and capacity to implement public sector mandates in PCB management and the 
Stockholm convention. The demonstration of environmentally sound PCB management will 
result in improved handling, transport, collection, storage and final treatment and disposal of 
PCBs both in demonstration areas and nationally.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project consists of three components:  
 
Page  2
Component A. Policy and Institutional Development (US$ 0.58M). The objective of this 
component is to develop an adequate policy and institutional framework for PCB management in 
Vietnam. The project would support:  
 
a. 
Improvements to the policy framework, through amendments laws and regulations on 
PCB management;  
 
b.
Rationalizing the institutional responsibilities for PCB policy development and its 
implementation through adjustments to the existing framework;  
 
c. 
Training for provinces and key ministries on implementation of PCB-related provisions 
of the Stockholm Convention  
 
Component B.  Demonstration of environmentally sound PCB management (US$ 21.85 M). 
The objective of this component is to demonstrate all aspects of PCB management from 
analytical testing, handling and transport to collection, storage, and disposal in the power sector 
in selected provinces in the country. The component would support:  
 
a. 
PCB capacity building. Improvement of protocols and procedures for PCB testing;  
 
b.
Establishment of inventory capabilities and inventories, and site surveys where 
equipment containing PCBs are stored to determine levels of contamination;  
 
c. 
Improvement of maintenance standards and management of existing PCB transformers 
and capacitors under EVN's power grid rehabilitation. Many transformers and capacitors that 
contain PCBs are in use throughout the country in the power grid and within industrial facilities. 
Through this rehabilitation program, leaking or damaged PCB equipment will need to be 
replaced or retrofitted/refilled with non-PCB oils. PCB oils from this equipment must be 
properly handled and treated.  
 
d.
One or more methods for treatment and disposal of PCBs, based on a feasibility analysis 
of the best available technique not entailing excessive cost (BETNEC). The treatment options to 
be considered include chemical treatment, other emerging technologies, and export to other 
countries in the region that possess the technology.  
 
e. 
Improvements to existing storage facilities (or construct new ones if upgrading of 
existing facilities are not financial viable) that contain old PCB-containing transformers and 
capacitors to meet environmental protection needs, and provision of protective equipment and 
training for workers.  
 
f. 
Pilot remediation of contaminated sites if appropriate. If sites identified in (e) are found 
to be contaminated with PCBs and if they pose significant risk to human health or ecosystems, 
the project will consider piloting remediation measures based on the most cost effective 
methodology to minimize their existing and potential impacts to human health and the 
ecosystem;  
 
g. 
Training for provincial authorities, line ministries, and State Owned Enterprises, customs 
authorities, and companies dealing with hazardous wastes for the activities listed above, and for 
worker safety training, emergency planning and preparedness, particularly for the those 
installations in populated areas, including schools and hospitals;  
 
h.
Public awareness and information campaigns targeting communities around PCB storage 
sites; and  
 
i. 
Design of a replication strategy for the Vietnam PCB management program which would 
address PCB oils and equipment in other sectors, measures and options to minimize 
Page  3
environmental and health risk in contaminated areas including dump sites, old brick factories 
using PCB oils as fuel.  
 
Component C. Project Management (US$ 2.8 M). This component would provide incremental 
financing for implementation of the project, incremental operating cost of the PMU for technical 
services, procurement, financial management, and audit, and monitoring and evaluation. The 
PMU would also develop and implement the replication strategy.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would be implemented in selected provinces, but these have not yet been identified. 
The locations for demonstration sites will be determined during project preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Vietnam Environmental Protection Agency (VEPA, within the Ministry of Environment and 
Natural Resources) would be responsible for the project components related to policy and 
regulatory management. Electricity Vietnam (EVN) and its subsidiary power companies would 
be responsible for implementation of demonstration sites in close collaboration with VEPA. 
Other industries that will participate in the project will be identified during preparation.  
 
EVN has implemented a number of Bank credits (TD1, SEIER, RE1), and is experienced with 
the Bank's guidelines regarding the preparation of EIAs, EMPs, and EMDPs, as well as 
mitigating environmental and social impacts.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Trang Phuong Thi Nguyen (EASEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental Assessment will be developed to assess potential adverse and beneficial 
environmental impacts of the project. An Environmental Management Plan will summarize the 
measures to mitigate adverse impacts, the institutional responsibilities for mitigation, and the 
costs. The EA and EMP will be prepared in accordance with World Bank requirements.  
 
If rehabilitation of storage sites is determined as a part of the project, separate site 
rehabilitation plans for each site will be prepared based on the guidance of the EIA and EMP.  
 
An environmental and economic analysis of PCB disposal alternatives will be carried out to 
inform decision-making on the appropriate PCB disposal methods.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The project would finance improvements to storage facilities that are currently owned and 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
operated by EVN. During project preparation, the team will determine whether improvements to 
storage facilities would involve land acquisition.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/10/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
To be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Helen Chan 
10/26/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
10/27/2006 
Comments:  Plese check to ensure that appropriate E&S staff are assigned to work on the task team, 
especially as relates to the potential resettlement aspects of the project 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Magdolna Lovei 
10/27/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
