                                                                                                                                                                                                           43655


Authorized
                                                                                                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                                                                                                               APPRAISAL STAGE

          Disclosure                                                                                        I. Basic Information
                                                                                                            Date prepared/updated: 04/24/2007                                       Report No.: AC2497
                    Public
                                                                                                            1. Basic Project Data
                                                                                                            Country: Vietnam                                 Project ID: P083588
                                                                                                            Project Name: Mekong Delta Transport Infrastructure Development Project
                                                                                                            Task Team Leader: Simon David Ellis
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: October 10,            Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2007
                                                                                                            2006
                          Authorized
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: EASTE                             Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                                                                                                                             Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: Roads and highways (40%);Ports, waterways and shipping (40%);General
                                    Disclosure                                                              transportation sector (20%)
                                                                                                            Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (P);Rural services and infrastructure

                                              Public                                                        (P);Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Small and medium
                                                                                                            enterprise support (S)
                                                                                                            IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
                                                                                                            IDA Amount (US$m.):            207.00
                                                                                                            GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
                                                                                                            PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
                                                    Authorized                                              Other financing amounts by source:
                                                                                                                    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                 74.00
                                                                                                                    AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development25.00
                                                                                                                                                                                       99.00
                                                              Disclosure                                    Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
                                                                                                            Simplified Processing                            Simple []            Repeater []
                                                                        Public                              Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)            Yes [ ]      No [X]

                                                                                                            2. Project Objectives
                                                                                                            The development objective of the project is to: (i) reduce transport costs and facilitate
                                                                                                            trade by improving the main inland waterways and road corridors in the Mekong Delta
                                                                                                            region; (ii) improve rural mobility of goods and people by providing year round basic
                                                                                                            access to these corridors; and (iii) strengthen the effectiveness of transport institutions to
                                                                              Authorized                    plan and manage multi-modal transport infrastructure and logistics.

                                                                                                            3. Project Description
                                                                                                            The Project will have four main components.
                                                                                        Disclosure

                                                                                                             Component A: National Road Corridors (US$87.9 million)
                                                                                                  Public     The component will improve the standard of national trunk roads connecting the main
                                                                                                            economic hub of the Mekong Delta. There are two sub-components:

 (i)    National Road Corridor Improvements, amounting to approximately US$82.55
million, will rehabilitate existing alignment by widening and upgrading the roads to a
Class II, Class III or Class IV standard of approximately 94 km of national highways
(including 13.52 km under NH 53, 40.85 km under NH 54, and 43.89 km under NH 91).
Works will also include construction of 22 bridges, provision of culverts and raising the
road levels where required in flood prone areas; and

 (ii)   Financing for Detailed Engineering Designs and Construction Supervision for the
national road component, estimated to cost approximately US$5.32 million.

 Component B: National Waterway Corridors (US$86.9 million)
 The component will improve the standard of trunk waterways connecting the Northern
and coastal delta areas to Can Tho and HCMC. There are two sub-components:

 (i)    Improvements to National Waterway Corridors, amounting to approximately
US$81.44 million will support investments on the main supply corridors to improve the
standard and connectivity of the canal network, concentrating on links in both the
Northern Trans Mekong corridor (253km) and the southern coastal corridor (148km).
These corridors will be improved to Class III standard and include dredging to the
required widths and depths, bank protection in selected areas, a ship lock, bridge
improvements (raising and rehabilitation) and provision of 24-hour aids to navigation.
The improvements will help improve region-wide accessibility, relieve congestion on the
main corridors, reduce transportation costs and support economic development in the
provinces; and

 (ii)   Financing for Detailed Engineering Designs and Construction Supervision for the
national waterway component, estimated to cost approximately US$5.43 million.

 Component C: Connecting the Poor to the Supply Corridors (US$84.2 million)
 The component will improve the feeder waterways, roads, ports and landing stages at
the district and provincial levels to link poorer and more distant producer communities to
the main supply corridors. The following four sub-components will be directed to this
objective:

 (i)    Investments in Provincial Feeder Infrasructure, amounting to US$73.9 million
will focus on connecting the secondary road network to areas of high economic activity
centers and areas with high poverty concentration in the Mekong region to the main
transport corridors. A total of 205 km of secondary roads, including 78 bridges, will be
upgraded to an all-weather standard in the thirteen provinces. Improvements will be
carried out along the existing alignments by upgrading the roads through providing
structural overlays, or through complete reconstruction where the existing road structure
has collapsed or where they are earth roads. The component will also finance the
improvement of two feeder canals in An Giang and Ca Mau provinces with a total length
of 58 kms. The improvements, estimated to cost US$1.06 million, will include widening
and deepening of the canal sections to a class IV standard, bank protection in selected
areas, raising of bridges where required and provision of aids to navigation.

 (ii)   Investments in Provincial and District Ports and Landing Stages, amounting to
US$5 million, will finance enhancements to existing provincial ports infrastructure, and
may include new wharfs, storage areas, road access or equipment to improve existing
throughput and efficiency. It will also finance new infrastructure in the form of 5 rural
landing stages to facilitate access to rural producers to the main transport networks, and 2
provincial river ports.

 (iii) Design, Supervision and Advisory Services will support the 13 project provinces
in their design and supervision of works, project management, reporting and capacity
building requirements. The design and supervision services will be procured by each of
the 13 provinces, amounting to approximately US$2.75 million. The other services will
finance technical assistance and advisory services for the development of a regional
support centre to be based at the Southern Transport College in Can Tho in the amount of
US$2.5 million. This support centre will provide provinces with help on general project
management but also with their training needs, including budgeting and planning,
procurement, financial management and safeguards issues.

 Component D: Institutional Support to Ministry of Transport (US$6.45 million)
 Four sub-components will provide institutional support to the Ministry of Transport
(MOT):

 (i)    Support to MOT on Developing Multi-modal Transport To enhance the efficiency
of multi-modal transport, the project will support the relevant departments in MOT in the
development of appropriate policies and planning frameworks. The consulting services
are estimated to cost US$1.5 million.

 (ii)   Institutional support to Vietnam Inland Waterway Administration (VIWA). To
more effectively carry out its roles and responsibilities as managers of the inland
waterways network in Vietnam the project will finance support to VIWA. The consulting
services are estimated to cost US$1.5 million.

 (iii) Training. To finance training in the areas mentioned above (US$0.95 million).

 (iv)   Project Audit Services, costing approximately US$1.0 million will facilitate two
types of independent audits: (a) Integrated Project Implementation Audit Services, in
which independent consultants will be procured to conduct semi-annual reviews that
provide heightened fiduciary, safeguards and general project monitoring; and (b) a
Project Financial Audit, in which independent external auditors will conduct annual
project financial audits.

 (v)    Preparation for future projects The sub-component will finance the detailed
design services for the Northern Delta Transport Development Project, in the amount of
US$1.5 million.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project would be implemented in locations throughout a 4.2 million hectare area of
the larger Mekong Delta. All 13 Mekong Delta Provinces will be participating in the
project, i.e. Dong Thap, Tien Giang, Long An, Ben Tre, Vinh Long, Ca Mau, Soc Trang,
Hau Giang, Ca Mau, Kien Giang, An Giang, Tra Vinh and Bac Lieu.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Ronald D. Zweig (EASRE)
   Mr Chaohua Zhang (EASSO)
   Mr Quang Ngoc Bui (EASSO)
   Mr Vinh Quoc Duong (EACIF)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Efforts have been made to avoid and mitigate resettlement impacts. However, the project
is anticipated to pose severe resettlement impacts due to required land acquisition for
rehabilitation, improvement and widening of national and provincial roads and
waterways, including some bridges and ship-locks.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:



3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Ministry of Transport (MOT) will establish a Project Steering Committee (PSC) to
address cross-ministerial issues, multi-modal issues and to monitor implementation
progress. The Department of Planning and Investment within MOT will act as Secretariat
for the PSC and be responsible for overall coordination and oversight of project
implementation, including: (i) coordination and liaison between the Project Implementing
Agencies and other ministries; (ii) monitoring the Project's progress; (iii) review of the
technical and financial audit reports, social and environmental monitoring reports, the
Project evaluation and monitoring reports, and the Project related studies, and (iv)
ensuring that the Project related policy and institutional reforms are achieved.

 Direct responsibility for project implementation and day-to-day management oversight
will be allocated to 15 operating sub-organizations within the MoT: (i) Project
Management Unit-1 (PMU-1) for Component A; (ii) Project Management Unit-
Waterways (PMU-W) for Components B and D; (iii) 13 Provincial Departments of
Transport (PDoTs) for Component C.

 Both PMU-1 and PMU-W have experience with implementing previous World Bank
projects and are familiar and capable to implement the safeguards elements. Most
provinces in the Delta also have experience with Bank projects, however the project will
finance an advisory consultant and a regional support centre to provide training in all
aspects of project implementation. Independent consultants will also be appointed to
monitor safeguards as part of an integrated review of overall project implementation.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was developed in accordance with Vietnam
laws and World Bank OP 4.12. Safeguard documents prepared in accordance with this
framework for the whole life of project will be subject to review by the World Bank. Two
Resettlement Plans (RPs), one for roads and one for waterways, are prepared for the first
year subprojects in accordance with the RPF. The RPs have been prepared in close
consultation with Displaced Persons (DPs), relevant local authorities, and key
stakeholders.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08/23/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  08/23/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08/23/2006
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                   03/19/2007
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08/18/2006

  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 08/18/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  08/18/2006
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     08/18/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 08/18/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  08/18/2006
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)        Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the        Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector      Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process            Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector      Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's     Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a     Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project Yes

  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the        Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the          Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?



  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                           Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                 Mr Simon David Ellis                        03/15/2007
Environmental Specialist:         Mr Ronald D. Zweig                          03/15/2007
Social Development Specialist     Mr Chaohua Zhang                            03/15/2007
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Mr Juan D. Quintero                         03/19/2007
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                   Ms Junhui Wu                                03/19/2007
 Comments:

