Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2185 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/22/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P099376 
Project Name: Tax Administration Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader: Duc Minh Pham 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 1, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: September 6, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASPR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme: Tax policy and administration (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
30.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed project is to implement a sustainable tax revenue 
collection system for Vietnam that will: (i) improve revenue collection to ensure a sustainable 
level of public expenditure; (ii) improve governance, in particular through reducing the potential 
for corruption and increasing compliance of tax administration with the laws in force, and (iii) 
improve the business climate by developing and implementing a taxpayer service culture and 
reducing the compliance burden for taxpayers.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would build on the tax administration reform plan. It would support the 
implementation of the key elements of the plan and further expand and roll out the reforms 
required to modernize tax administration and enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of tax 
collection. Tax collection will be based on voluntary compliance facilitated by an appropriate 
combination of taxpayer service and assistance programs, with strengthened audit and 
enforcement capacity. The introduction of self-assessment, the organization of tax administration 
along functional lines, re-engineering and computerization of business processes, and the 
introduction of best practice human resource management policies are key elements of the 
Page  2
reform. The Project would entail an investment over a period of 5 to 6 years needed to achieve 
the stated objectives. The project would have four main components:  
 
a) 
An institutional development component that would deal with the reorganization of tax 
administration to match new operational requirements; strengthen the legal and regulatory 
framework; improve human resource management, and develop a strong focus on integrity.  
 
b)
An operational development component that would improve the operational processes 
and strengthen the operational functions in all phases of work, from registration, declaration and 
payment processing, to the downstream activities of audit, enforcement, arrears collection, 
taxpayer services and dispute resolution .  
 
c) 
An ICT Development component that would procure and tailor an Integrated tax 
Administration Information System (ITAIS) and procure an ICT infrastructure to support the 
modernized tax operations.  
 
d)
A
project management component that will lay special emphasis on change management 
in tax administration, ensure timely and efficient application of resources, carry out procurement 
and financial management activities of the project, and interact with all local and international 
entities involved in project execution.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Subject to specification during the project preparation, the project location would be the head 
office of the General Department of the Taxation (GDT) in Hanoi, and most of the tax offices in 
all the provinces and districts.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
This is the first time, the GDT prepares and implements an IDA project.  But MOF, to which 
GDT belongs to, has demostrated good capacity for IDA project preparation and implementation, 
including the safeguard policies. GDT can learn lessons from on-going projects in the sector, 
including the Public Fiance Management and the Customs Modernization.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Phillip Brylski (EASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  3
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  08/15/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Duc Minh Pham 
03/07/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Phillip Brylski 
03/07/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
