Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3037 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/02/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P103238 
Project Name: Renewable Energy Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Anh Nguyet Pham 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 10, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 4, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASVS 
Lending Instrument: Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector: Renewable energy (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Climate change (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
102.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
3.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Borrowing Country's Fin. Intermediary/ies 
24.00 
 Sub-borrower(s) 
53.00
77.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed project would be to increase the supply of least-cost 
electricity to the national grid from renewable energy sources on a commercially sustainable 
basis.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
(A) Renewable Energy Investment Component  
 
Subcomponent 1: Credit to Support Renewable Energy Investments (total financing $182 
million, of which IDA $100 million)  
 
Up to 5 PBs would be selected on competitive basis, using criteria based on on standard 
financial performance benchmark, willingness and commitment of management and potential to 
improve their capacity to lend to the sector. Renewable energy sub projects 
–
small hydro, wind 
and biomass – would be selected and financed by participating banks (PBs) based on their own 
appraisal of the subproject. The PB would bear the full credit risk of the funds. A facility, 
financed by the World Bank on IDA terms and located in Ministry of Finance, would allow a PB 
Page  2
to refinance up to 80% of its loan to a subproject based on eligibility criteria that would be 
developed during preparation. The eligibility criteria would be a means to ensure that the 
subprojects meet best international practice in technical, environmental and social terms, and 
meet minimum levels of financial and economic performance. An administrative unit (AU) 
would be hired to manage disbursement on behalf of the Government and to ensure that 
subprojects meet the refinancing eligibility requirements.  
 
Subcomponent II:  Technical Assistance for Investment Project Implementation (total financing 
$2 million, of which $1 million IDA, $1 million cofinanced by TF )  
 
A
technical assistance (TA) facility would be established to support all participants 
–
the AU, 
PBs, and SHPs. The TA facility will be managed by MOI and would focus on ensuring that 
project sponsors had the necessary skills to identify good projects and prepare proposals for 
bankers, navigate the approval process, and negotiate financing. It would support the PBs by 
enabling them to understand the risks of investment in renewable energy projects, and hence 
prepare credit policies for this kind of project, and then appraise sub-projects against those 
policies. The technical assistance would also assist the AU to evaluate projects against the 
eligibility criteria.  
 
(B) Regulatory Development Component  
 
(Total financing $3 million of which $1 million IDA, $2 million cofinanced by TF )  
 
This component will provide technical assistance to strengthen regulations and build capacity of 
MOI, Electricity Regulatory Authority of Vietnam and other relevant government agencies for 
renewable energy development. Activities would include: (i) technical assistance in 
strengthening the legal framework for renewable energy development; (ii) capacity building for 
preparation and enforcement of regulations; and (iii) further pipeline development.  It would also 
be managed by MOI.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Subprojects would be located in various provinces throughout Vietnam   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Subproject sponsors and Participating Banks are unlikely experienced with implementation of 
the Bank safeguard policies. They will be provided intensive training and capacity building to 
meet their needs during preparation and implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (EASSO) 
Ms Phuong Thi Thanh Tran (EASVS) 
Ms Lan Thi Thu Nguyen (EASVS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Individual sub-
projects are expected to have low or medium level of impacts on environment.  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
It is not clear yet whether sub
-
projects have any impact on natural habitats. This issue will be 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
assessed during preparation.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
It is not clear yet whether sub-projects have any impact on forests. This issue will be 
determined during preparation.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
It is not clear yet whether subproject have any impact on physical cultural resources. This 
issue will be determined during preparation.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Some subprojects are expected to have impacts on indigenous peoples.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Subprojects are expected to have impacts on involuntary resettlement.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Some subprojects are expected to trigger safety of dams issue.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/21/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/21/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The frameworks for environment assessment, resettlement and compensation, ethnic 
minority development and dams safety for the project will be initiated in August 2007 and 
completed in May 2008.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Anh Nguyet Pham 
06/14/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Harikrishnan Panneer Selvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
 
Comments:   
