Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC587 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/01/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P083588 
Project Name: VN-Mekong Transport Infrastructure Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Simon David Ellis 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 20, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: January 11, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (40%);Ports, waterways and shipping (40%);General 
transportation sector (20%) 
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Small and medium 
enterprise support (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall goal of the proposed project is to support economic development in the Mekong 
Delta and to reduce poverty in that area. To achieve this goal, the Project aims to improve supply 
chain efficiency for the production, and domestic trade of the region. It will relieve bottlenecks 
on the main supply chain and better link the poor to that supply chain. Specific Project objectives 
are:  
 
*
to reduce transport costs from points of production to points of export and markets through 
improvements in the inland waterways and roads; and  
 
*
to raise the efficiency of logistics services across modes.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component A: National road corridors (US$115 million) - to improve the standard of trunk roads 
connecting to the main economic hub of the Mekong Delta. This sub-component will finance the 
improvement of three national highways providing links to Can Tho. There is a total of 99 kms 
Page  2
of road that will be upgraded to either Class III or IV standard. Roads in the Mekong Delta are 
characterized by mixed use traffic and communities that live very close to the road side. As a 
result, additional work will be undertaken to improve traffic management and road safety.  
 
Component B:  National waterway corridors (US$65 million) - to improve the standard of trunk 
waterways connecting the Northern and coastal delta areas to Can Tho and HCMC. This sub-
component will finance the improvement of approximately 405 kms of two major waterway 
corridors through the Mekong Delta. Both corridors will be upgraded to a Class III standard, and 
designed to accommodate 300 DWT barges. The improvements will include dredging, bank 
protection, 24 hour aides to navigation, bridge improvements and a Navigation Lock at K Rach 
Chanh.  
 
Component C: Connecting the poor to the supply corridors (US$50 million) - to improve those 
feeder waterways and roads at the district and provincial levels that would link poorer and more 
distant producer communities to the main supply corridors. Besides rural and provincial 
waterways and roads, this component includes provincial ports, district level landing stages at 
interchange points such as farmer's market centers, and areas of warehousing and processing 
plants.  
 
Component D: Institutional Support to the Ministry of Transport (US$5-10 million) - to provide 
institutional support to the Ministry of Transport in five areas: (a)Developing Multi-modal 
Transport through the relevant departments in MOT in the development of appropriate policies 
and planning frameworks; (b) Institutional support to Vietnam Inland Waterway Administration 
(VIWA) to more effectively carry out its roles and responsibilities as managers of the inland 
waterways network in Vietnam; (c) Training in the above mentioned areas; (d) Project Audit 
Services to facilitate two types of independent audits: (i) Integrated Project Implementation 
Audit Services, in which independent consultants will be procured to conduct semi-annual 
reviews that provide heightened fiduciary, safeguards and general project monitoring; and (ii) a 
Project Financial Audit, in which independent external auditors will conduct annual project 
financial audits; and (e) preparation of the Northern Delta Transport Development Project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would be implemented in locations throughout a 4.2 million hectare area of the 
larger Mekong Delta. All 13 Mekong Delta Provinces will be participating in the project, i.e. 
Dong Thap, Tien Giang, Long An, Ben Tre, Vinh Long, Ca Mau, Soc Trang, Hau Giang, Ca 
Mau, Kien Giang, An Giang, Tra Vinh and Bac Lieu.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Ministry of Transport (MOT) will establish a Project Steering Committee (PSC) to address 
cross-ministerial issues, multi-modal issues and to monitor implementation progress. The 
Department of Planning and Investment within MOT will act as Secretariat for the PSC and be 
responsible for overall coordination and oversight of project implementation, including: (i) 
coordination and liaison between the Project Implementing Agencies and other ministries; (ii) 
monitoring the Project's progress;  (iii) review of the technical and financial audit reports, social 
and environmental monitoring reports, the Project evaluation and monitoring reports, and the 
Page  3
Project related studies, and (iv) ensuring that the Project related policy and institutional reforms 
are achieved.  
 
Direct responsibility for project implementation and day-to-day management oversight will be 
allocated to 15 operating sub-organizations within the MoT: (i) Project Management Unit-1 
(PMU-1) for Component A; (ii) Project Management Unit-Waterways (PMU-W) for 
Components B and D; (iii) 13 Provincial Departments of Transport (PDoTs) for Component C.  
 
Both PMU-1 and PMU-W have experience with implementing previous World Bank projects 
and are familiar and capable to implement the safeguards elements. Most provinces in the Delta 
also have experience with Bank projects, however the project will finance an advisory consultant 
and a regional support centre to provide training in all aspects of project implementation. 
Independent consultants will also be appointed to monitor safeguards as part of an integrated 
review of overall project implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (EASSD) 
Mr Quang Ngoc Bui (EASSD) 
Mr Ronald D. Zweig (EASRD) 
Mr Vinh Quoc Duong (EASEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
To comply with the Bank OP4.01, the Borrower has commissioned an independent 
environmental consultant to prepare an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). Given that the 
project is dealing with multiple modes of transport and will be implemented in a phased 
approach, the EIA will include an overall impact assessment of project, a specific impact 
assessment for the subprojects identified for the 1st phase, and an environmental framework 
governing the impact assessment process for the subsequent phase of the program.  
 
Preparation of the final draft EIA report is underway; the Bank team has been working 
closely with the PMU and Consultant Team through review of draft study reports and providing 
comments on how the documents can be improved. The draft EIA report addresses the potential 
environmental impacts and risks based on relevant national technical guidelines and international 
experience. The EIA study has identified the following main civil works activities as having an 
environmental impact: (i) Waterway dredging and disposal of dredging material; (ii) Earth filling 
and excavation for road upgrading; (iii) Piling work for building structures in water bodies; (iv) 
Construction worker camps; (v) Construction materials storage areas; and (vi) Concrete batching, 
asphalt hot mix plants.  
 
The major environmental impacts of waterway upgrading are the disturbance of water 
quality and aquatic species as a result of canal dredging, spoil disposal, and piling works for 
structures built in the water. For the road rehabilitation dust emission, noise, air pollution from 
earth filling and excavation works, hot mixing plants, material stockpiling and disposal of 
unused spoil are major impacts. These impacts are evaluated as short term and confined within 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
the construction period.  Experience from periodic monitoring and supervision of other canal 
upgrading projects in the same areas show that water quality returns to original conditions after 
24hours to 48hours from dredging. The long term impacts on water quality are less of a concern 
because the project area is substantially influenced by daily tidal effect and high water exchange 
capacity, while the upgrading is mainly for the existing civil work structures only.  
 
Dredging canals and upgrading roads which traverse areas containing acid sulphate soil 
need careful management to control acidity leakage from the dumping sites. These sites should 
be large enough for run-off water to be retained and settled before running to outside water 
bodies. The environmental mitigation and environmental management plan will be incorporated 
into building and supervision contracts for compliance during construction.  
 
The EIA concluded that the proposed projects will not have significant adverse impact, 
provided the mitigation measures be properly implemented. The transport routes under MTIDP 
are not close to sensitive ecosystems (national park, natural reserves) or historical and cultural 
sites. It is expected that an Environmental Management Plan will be developed which specifies 
the environmental management and supervision organizations and responsibilities, mitigation 
measures, monitoring and reporting programs, budget estimates and capacity building 
requirement. During EIA preparation, public consultation with project affected people and local 
relevant stakeholders will be under-taken, and their feedback taken into consideration when 
designing appropriate mitigation measures.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The result of the social surveys showed that the project would impact on a number of ethnic 
minority communities/households in the project areas, including Khmer, Cham, Hoa, Ngai and 
Tay. An Ethnic Minority Policy Framework (EMPF) that complies with Bank's OD4. 20 on 
Indigenous Peoples is being developed and will be approved by the Borrower. The EMPF will be 
applied to develop Ethnic Minority Development Plans (EMDPs) for all subprojects involving 
ethnic minority peoples. An EMDP is prepared for the first phase implementation, for both 
waterways and national highways and provincial roads. However, specific EMDPs will be 
required in subsequent years of project implementation when the subprojects are specified and 
the same EMPF is applied.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Efforts have been made to avoid and mitigate resettlement impacts. However, the project will 
pose resettlement impacts due to required land acquisition for rehabilitation, improvement and 
widening of national highways, provincial roads and waterways, bridges and ship locks. A 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that complies with the requirements of the Bank's OP4.12 
on Involuntary Resettlement has been developed and will be approved by the Borrower. The 
RPF will be applied for all subprojects for the whole project life. According to the results of 
inventory, almost 2,840 Displaced Persons (DPs) will be affected under the first phase road 
subprojects and 7,245 DPs affected by first phase waterway subprojects (and constitute a loss of 
residential or agricultural lands). Thus, two Resettlement Plans (RP) will be developed for the 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
first phase implementation, one for waterways and one for national highways and provincial 
roads. However, specific Resettlement Plans will be required in subsequent years of project 
implementation when the subprojects are specified.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/10/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Initial disclosure of applicable safeguard documents is expected by August 15, 2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Simon David Ellis 
07/28/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
07/31/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jitendra N. Bajpai 
08/01/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
