Page  1
1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
Report No.:
 
41067
 
Date prepared/updated:  September 25, 2007 
 
I.  Basic Information 
 
1. Basic Project Data 
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P104528 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
Project Name:  East Meets West Foundation (EMWF) GPOBA Vietnam Rural Water Supply 
Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  
Xavier Chauvot de Beauchêne 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: N/A 
Managing Unit:  FEU, Global Partnership on 
Output-Based Aid (GPOBA) 
Lending Instrument
1
:
Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (90%); Sub-national government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Access to improved piped rural water supply services 
GPOBA Grant Amount (US$m.):  3.0 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
Other financing amounts by source: US$0.5 million 
Environmental Category: B 
Is this a transferred project 
Yes [X] 
    No [ ] 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
    Repeater [ ] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives: 
 
The main development objective of the project is to increase sustainable access to piped water 
services to low income households in rural central provinces of Vietnam through an innovative 
community-based approach, involving public-private partnership. Safe, affordable and reliable water 
service, coupled with improved hygiene and sanitation behavioral change will lead to better quality of 
life from improved environmental sanitation and improved community health, particularly for the 
rural low-income families, many of whom now have very limited access to sufficient quantity of good 
quality water that is reliable and affordable.  The proposed project will build u
pon EMWF’s ten years 
of experience providing technical and management support to construct 94 piped water systems in the 
Central Region provinces where this project will be implemented. 
 
The overall outcome of the project will be improved community health and socioeconomic status. A 
complementary EMWF-financed program will further improve community environmental sanitation 
conditions through a targeted program supporting construction of sanitary latrines, and improved 
hygiene and sanitation behavioral change (HSBC).  The HSBC program will build upon the 
availability of clean water to encourage project beneficiaries to construct and use sanitary latrines, and 
properly dispose of solid waste and household waste water.  These interventions are expected to 
produce: 
1
There is no reference to Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid Grant, they are referred to as SIL. 
Page  2
2
·
Health benefits from reduced exposure to environmental risks posed by unsafe water (reduced 
morbidity and mortality rates 
–
especially in infants); 
·
Economic benefits from reduction in medical expenses to treat water borne diseases, 
increased productivity and capacity to work due to reduced morbidity and associated 
reduction in sickness related absence from work, reduced household expenditure of clean 
water (water tariff lower than cost of many alternative sources). 
 
3. Project Description: 
 
The project will grant $3 million to the East Meets West Foundation (EMWF), a US-based 
International Non-Governmental Organization, to develop an Output-Based Aid approach to provide 
access to clean water services through the construction of about 75 new small water schemes in low 
income rural communities in 5 Provinces in Central Vietnam. The EMWF Clean Water Program 
(CWP) is already underway in each of these provinces.  As a result, EMWF has developed substantial 
political capital that will help expedite active support and cooperation from the local authorities, who 
play important roles in mobilizing communities to participate not only in the consultation process, but 
also to encourage beneficiaries to support the need for full cost recovery water tariffs and 
consumption-based payments. 
 
Each small water scheme will be considered a subproject under the project.  Each community has 
around 500 households and the uptake for the proposed scheme is expected to be around 75% or 400 
households. The total beneficiaries are expected to be around 30,000 HHs or 150,000 people. Under 
the project, EMWF will pre-finance the water schemes and will receive a pre-agreed fixed subsidy for 
each eligible HH connection. Disbursement take place in two trenches, 80% of the subsidy amount 
after eligible have been realized and verified, and the remaining 20% upon evidence of acceptable 
service provision for at least six months. 
 
Each water system will consist of a water treatment plant, storage tower, pumps, drilled boreholes (or 
other suitable water collection such as small surface water diversion gravity flow systems, or 
rainwater catchment), water treatment (e.g. de-sedimentation, filtration, flocculation, aeration where 
iron is a problem, chlorination, and improved in-house water storage and filtration where required), 
electrical controls, and transmission and distribution pipelines through the community service area.  
 
EMWF will provide support for system design, procurement of all required goods and materials, 
community consultation, motivation and training, identification and training of water managers, and 
technical assistance for major repairs or extension planning, if and when required.  Every HH wishing 
to connect to the water system will meet the following obligations:  
 
·
Pay for the water meter, valves, pipe and fittings from the distribution line to their house, and 
dig the trench for their own house connection (supervised by EMWF Construction 
Supervisors to make sure all HCs are properly installed and leak-free); 
·
Contribute labor for digging and backfilling the transmission and distribution pipeline 
trenches, the labor for which will be equitably divided among all the participating HHs;  
·
Pay in full each month the cost of piped water consumption as indicated by their household 
meter, based on a water tariff that will be calculated (and periodically updated as necessary) 
to cover the full anticipated cost of operation, maintenance, repair and salaries for water 
managers; and 
·
Be willing to participate in the HSBC promotion activities. 
 
Local government will provide the following at no cost to the project: 
 
·
All land required, in particular for the water storage tower, all associated equipment and an 
office for the water managers, and rights of way for the water pipelines; 
·
Legal access to water sources to be developed (including groundwater) 
Page  3
3
·
Convenient access to a power transformer with good quality and reliable electricity (to 
maximize the longevity of the electrical equipment, especially the pumps); and 
·
Active support for project promotion in the beneficiary communities, and within local 
government decision-making agencies. 
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis: 
 
The project activities will take place in the provinces of Quang Nam, Quang Tri, Quang Binh, Quang 
Ngai and Thua Thien Hue.  During the first year, the project is expected to develop schemes in 20 
communities. To date 19 suitable communities have been identified for the first year of operation, 
based on, inter alia, poverty rate, community willingness and ability to pay, feasible water source 
(adequate quantity, quality, proximity, and legal access). The remaining communities will be 
identified during implementation. 
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
 
Environment Team Member: 
Trang Phuong Thi Nguyen 
Social Dev. Team Member: 
Hoa Thi Mong Pham 
 
Reviewers prior to Safeguards Review Meeting of September 6, 2007: 
Env. Safeguards Reviewer 
Panneer Selvam 
Social Safeguards Reviewer: 
Samantha Forusz 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X 
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
The project will not have any large scale, significant or irreversible environmental impacts. 
 
The project triggers the World Bank’s Environmental Assessment Policy (OP4.01). An 
Environmental Assessment Framework (EAF) has been prepared to evaluate potential negative 
impacts of the Project. It concluded that there are potential safety, construction, and operation related 
adverse impacts (including water source protection, management of collected sediment filtered or 
Page  4
4
precipitated from water sources, use of chlorine for water disinfection) that are minor, largely 
reversible, and can be mitigated through easily implemented measures, as described in the 
environmental management plan (EMP) that has been developed as a part of the EAF. Potential 
subprojects will be screened against a negative checklist (included in the EAF) and projects triggering 
certain safeguard policies will be disregarded. In addition, a subproject EA will be prepared for each 
subproject, to ensure appropriate mitigation measures are in place in case any negative impacts 
materialize. Environmental guidelines are set forth in the EAF for the screening of subproject and 
preparation of subprojects EAs. 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12): 
No resettlement has occurred to date under any of the EMWF's 
water supply schemes in the provinces targeted by the Project. There will be no involuntary 
resettlement as part of the project. The infrastructure and facilities required under each subproject will 
require very little land.  Such land will only be government land, free of encumbrances, or land 
provided through voluntary land donation.  In case of voluntary land donation, the key principles of 
OP 4.12 will be applied and documented by EMWF, as set forth in Appendix 3 to the EAF. 
 
Indigenous Peoples
(OP 4.10
)
Ethnic minorities do exist in the project provinces, but it is very 
unlikely that they will be affected by the project.  Ethnic minorities mostly live in mountainous areas, 
away from the coastal areas where subprojects are to be selected.  No ethnic minorities were 
encountered in any of the water supply projects financed by EMWF in the past, or in the 19 
subprojects considered for the first year of implementation. Nevertheless, in case any subproject does 
involve ethnic minorities, the key principles of OP 4.10 will be applied and documented by EMWF, 
as set forth in Appendix 4 of the EAF. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area: 
 
The project would not cause or contribute to long term or cumulative negative impacts. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts: 
 
The Project has been developed in order to minimize potential negative impacts. As indicated above, 
potential subprojects will be screened against a negative checklist (included in the EAF) and projects 
triggering certain safeguard policies will be disregarded. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: 
 
Based on its 15 years of working experience in Vietnam, and ten years implementing the Clean Water 
Program, EMWF’s institutional capacity for community consultation, established relationships with 
the local authorities at all levels, water engineering design, supervision, construction, operation and 
maintenance, and training of technical specialists (to date, local Water Managers are hired to operate, 
maintain and repair each system, and collect and allocate water tariffs), EMWF is well qualified to 
carry out the proposed project.  In addition to its current 12 full-time staff (not including numerous 
pipe fitters and storekeepers, nor the 196 trained Water Managers – two responsible for O&M at each 
of the 94 CWP piped water systems), the EMWF CWP is now in the process of expanding its staff to 
include the following additional staff: water design engineer, electrical engineer, environmental 
specialist, three additional construction supervisors, two additional site supervisors, and an MIS 
specialist.  
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people: 
 
Page  5
5
Stakeholders of the project include: (i) Low income households in Provinces of Quang Nam, Quang 
Tri, Quang Binh, Quang Ngai and Thua Thien Hue; (ii) EMWF and (iii) Quang Nam, Quang Tri, 
Quang Binh, Quang Ngai and Thua Thien Hue provincial and local officials. 
 
The EAF has been disclosed in Infoshop, on 
EMWF’s website and in EMWF office in Danang. It has 
also been disclosed to the Department Of Natural Resources and the Environment, through the 
Provincial People’s Committee in each of the five provinces targeted by the Project. 
 
The project has been discussed with EMWF and provincial officials and with local officials and low-
income households in the 19 subprojects identified for the first year of implementation. For future 
subprojects, consultations with local authorities and low-income households will be carried out in the 
respective communities at the scale of each subproject. Public consultations will be carried out to 
make sure that the affected people are informed before the construction work is started. Minutes of 
such consultations will be attached to the respective subprojects EA. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: EA Framework including 
EMP 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
August 29, 2007
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
September 26, 2007
Date of submission to InfoShop 
September 14, 2007
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
N/A
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop 
N/A
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop 
N/A
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop 
N/A
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 
N/A 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS 
is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including 
EMP) report? 
Yes [X]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector 
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes []            No [  ]          N/A [X] 
Page  6
6
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP 
incorporated in the credit/loan? 
No 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or 
degradation of critical natural habitats? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
If the project would result in significant conversion or 
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does 
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the 
Bank? 
 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management 
issues? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a 
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager?  Are PMP 
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
 
OP/BP 4.11 
–
Physical Cultural Resources
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to 
cultural property? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate 
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural 
resources? 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning 
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in 
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan? 
 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the 
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional 
Social Development Unit? 
 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy 
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been 
prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the 
plan/policy framework/process framework? 
 
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional 
issues and constraints been carried out? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to 
overcome these constraints? 
 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if 
so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
Page  7
7
Have the TORs as well as composition for the 
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and 
approved by the Bank? 
 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been 
prepared and arrangements been made for public 
awareness and training? 
 
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the 
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the 
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared 
and sent? 
 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
 
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the 
international aspects of the project, including the 
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for 
dealing with the issue, been prepared 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer 
referred to in the OP? 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to 
the World Bank's Infoshop? 
Yes [X]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a 
public place in a form and language that are 
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups 
and local NGOs? 
Yes [X]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
All Safeguard Policies
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes [X]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been 
included in the project cost? 
Costs related to safeguard policy 
measures have been calculated and 
included in the EAF. EMWF will be 
responsible to ensure that safeguard 
policies are respected. 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the 
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes. Such monitoring will be a part 
of the Operations Manual for the 
Project, EMWF will have to report 
on compliance with safeguards 
policies, OBA independent 
verification agent will review such 
compliance on a quarterly basis.  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been 
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes, through the Operations Manual 
in addition to the Grant Agreement. 
Page  8
8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Xavier Chauvot de Beauchêne 
September 26, 2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Trang Phuong Thi Nguyen 
September 26, 2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Hoa Thi Mong Pham 
October 2, 2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Panneer Selvam 
Transferred 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Patricia Veevers-Carter 
October 2, 2007 
Comments:   
Page  9
9
