Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2094 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/05/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P096418 
Project Name: Land Administration Project 
Task Team Leader: Susan S. Shen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 30, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 30, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASRD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Land administration and management (P);Other public sector governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.00 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
5.00 
 
SWEDEN: SWEDISH INTL. DEV. COOPERATION AGENCY (SIDA)  10.00
35.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed project is that land users in Vietnam benefit from 
enhanced land tenure security and the provision of accessible, efficient, effective and transparent 
land administration services.  This objective will be achieved through ensuring that land users in 
a
select number of provinces (a) have access to more efficient, reliable, and transparent services 
from land administration; and (b) are more aware of the benefits, rights and obligations of land 
registration.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project is envisioned to have the following components:  
 
Component 1: Land Administration System Modernization. The aim is to establish the basic 
infrastructure for a modern land administration system and would include (a) standardizing, 
completing, and updating cadastral maps and land records in digital format including the 
improvement and use of uniform and user-friendly map software for map preparation and 
utilization; and (b) finalizing the design, setting up and operationalizing a land database and land 
Page  2
information system linking different land administration levels for effective, efficient and 
reliable land information exchange to meet demand of potential users.  
 
Component 2: Legal and Institutional Framework Development.  The aim is to develop a 
conductive and consistent policy and institutional environment in support of Component 1 
implementation.  In view of the efforts planned by GoV and other donors, this component will be 
targeted to supporting development and dissemination of studies, regulations, and guidelines in 
support of modernizing the LAS.  This may include development of client service standards, data 
collection/sharing protocols, promotion of private sector involvement, user fees and cost 
recovery mechanism to support the LAS, as well as a comprehensive and coherent national land 
administration program that could be supported through a SWAp or other more innovative and 
cost-effective mechanism of support in subsequent phases.  
 
Component 3:  Training and Public Awareness.  The aim is to develop the human resources 
(internally) and raise public awareness (externally) which is critical for the effective operation, 
maintenance and use of the land administration system.  Activities to be supported are (a) an in-
service training program which would build upon the experiences of Sida-financed capacity 
building pilots; and (b) a public awareness program tailored to different target audiences (e.g., 
households and enterprises as well as women and ethnic minorities.  
 
Component 4:  Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation.  The aim is to develop 
requisite management and technical skills necessary to implement the project and a simple M&E 
system to monitor impact.  This component would finance project management activities, M&E 
development and implementation, and TA.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Component 2 and parts of Components 1 and 3 will provide support at the national level, the 
focus of Component 1 will be on a limited number of provinces or cluster of provinces to be 
selected during early project preparation based on agreed selection criteria such as quick returns 
from a modernized LAS, local government commitment to finance operation and maintenance of 
the LAS, local demand for land information, and implementation capacity   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The regulatory framework for dealing with environmental and social safeguard issues are 
becoming more aligned with WB standards during the last ten years.  The creation of the 
Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment in 2002 focused attention on 
environmental/social issues related to environmental protection and land use.  Continuous 
capacity development of MONRE is being supported by a number of donors including Sida and 
ADB.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Lars C. Lund (EASSD) 
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham (EASSD) 
Mr Vinh Quoc Duong (EASEN) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
While no negative environmental impact is anticipated, there is a need to better understand 
the environmental issues related to land registration. EAP regional safeguards team will compile 
a
list of key questions/issues on environmental concerns and risks linked to the proposed project 
to be addressed.  The responses to these questions will be the basis for an environmental report. 
These questions will also include issues elated to natural habitats and forestry   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
see EA section   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
see  EA section   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Improved cadastral maps and land records and improved land administration services would 
potentially benefit all those with an interest in land, including IPs, as potential beneficiaries.  In 
addition, public awareness activities under Component 3 focus on, among others, women and 
indigenous groups.  The application of the policy will be determined once the project areas are 
selected and through the proposed social assessment   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
social assessment/baseline study will be undertaken as part of project preparation 
(September 2006 to February 2007) to assess: (i) public perception and awareness of the land 
use system, including the perceived pros and cons of getting land use rights (Land Use 
Certificate (LUC); (ii) the benefits that households derive from the LUC, how they regard 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
that the LUC has improved tenure security, to what extent they mortgage LUC for 
investments and what the return has been on these investments, (iii) the level of service 
delivery by government and level of satisfaction of receivers of LUCs. The study will 
provide the project preparation team with a recommended design for an M&E System, and a 
framework for regular public feed back and participation.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Susan S. Shen 
03/30/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
04/04/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
04/05/2006 
Comments:  Approved. 
