Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2149 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/08/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P090723 
Project Name: Vietnam Livestock Competitiveness and Food Safety 
Task Team Leader: Marianne Grosclaude 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 20, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: November 15, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASRD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural marketing and trade (30%);Animal production (30%);General 
agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%);Agricultural extension and research (20%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural policies and institutions (P);Other 
rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
65.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project would be the first phase of a long-term program aiming at strengthening 
the capacity of public and private agriculture sector institutions to enhance the competitiveness 
of food-supply chains and the ability of farmers and processors to respond to market demand for 
higher quality and safer products. The program would thereby contribute to the overarching goal 
of increasing farmers’ incomes and generating rural employment.  
 
The development objective of the proposed project (first phase of the program) would be to 
strengthen the capacity of public and private sector institutions serving the livestock sector to 
provide critical support services and related infrastructure, thereby contributing to enhancing the 
competitiveness of the sector.  
 
The expected specific outcomes of the project would include: (i) improved delivery of animal 
health services; (ii) greater capacity of farmers and processors to improve productivity, quality 
and value-added in livestock-supply chains; (iii) reduced public health risks and environmental 
impact of animal production, processing and marketing activities; and, (iv) improved capacity of 
Page  2
public and private sector institutions to jointly formulate and implement policies and long-term 
strategies to enhance the competitiveness of household-based animal production.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
External funding requirements for the proposed project are estimated at US$ 65 million, to be 
financed by IDA. Opportunities for cofinancing will also be explored, in particular grant 
financing in support of institutional development activities. The proposed project (first phase of 
the program) would be scheduled for four years, beginning mid-2007. The proposed project (first 
phase of the program) would have a focus on the livestock sector, which has been identified as 
an immediate priority by the Vietnam Action Plan on Food Safety and Agricultural Health. 
Progress with institutional development during the first phase of the program would enable, once 
the approach has been tested in the livestock sub-sector, expansion to other food supply-chains.  
 
It is envisaged that the proposed project would have the following components:  
 
(1)  Improving household-based production systems, in particular the capacity of small and 
medium farmers to respond efficiently to market demand for quality and safe products, through 
(i) strengthening the capacity of the national animal breeding system, (ii) improving technology 
transfer and advisory services by the public and private sector in the areas of animal feeding 
practices and Good Agricultural Practices, (iii) strengthening feed quality control, and (iv) 
contributing to the restructuring of the poultry industry, based on the restructuring strategy to be 
developed during project preparation;  
 
(2)  Strengthening animal health systems, to reduce economic losses and public health risks and 
open new markets, including (i) quarantine infrastructure and services, (ii) disease surveillance, 
diagnostic and reporting systems, (iii) disease control and/or eradication, (iv) grassroot 
veterinary services, (v) meat inspection services and other quality control systems, and (vi) 
veterinary training;  
 
(3)  Improving agricultural produce processing and marketing, focusing on quality, value-added 
and food safety management in supply-chains through (i) public and private investments in 
improved infrastructure (e.g. slaughterhouses)  and technologies for processing and marketing, 
including innovative value-adding and environment friendly technologies, (ii) raising awareness 
of producers and consumers on food safety and environmental issues, (iii) the promotion of 
quality and standards, and (iv) strengthening food safety surveillance and diagnostic systems;  
 
(4) Institutional development, including strengthening the capacity of public and private 
(including the associative sector) institutions to jointly define strategies, policies and investments 
to promote improved quality and safety of key agricultural produce;  
 
(v)  Project management, monitoring and evaluation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project location would be specified during project preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has demonstrated its capacity for IDA project preparation and implementation, 
including safeguards policies, though capacity still needs to be further developed. 
Implementation arrangements will build on lessons learned from prior IDA assistance projects in 
the sector (ADP, AIERP).   
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Lars C. Lund (EASSD) 
Mr Vinh Quoc Duong (EASEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An environmental Impact Assessment would be conducted as part of project preparation, 
focusing in particular on possible impacts and mitigation measures related to livestock 
production, processing and marketing (including waste management). The promotion of 
livestock waste management and environmental-friendly agricultural production and processing 
techniques and technologies would be part of project activities.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
The proposed project may include field production activities. Should this be confirmed 
during project preparation, an appropriate Pest Management Plan would be prepared.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The proposed project may include provinces with populations of ethnic minority groups. This 
would be determined during project preparation, and if required, an Ethnic Minority 
Development Plan prepared.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
It is expected that there would be no involuntary land acquisition or resettlement under the 
proposed project. However, this will be confirmed during project preparation. If the project has 
plans to provide for the construction of new facilities (e.g. slaughterhouses) then a policy 
framework or resettlement plan will be prepared.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/15/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Safeguard related studies would be conducted during project preparation: June to December 
2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Marianne Grosclaude 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
