Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/15/2007 
Report No.:  AC2913
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P104848 
Project Name:  VIETNAM- HIFU Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Kamran M. Khan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASUR 
Lending Instrument:  Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector:  General finance sector (100%) 
Theme:  Municipal finance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
30.00
30.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to develop HIFU as a model LDIF (in terms of 
internal policy and procedures for financial policy, sub-project appraisal, social and 
environmental safeguards, and partnership with the private sector) and increase private 
sector participation in financing municipal infrastructure in HCMC.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Investment Capital (US$ [30] million; IDA US$ [50] million)  
 
A
line of credit to help HIFU invest in cost recovery oriented municipal infrastructure 
projects in partnership with the private sector.  A Project Preparation and Appraisal 
(PPA) Manual describes the way HIFU investments under the line of credit will be 
identified, developed and appraised. A pipeline of projects has been identified and the 
due diligence conducted to confirm HIFU?s absorption capacity.  Two sub-projects have 
been appraised, including safeguards, for investment in Year 1 of project implementation.  
 
Component 2: Technical Assistance (US$ 0.5 million; IDA US$ [0] million)  
 
The technical assistance for project implementation and monitoring will be financed by 
HIFU.  Technical assistance will support the implementation of key reforms, including: 
(i) support to implement the Project Preparation and Appraisal (PPA) Manual with on-
the-job chief advisor and technical specialist, as well as a social specialist and an 
Page  2
environment specialist; (ii)support to implement the Private Sector Participant (PSP) 
Selection Manual with on-the-job chief advisor  and private sector specialist; (iii) 
independent monitoring consultants for social and environmental safeguards policies; and 
(iv) Financial Audits of HIFU to International Auditing Standards. The project will 
develop Environment and Social safeguards management structures and institutional 
capacity within HIFU and HIFU?s borrowers and Special Purpose Vehicle Project 
Enterprises.   The framework put in place will undergo a process of continuous 
improvement as HIFU staff gain more and more operational experience.  
 
The project design includes six-month review by the task team and clients of all project 
conditions, including the PPA Manual, which provides a useful mechanism to make 
appropriate adjustments to ensure the successful implementation of the project safeguards 
framework. The task team will share the results of the six monthly reviews of all project 
conditions, including the PPA Manual implementation experiences, with the Safeguards 
Secretariat to decide on next steps if any are required. The PPA Manual provides the 
necessary screens, flowcharts and TOR for the implementation of safeguards instruments 
to facilitate the implementation of subprojects and training of HIFU staff.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The HDP is located in HCMC, the largest and most populated city in Vietnam. The 
investments under HDP are restricted to municipal infrastructure, but no mega projects 
are anticipated. Two subprojects will be financed in the first year of implementation:  
 
(a) The West Bus terminal is located in Ward An Lac, Binh Tan district. The Bus 
Terminal is surrounded by a very busy big road and two smaller roads, as well as a 
market and residential areas which include high-rise buildings. The reconstruction of the 
bus terminal will be restricted inside its existing area.  
 
(b) The Septic tank waste treatment plant is located in Commune Da Phuoc, Binh Chanh 
District. The site is a low land mainly for agriculture with many surrounding canals. The 
land has been allocated for four cemeteries and a hazardous waste landfill. The closest 
residential areas are approximately 500 meter away, located along the national road N-50 
as well as a district road.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Phuong Thi Thanh Tran (EASRE) 
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham (EASSO) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
OP 4.01, Environmental Assessment.  
 
The HDP project is classified as Category FI. The complexity of subprojects evaluated 
for investment is varied.  All subprojects will pass initial review and screening against the 
GOV and WB/IFC exclusion lists. Project categorization to meet GOV environmental 
regulations and WB environmental safeguards will be determined for each subproject 
based on known and potential environmental impacts.  The HDP is expected to have 
mostly positive environmental and public health impacts as it contributes to improvement 
of HCMCs infrastructure, solid waste management, transport systems, and on-site 
sanitation services.  
 
The safeguards guidelines in the PPA Manual were used by HIFU in appraising the two 
subprojects for Year-1 in a manner acceptable to IDA. The PPA Manual will be similarly 
used in the preparation of the other subprojects in the investment pipeline. Prior review 
by the WB is required for high environmental risk sub-projects only.  
 
Environmental appraisal of the two year 1 pilot subprojects:  
 
The two subprojects in Year 1 would have overall positive environmental and social 
impacts by creating a better managed facility for bus services (Subproject 1) and safer 
disposal of septage than the current facility (Subproject 2). The investments in 
infrastructure have the potential for short-term and site-specific adverse impacts of 
construction work on resident areas around the bus terminal and along the roads to the 
disposal site in Da Phuoc commune. Key environmental issues during construction work 
under the two subprojects are noise and dust pollution, traffic congestion, transportation 
and disposal of waste construction materials, transportation of filling soils. Major 
environmental impacts during the operation phase are related to the operations of the 
waste treatment plant include odor and pathogenic bacteria, insects and bugs vermin, 
collection truck leakage, vehicle exhaust fumes, ground water pollution from pipe and 
tank leaks during the treatment process and surface water pollution from runoff, effluent 
Page  4
discharge from treatment facilities.  Other impacts could be related to the management of 
waste generated at the bus terminal  
 
The design standards will ensure effluents from wastewater at the bus terminal be 
connected to the city?s sewer. Discharge from the septic tank waste treatment plant is 
expected to comply with the requirements for water quality of the receiving bodies. 
Better solid waste management would also contribute to improved environmental 
conditions of the cities.  
 
Nevertheless, improper transportation and disposal of the construction materials and the 
wastes would impose noise and dust pollution. Inadequate design of the disposal site 
would have long-term soil pollution and lead to hygiene consequences. Poor O&M of the 
septic tank waste treatment plant would cause serious environmental problems in the 
surrounding areas, especially the residential areas and the canals supplying water for 
agriculture and aquaculture activities.  
 
The PPA Manual guidelines were used by HIFU and IDA to carry out the due diligence 
assessments of the two subprojects, including assessment of the adequacy of the EIA and 
IEE reports, and assessment of the institutional mechanism of the Hoa Binh Ltd. in 
carrying out EA works for the Septic tank waste treatment (A-category project). A risk 
management plan has been developed for each of the subprojects to manage project risk 
associated with the deficient EMPs. Those risk management plans will be signed between 
HIFU and the sub-borrowers as condition of the loan disbursement to HIFU borrowers.  
 
Cultural Resources (OP 4.11)  
 
The PPA Manual requires that subprojects in the investment pipeline be designed to 
minimize possible viewscape changes or damage to historic and cultural sites. Proper 
construction supervision is also required during subproject implementation, particularly 
excavation and dredging works, to check for possible buried artifacts. OP 4.11 is not 
triggered in the two Year-1 subprojects.  
 
Natural habitat (OP 4.04)  
 
The PPA Manual requires that an environmental exclusion list will be used to screen all 
subprojects in the investment pipeline to ensure that the project does not finance adverse 
impacts or conversion of critical natural habitats. OP 4.11 is not triggered in the two 
Year-1 subprojects.  
 
Pest management (OP 4.09)  
 
All the subprojects in the investment pipeline will be screened against the use of 
chemicals listed in the Government restriction list. OP 4.09 is not triggered in the two 
Year-1 subprojects.  
 
OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement  
 
It is likely that some land acquisition will take place is some of the subprojects 
identified by HIFU. A Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared to be applied to 
Page  5
manage all issues related to land acquisition. Out of the two proposed Year-1 subprojects, 
only the Septic Tank Waste Treatment Plant required land acquisition.  Compensation 
and resettlement activities for the subproject were concluded in 2005. According to 
prepared due diligence report, 1.9 out of the total of 9.4 ha have not yet been cleared, 
with about 10 households waiting for their complaints to be resolved and land plots in a 
resettlement site to be provided. HCMC PC has instructed Binh Chanh district PC to 
resolve the outstanding issues as soon as possible. Resolution of this issue in a manner 
satisfactory to the Bank is a condition for disbursement of funds for the subproject under 
HDP.  
 
OP 4.10  Indigenous peoples  
 
The likelihood of subprojects triggering OP 4.10 is not very high. For example, no 
ethnic minorities are being affected in the proposed two Year 1 subprojects. However, an 
Ethnic Minority Planning Framework (EMPF) was prepared. Ethnic Minority Plans will 
have to be developed in accordance with the project EMPF for the subprojects having any 
ethnic minority group in the subproject areas.  
 
BP 17.50, Public Disclosure.  
 
The PPA Manual and its supporting annexes provide clear guidance and structure for 
dealing with public disclosure issues throughout the subproject cycle as required under 
Bank rules as well as GOV laws and regulations.  
 
Regarding the Year 1 subprojects, the EIA report for the Septic Tank Waste Treatment 
Project (A category) has been consulted with the local authority (Commune People 
Committee Da Phuoc) and local NGO (the Father Front of the District Binh Chanh) in 
accordance with the new national law on environmental protection. HIFU has confirmed 
the public disclosure of the EIA report and the Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) 
for the West Bus Terminal subproject  in the ward People Committee offices since March 
05, 2007 in accordance with the Bank?s disclosure requirements.  
 
The draft Environmental and Social Guidelines (in the PPA Manual) as well as 
Resettlement Policy Framework and Ethnic Minority Planning Framework have been 
disclosed locally and sent to the InfoShop in Washington DC and displayed at the VDIC 
in Hanoi since March 20, 2007.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Overall HDP project will help address urban development, current environmental 
sanitation problems and is expected to have a positive impact on existing environmental 
and social conditions. Adverse potential indirect and long term impacts could arise 
through: (a) improper operations of the constructed facilities such as wastewater 
discharge, transportation and disposal of septage, solid waste management; (b) impacts 
related to land acquisition and resettlement.   
 
Page  6
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In the Year-1 subproject involving the Septic Tank Waster Treatment, an alternative 
considered during the preparation of the EIA involved a drying bed and a closed drying 
system for the emission of CH4 from the septage. The latter option was chosen because it 
has relatively less odor impact.  For the future investments, alternatives will be 
considered as part of sub-project specific EA work.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) was prepared for the West Bus Terminal 
subproject (Category III) and an environmental certificate was issued by DONRE on 
April 18, 2005 to this IEE. This environmental certificate is still valid to the basic design 
which has recently been revised. For the Septic tank waste treatment subproject (category 
I
)
a
full EIA report was prepared and approved by HCMC DONRE on March 20, 2007.  
 
Due Diligence Programming  
 
The PPA Manual has been developed by HIFU with Bank team support in close 
collaboration with the Department of Planning and Investment DPI, Department of 
Finance DoF, Department of Natural Resources and Environment DONRE, Department 
of Transport and Public Works TUPWS and other relevant city departments. The PPA 
Manual includes the RPF, guidelines on Environmental and social safeguards which are 
acceptable to GoV and IDA.  
 
The PPA Manual has been adopted by HCMC PC and it will go through continuous 
improvements as HIFU staff gains more operational experience and builds the capacity to 
undertake more sophisticated projects. There will be a review of the implementation of 
the PPA Manual every 6 months to allow adjustment of the manuals and other guidelines 
and/or provide additional guidance and/or training to HIFU staff as necessary.  
 
The World Bank team will continue to advice HIFU and HCMC PC on the 
implementation of the PPA Manual. The WB will retain the right of Prior Review for the 
first direct investment financed by HIFU under the HDP, as well as prior review for all 
high environmental risk sub-projects.  
 
Capacity of HIFU  
 
Bank consultants have assessed HIFU?s institutional capacity to carry out 
environmental and social safeguard works. The reports reveal that HIFU has the 
institutional arrangement to manage investments, and its departments have clear 
understanding of the requirements for implementing the Government and World Bank 
safeguard policies during a subproject appraisal and investment and monitoring phases. 
The World Bank policies on involuntary resettlement are relatively new for HIFU. 
However, HIFU has staff with experience in land acquisition and resettlement gained 
Page  7
through other projects, and training and familiarity with environmental management and 
EAs.  
 
On-the-job consultants will assist HIFU staff in implementing the PPA Manual 
including the Guidelines on safeguard policies (Annex F and G) on social and 
environmental safeguards, and in assessing HIFU safeguard performance during the first 
three years. Independent safeguard monitoring consultants will also be hired by HIFU 
under the project to monitor safeguard compliance in the implementation of the 
subprojects. The need for assistance to HIFU in implementing the PPA Manual, including 
the guidelines on safeguard policies, has been identified and included in the project costs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Public consultation on environmental issues was conducted for the Septic tank waste 
treatment subproject as required by the new National law on environmental protection. At 
a
request from the Bank, the EIA and IEE reports were made available to the public in the 
two ward People Committee offices from March 5, 2007.  
 
HIFU and local resettlement related agencies have been consulted intensively during 
preparation of PPA Manual and its supporting annexes, including the RPF, environmental 
safeguards manuals and the social safeguards manual. The preparation of the PPA 
Manual involved broad based dialogues between HIFU, Department of Planning and 
Investment, Department of Finance and other relevant city departments. The process also 
involved a high-level workshop which was chaired by the Vice Chair of the HCMC PC.  
Additional workshops have also been organized under the guidance of the Ministry of 
Finance under the Local Development Investment Funds Project (LDIFP) for the staff of 
HIFU and three other LDIFs to discuss safeguards policies and procedures. In order to 
pay special attention to the critical issues involving resettlement, a consultation 
mechanism has been developed for Resettlement Plan (RP) preparation and 
implementation to ensure that the needs and wishes of all related stakeholders, especially 
potentially affected people, are addressed in accordance with GOV laws and regulations 
and Bank policies.  
 
Disclosure mechanism is described in the PPA manual in accordance with the Bank?s 
requirement. Summaries of the EIAs in Vietnamese were displayed to the public in each 
of the ward people committee offices from March 05, 2007. A copy of the draft 
Environmental and Social Guidelines (as Annex F and Annex G to the PPA Manual) as 
well as Resettlement Policy Framework and Ethnic Minority Planning Framework have 
been disclosed locally and sent to InfoShop in Washington DC and made available in 
English and Vietnamese in Hanoi's Development Information Center (VDIC) on March 
20, 2007.  
 
The HDP project?s key stakeholders include:  
Page  8
HCMC Department of Natural Resources and Environment (DONRE) and Department 
of Transport and Public works, Department of Planning and Investment, Department of 
Construction, Department of Finance  
 
Local authorities of the Ward An Lac of the District Binh Tan (Subproject 1) and the 
ward Da Phuoc of the District Binh Chanh (Subproject 2)  
 
Mass organizations such as the Women Union, Father Front Union  
 
Local residents and business in the targeted service areas.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/08/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/05/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/20/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/27/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/20/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/20/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Page  9
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Kamran M. Khan 
05/08/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Phuong Thi Thanh Tran 
05/08/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham 
05/08/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
05/08/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
05/08/2007 
Comments:   
