Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/16/2007 
Report No.: 39488
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P096911 (GPOBA project 
supporting IDA funded P073763) 
Project Name:  Targeted Service Expansion through Water Loss Reduction 
–
Ho Chi 
Minh City, and Tra Vinh Province, Vietnam 
Task Team Leader:  William D. Kingdom 
Estimated Appraisal Date: N/A 
Estimated Board Date: January 18, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASUR 
Lending Instrument:  Grant (GPOBA) 
Sector:  Water supply (100%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services for the poor (P); Municipal governance and institution 
building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GPOBA Amount (US$m):         5.50 
Gov’t of Vietnam (US$m.): 
0.00  
Environmental Category: B  
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
 
The primary objective of the project is to increase and sustain piped-water access for poor 
households in HCMC and Tra Vinh utilizing savings made through the reduction of physical 
losses in the water distribution systems. 
 
The secondary objective of the project is to demonstrate an efficient approach to piped water 
supply connection subsidies that can create incentives for better water management.  
 
3. Project Description 
 
There are three components in the project:  
 
Component 1 
–
New Connections 
a) Ho Chi Minh City: 
To create the right incentives to connect low income communities and to maximize the 
efficiency of the subsidy in HMC the project will:  
1.  Make a flat payment of US$150 for each in-fill DOLISA (i.e. low income) connection 
lying within 60m of an existing distribution main 
2.  Make a variable payment of US$150 plus
the pro-rated cost of extensions made in 
areas more than 60m from an existing distribution main.  The payment for extensions 
works is capped at $250 to provide SAWACO with incentives to plan new 
connections in an efficient manner. This results in a total subsidy cap of US$400 per 
DOLISA connection in extension areas. 
Page  2
Provided: 
i. 
each eligible DOLISA household expresses demand for the connection 
through the payment of a connection fee equal to 20% of the equivalent fee 
charged by SAWACO for regular customers up to a maximum of $30; 
ii. 
the cumulative total of connections which have attracted an OBA payment 
over US$150 does not exceed 10% of the cumulative total of all connections 
made;  
iii. 
the connection is new, and made after the signing of the grant agreement with 
GPOBA; 
iv. 
the connection is operational and in use at the time of application for payment; 
v. 
the service has been used at the connection for a period of at least three 
months prior to the application for payment, as evidenced by billing records; 
vi. 
the connection is of the approved specification; 
vii. 
connections in extension areas have been subjected to the appropriate ex-ante 
and ex-post review by the OBA audit firms; and 
viii. 
there is a certified saving of 1m
3
/day of physical losses in Zone 1 or 2 
achieved in the three months prior to the application for the payment.  
SAWACO Contributions:
 
SAWACO will make a significant contribution to the costs of 
new connections (estimated to be US$275 per connection for reductions in NRW).   
Household Contributions:   
A
nominal connection fee serves to signal real demand from 
unconnected households.  To allow for future variations in the official connection fee the 
households will pay a fee for new connections under the project equal to 20% of the payment 
normally charged by SAWACO for similar connections in the same area, including the 
reinstatement of the road surface. The maximum contribution of the household will be limited 
to VND 500,000 (US$31) under the project. 
 
b) Tra Vinh 
In Tra Vinh the subsidy rate will be determined based on an analysis of prevailing market 
conditions. This will be undertaken as part of the detailed preparation of the Tra Vinh part of 
the project to be carried out during project implementation. 
 
Component 2 
–
Technical Assistance 
a) Ho Chi Minh City: 
To support DOLISA in carrying out the project, the project will also cover the costs of: 
(1) An OBA Audit Firm
who will be hired by DOLISA will (a) provide a six-monthly 
assessment of progress and quality of works under the OBA scheme; (b) undertake spot 
checks or audit on connections made and (c) certify the unit subsidies to be paid for 
connections made as part of extension schemes.  The OBA audit firm will also carry out an 
annual ‘year end’ assessment of the impact of the project, on a sample basis, which would 
consider inter alia: 
·
levels of Household contributions relative to income (both for connection fee and 
consumption charges); 
·
the application of the eligibility criteria for households; and 
·
the efficiency of subsidies vis a vis in-fill and extension connections. 
 (2) A project Financial Auditor
who will be hired by DOLISA and will carry out an annual 
financial audit of the OBA Designated Accounts. 
 
Page  3
A
Supervision Consultant and an NRW auditor will be hired by SAWACO using IDA funds 
under the NRW Project.  The TORs of these consultants will include to confirm the quality of 
the connections made under the GPOBA scheme and to verify the reductions in NRW 
achieved by the water company. 
 
b) Tra Vinh 
To support DOLISA in Tra Vinh in implementing the project, the project will cover the costs 
of: 
(1) A Supervision Consultant/ NRW auditor
who will be hired by the Tra Vinh Water 
Company and who will be responsible for certifying eligible reductions in leakage within Tra 
Vinh and will also supervise planning and construction of new connections so as to ensure 
that their quality and technical specifications meet the requirements of the project. 
(2) An OBA Audit Firm 
who will be hired by the Tra Vinh DOLISA and who will (a) 
provide an annual assessment of progress and quality of works under the OBA scheme; (b) 
undertake spot checks or audit on connections made and (c) certify the unit subsidies to be 
paid for connections made as part of extension schemes (if applicable).  The OBA audit firm 
will also carry out an annual ‘year end’ assessment of the impact of the project which would 
consider inter alia: 
·
levels of Household contributions relative to income; and 
·
the application of the eligibility criteria for households 
 (3) A project Financial Auditor
who will be hired by the Tra Vinh DOLISA and will carry 
out an annual financial audit of the OBA Designated Accounts. 
 
Component 3 
–
World Bank Supervision 
A
Project Design Consultant
will be hired and supervised by World Bank to work with 
DOLISA and the Tra Vinh Water Company to adapt the HCMC model to the specific 
requirements of the Tra Vinh system.  The consultant will prepare a set of implementation 
manuals for the Tra Vinh DOLISA and Water Company which will guide project 
implementation. A Post-project Review
consultant will be hired and supervised by the World 
Bank at the end of the project implementation period to assess the performance of the project, 
identify lessons learnt, identify areas for improvement, and propose a national roll out 
program including timeframe and costs. The findings of the report will be presented at a 
national workshop. 
 
World Bank staff will provide routine support to the DOLISAs and Water Companies in the 
implementation of the GPOBA scheme and will periodically (twice a year) visit the sites to 
review progress with the local authorities. 
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Hoa (social safeguards) 
Ms Trang Phuong Thi Nguyen (environmental safeguards) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
TBD 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
The project would have positive environmental impacts by improving access to drinking 
water. There would not be any significant environmental impacts. Extension and replacement 
of water pipes may cause minor and temporary impacts during the construction. There would 
be no impact to natural habitats because the project location is in developed areas.  
 
No connections, causing any involuntary land acquisition or assets loss will be conducted 
under the project, and there will be a screening process to make sure this happens. 
 
There are two ethnic minority communities living in HCMC (Cham and Khmer with about 
10,000 people as the total). In case there are any ethnic minority groups/communities 
included in the project, a consultation process will be carried out to make sure they 
understand the project objective and voluntarily participate in the water supply connections. 
The Ethnic Minority Policy Framework, prepared for the Vietnam Urban Water Supply 
Development Project, will guide this activity if required.  
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area: 
 
The project would not cause or contribute to long term or cumulative negative impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts. 
 
There would be no important social or environmental impacts. No alternatives were analyzed 
for such impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework, an Environmental Guideline and an Ethnic Minority 
Policy Framework (EMPF) were prepared as part of the associated Urban Water Supply 
Development project which is now under implementation. These guidelines will be adopted 
Page  5
for the proposed project. The check lists for environment and land acquisition issues have 
been prepared to be included in the operational guidelines to make sure no connections, 
which would trigger EIA/RPF, will be included. In case there are any ethnic minority 
groups/communities in the project, a consultation process will be carried out in accordance 
with the EMPF to ensure they understand the project objective and voluntarily participate in 
the water supply connections. SAWACO has sufficient experience with the environmental 
mitigation measures used to manage these, as they are commonly used in projects financed 
by Gov and World Bank. These mitigations will be included in possible construction 
contracts. DOLISA and SAWACO will collaborate with the local authorities in consultation 
with ethnic minorities, if needed. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
Stakeholders of the project include: (i) Low in-come households in Ho Chi Minh City and 
Tra Vinh Province; (ii) state institutions and implementation such as Department of Labor, 
Invalids and Social Affairs (DOLISAs) of Ho Chi Minh City and Tra Vinh Province, Sai Gon 
Water Cooperation (SAWACO) and Tra Vinh Water Supply Company (iii) and Ho Chi Minh 
City and Tra Vinh provincial and local officials. 
 
The project has been discussed with each of these stakeholders. The public consultation has 
to be carried out to make sure that the affected people are informed before the construction 
work is started. 
 
Environmental guideline, EMP, RPF and EMPF shall be disclosed according to the schedule 
below. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
Mar. 22
nd
 2007 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
Mar. 27th 2007
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
Apr. 10th, 2007
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
Apr. 3
rd
 2007
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
Apr. 10, 2007
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
Apr. 3
rd
 2007
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
Apr. 10, 2007
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS 
is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes (EMP only)
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10
 
Indigenous Peoples
 
Has an Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate) been 
prepared? 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
TBD 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-
affected groups and local NGOs? 
TBD 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the 
project cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr. William D. Kingdom 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Trang Phuong Thi Nguyen 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr. Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
 
 
Comments:   
Page  8
