Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1958 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/12/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P095129 
Project Name: Northern Delta Transport Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Moustafa Baher El-Hefnawy 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 21, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASTE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Ports, waterways and shipping (65%);Roads and highways (25%);General 
transportation sector (10%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Trade facilitation and 
market access (S);Regional integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the Project is to support sustainable economic growth and 
inclusive development in the Northern Delta Region by increasing the efficiency of transport 
infrastructure in the Delta Region in an integrated, safe and sustainable manner. The Project will 
improve supply chain efficiency for production, distribution and trade and will also provide 
better and safer access for the poor to the main supply corridors. Specific Project objectives are:  
 
-
to reduce transport costs/tariffs and improve service quality from points of production to 
local markets or points of export through improvements in the inland waterway and connecting 
road systems;  
 
-
to raise the efficiency of logistics services across modes;  
 
-
to assist in building the management tools and capacity of the Vietnam Inland Waterways 
Administration and Provincial Departments of Transport in the effective exercise of their 
responsibilities under the 2004 Law on Inland Waterways; and  
Page  2
-
to develop/strengthen existing frameworks for private sector participation in the provision 
of infrastructure and services associated with provincial ports, landing stages and logistical 
centers.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Total Project costs are estimated to be US$200 million. The size of the IDA Credit is expected to 
be around US$150 million.  
 
Project Components  
 
The Project has three main components:  
 
Component (A): Multi-modal Corridor Investments:  Investments in three main waterway 
corridors: (1) Quang Ninh to Viet Tri, (2) Quang Ninh to Ninh Binh, (3) Hanoi to Day-Lach 
Giang to increase the efficiency of multimodal transport and supply chains. The estimated cost of 
this component is US$ 175-190 million.  It will include the following subcomponents:  
 
(A.1) Investments in inland waterways and roads (US$ 155-160 million) to improve the main 
supply corridors and their access routes. While the bulk of the road investment is expected to be 
in provincial and lower level roads, this will not preclude investments in small sections of 
national roads if this is to enhance connectivity.  Among the important waterway access routes 
for consideration under the Project are those linking Tuyen Quang, Da Phuc and Bac Giang to 
the Quang Ninh - Viet Tri corridor.  This component also includes navigational aids.  
 
(A.2) Investments in river ports and landing stages on the three waterway corridors (US$ 20-30 
million) to raise the distribution efficiency of the transport network within the project region 
which would in turn improve the connectivity of the region to the sea ports in the north as well as 
to central and southern Vietnam. This component will cover 10-15 ports on the Red and Thai 
Binh river systems distributed among the provinces of the region. The selection of the ports to be 
included in the Project will be based on both efficiency and socio-economic considerations. This 
sub component will include investments in both infrastructure and management systems.  
Investment in management support systems will be addressed under the institutional support 
component below. This component may include some rural and district level landing stages at 
interchange points such as farmers' market centers and areas of warehousing and processing 
plants.  
 
Component (B):  Investments in small ferry boat stages (US$ 5.0 million) to provide safer and 
wider access within the region. At present, there are over 1,000 small ferry boat stages for river-
crossing passenger boats. Access to these ferries from the roads is often dangerous and many 
accidents resulting in fatalities have occurred. This component includes developing standards for 
the design and operation of the different size ferry boat stages and will lead to the physical 
improvement of 15-30 of these stages. The development of a framework of standards for the 
design and operation of the different sizes of ferry boat stages will be part of the institutional 
support component for this Project.  
 
Component (C):   Institutional support to MoT, VIWA and provinces (US$ 5.0 million). This 
component is expected to include:  
Page  3
-
Support to the Vietnam Inland Waterways Administration and Provinces in 
implementation of Law 23/2004/QH 11 for: (a) extension of the asset management database to 
this region, (b) planning of and budgeting for sustainable inland waterway management and 
maintenance programs, and (c) management of safety function.  
 
-
Support to MoT and Provincial Departments of Transportation (PDoTs) (including 
navigational schools) in planning multi-modal transportation infrastructure and logistics services 
taking full consideration of the potential role of the private sector.  
 
-
Support to VIWA and provincial governments in developing and strengthening existing 
frameworks for private sector participation in the provision of infrastructure and services 
associated with provincial ports, landing stages and logistics centers.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project region in northern Vietnam consists of 15 provinces: the 11 provinces of the Red 
River Delta and four provinces from the Northeastern Region (Quang Ninh, Bac Giang, Phu Tho 
and Tuyen Quang).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Project implementation will involve Project Management Unit-Waterways, that is currently also 
engaged in the Mekong Delta Transport Infrastructure Development Project (MDTIDP). A 
similar organizational structure will benefit Project preparation and implementation, as the 
responsible implementing agencies can demonstrate their previous safeguard due diligence 
experience garnered during the aforementioned ongoing operation. As such, the Borrower's 
institutional capacity to comply with World Bank safeguard policies is considered to be 
sufficient. It is proposed that the implementation of provincial level infrastructure improvements 
will be decentralized to PDoTs, whenever possible. In such cases, these investments will form a 
component of provincial transport sector support currently being developed under the Third 
Rural Transport Project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Pramod K. Agrawal (EASRE) 
Mr Quang Ngoc Bui (EASVS) 
Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASRE) 
Ms Trang Phuong Thi Nguyen (EASVS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Environmental Assessment (EA) OP4.01 is triggered because Project Components A and 
B
will finance investments that are likely to have significant direct adverse environmental 
impacts on associated and nearby riverine ecosystems, such as estuarial areas and inland 
waterway corridors, and also on land, during construction of these facilities, but more so during 
the operational phases. These types of impacts are likely to be associated with water pollution, 
erosion, sedimentation transportation and deposition, spoil deposition on land, water use and 
availability, change in hydrology, and air pollution. Additionally, since this Project would lead to 
increased traffic volumes, movement frequencies and size of vessels plying these waterways, 
induced impacts such as from potential collisions/accidents and oil spills from large oil tanker
s, 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
for example, are possible.  
 
The costs and benefits of the environmental impacts and mitigation measures will be 
reflected in the consideration and identification of the different sub project design alternatives in 
the feasibility study. This is discussed in the Inception report and will be further addressed in the 
Interim Report of the feasibility study.  
 
Once a decision has been made on the type of investments and their locations, (a) a series of 
environmental assessments and environmental management plans (EMPs) will be prepared for 
the sub projects that will be implemented during the first phase of the Project and (b) an 
environmental management framework will be prepared to guide the preparation of the EMPs of 
the second-phase sub projects.  EMPs will cover the planning, construction and operations 
phases.  In compliance with GoV environmental requirements and World Bank OP4.01, the 
following EA package of documents will be submitted to the Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Environment and to the World Bank for review, clearance and subsequent disclosure locally in 
Vietnam and at the World Bank Infoshop. There will be a total of five documents:  
 
-
An EA/EMP to cover all project investments in Inland Waterways in the first phase of 
implementation (e.g., associated with dredging works, groin systems, breakwaters, bank 
protection, navigation aids, and all other works to maintain the width, depth and height of the 
inland water shipping lanes such as raising of power lines, low overhead bridges, etc.). This 
document will address each of the three corridors separately, as there will be site-specific issues 
and mitigation measures for each corridor.  
 
-
An EA/EMP to cover all investments in the first phase of implementation and their 
operations at (i) River Ports (e.g upgrading/extending of berths and other landing stages, 
pavement works, warehouse, storm water drainage, cargo handling equipment and (ii)  Ferry 
Stages (e.g jetty's, ramps, aids to navigation). This document is likely to consist of a general 
EMP addressing different designs options with separate sections pertaining to investment/site-
specific issues.  
 
-
An EA/EMP for works in the first phase of implementation associated with access roads 
and the Physical Distribution and Logistics Center linking multimodal transport systems. This 
document is likely to consist of a general EMP addressing different designs options with separate 
sections pertaining to investment/site-specific issues.  
 
-
An Environmental Management Framework to guide the EAs and the EMPs for the 
second phase subprojects. These EAs and EMPs are to be prepared during the Project's first year 
of implementation.  
 
-
An executive summary of all four reports above.  
 
Generally effective and meaningful consultations with all stakeholders (including users of 
inland waterways, potential project affected persons (PAPs), etc.) will take place on an ongoing 
basis. However, consultations with potential PAPs would be done in two distinctive stages, once 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
during the feasibility design's earlier stages (stage one described above in this section) when 
environmental impacts and their locations are more clearly known and secondly during the stage 
at which the EA documents are being finalized.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
It is not yet possible to determine whether natural habitats will be affected. This will be 
determined by the Pre-Appraisal mission in November. If this safeguard policy is triggered, 
mitigation measures will be included in the EMPs mentioned above.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
It is not clear whether the Project triggers the Physical Cultural Resources safeguard policy. 
This will be determined by the Pre-Appraisal mission in November. If the policy is triggered, a 
physical cultural resources management plan will be developed and incorporated in the EMP.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The field visit showed that the Project could impact a number of ethnic minority 
communities/households in the Project areas, including local ethnic minorities living in the 
corridors and/or access roads within Tuyen Quang, Phu Tho, Bac Giang, Vinh Phuc, Quang Ninh 
provinces. A number of Tay, San Diu, San Chi, Nung, Muong ethnic minorities live in the 
Project region. If ethnic minorities are expected to be affected by the Project, OP 4.10 will be 
triggered. If the policy is triggered, a Social Assessment will be carried out consistent with the 
Bank OP 4.10 and free, prior and informed consultations with the ethnic minorities will be 
carried out by the Borrower leading to broad community support to the Project.  An Indigenous 
Peoples Plan (IPP) will be prepared for the sub projects that will be implemented during the first 
phase of the Project and (b) an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework will be prepared to 
guide the preparation of the IPPs of the second-phase sub projects.  A Social Assessment, in 
compliance with Bank OP 4.10, will be developed by the client as well.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The field visit showed that the Project will pose resettlement impacts due to required land 
acquisition for rehabilitation, improvement and widening of access roads sections to the river 
ports and/or river ports upgrading and waterways widening. A Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) covering all investments, and in compliance with Bank OP 4.12, will be developed and 
approved by the client.  Additionally, a Resettlement Plan (RP) will be developed for the sub 
projects that will be implemented during the first phase of the Project, when the locations and 
specific subprojects are identified by the Pre-Appraisal mission in November. RPs guided by the 
RPF will be prepared for the second phase subprojects during the Project's first year of 
implementation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The project's investments will be located predominantly on the Red River (and/or its 
tributaries), which is clearly an international waterway as defined by OP7.50, as the Red River 
system originates in China. Vietnam is also the lowest downstream riparian user of this river 
system as the river system empties itself into the South China Sea from within the territory of 
Vietnam without entering any other country's territory. The Project essentially involves 
rehabilitation of existing schemes.  It does not involve works and activities that would exceed the 
original scheme, change its nature, or alter and expand its scope and extent to make it app
ear a 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
new or different scheme. Moreover, the Project (a) will not adversely affect the quality or 
quantity of water flows to the other riparians; and (b) will not be adversely affected by other 
riparians' water use. Consequently the project falls within the exception to the notification 
requirement set forth in paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50.  
 
Regarding the potential additional works at the river mouth, these relate to tributaries of the 
Red River's international waters that run exclusively in Vietnam and as such the Project would 
fall within the exception to the notification requirement set forth in paragraph 7(c) of OP7.50 as 
it is the lowest downstream riparian and does not cause appreciable harm to other states.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/04/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The five Environmental Assessment reports described above are scheduled to be delivered on 
January 10, 2008. The Social Assessment, Resettlement Policy Framework, Indigenous 
Peoples Planning Framework including a Resettlement Plan and Indigenous Peoples Plan, if 
necessary, for the first phase sub-projects will also be delivered on the same date, January 10, 
2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Moustafa Baher El-Hefnawy 
10/10/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jose Vicente Zevallos 
10/10/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
10/11/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
