Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/08/2007 
Report No.:  AC2607
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P083581 
Project Name:  Hanoi Urban Transport Project 
Task Team Leader:  Shomik Raj Mehndiratta 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P085393 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 26, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASTE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (70%);Roads and highways (30%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring and 
privatization (P);Regulation and competition policy (S);Pollution management and 
environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
155.21 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
9.80 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
139.68
139.68 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the IDA Credit is to increase urban mobility in targeted 
areas in Hanoi by (i) increasing the use of public transport in two existing and one new 
corridors [thereby increasing corridor capacity]; and (ii) reducing travel times by all 
modes between the city center and the west and northwest sections of the city (west of 
West Lake).  Its GEF strategic objectives are to promote a shift to more environmentally-
sustainable transport modes and urban development plans, and to promote the replication 
of these approaches in the country and region. Its global environment objective is to 
lower Hanoi?s transport-related greenhouse gas emissions, relative to a business-as-usual 
scenario.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has three components.  
 
The Bus Rapid Transit Component (BRT) [total US$99.88 million, IDA US$84.12 
million, Government of Vietnam US$11.76 million, GEF$4.0 million]  will support the 
Page  2
development of 37 km of segregated bus lanes and 9 km of bus priority along the Giang 
Vo- Lang Ha and Giai Phong - Dai Co Viet corridors (including a city center connection, 
with bus priority in mixed traffic), the construction of BRT stops, interchange stations, 
terminals and maintenance facilities, and the acquisition of 130 BRT vehicles. It will also 
support the establishment of a modern BRT management system, including bus ticketing 
and financial controls.    Lastly, the component will finance the implementation of a 
public consultation, communications and media strategy for disseminating information on 
the BRT system.  
 
The Road Infrastructure and Sustainable Urban Planning component [total US$194.33, 
IDA US$64.65 million, Government of Vietnam US$127.92 million, GEF US$1.75 
million] includes the construction of a section of the Second Ring Road (RR2) between 
Nhat Tan Bridge and Cau Giay on the main western radial arterial and construction of a 
resettlement site to house persons displaced by the proposed road, together with support 
for sustainable urban land development and transportation planning in Hanoi.  
 
The Institutional Development Component (ID) [total US$10.49 million, IDA US$6.44, 
US$4.05 million from the GEF, US$0.32 million from Government of Vietnam] includes 
equipment procurement and technical assistance (TA) to: (a) strengthen Air Quality 
Management; (b) support traffic safety; (c) support establishment and strengthening of a 
new Public Transport Authority and support transport planning and policy development;  
(d) finance replication activities that have been designed to address GEF?s priority on 
replication; and (e) support project management for the GEF project and enhancement of 
project monitoring skills.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project area lies in Hanoi City and its ecological environment is highly artificial 
including some agricultural environment. The surface water system in Hanoi includes 
two major rivers (Red river and Nhue river), four small rivers and 118 lakes and ponds. 
West Lake is the largest and most rich in ecosystem, however it is located about 1 km 
away from the proposed RR2.  Literature review and field survey showed that the major 
features of the flora include agricultural plants and road side plantation trees, and no 
protected fauna species were identified. There was no indication of the existence of 
valuable nature habitats.  
 
Water Quality.  Baseline water quality monitoring was conducted in June and October 
2005.  The results showed that the water qualities of rivers and ponds along the proposed 
alignments often exceeded the relevant standards in terms of COD/BOD, amonia and 
coliform due to domestic and industrial wastewater.  
 
Air Quality.  The baseline air quality was assessed based on the existing air quality 
monitoring data, as well as supplementary monitoring data conducted in July 2005 along 
the proposed alignments.  In general, air pollution levels in the city exceed the national 
ambient air quality standards with respect to PM, and CO and NO2 at some urban street 
locations sometimes exceed the air quality standards.  The result of supplementary 
Page  3
monitoring was almost the same as the general situation, i.e. the concentrations of PM 
were mostly higher than the standards while those of NO2, SO2 and CO did not exceed 
the standards.  
 
Noise.  Baseline noise monitoring was conducted in July 2005 together with the 
supplemental air quality monitoring.  Noise levels along the proposed alignments were 
roughly around the relevant standard levels and often exceed the standards both in day-
time and night-time.  
 
Cultural Relics.  A cultural relics survey identified 11 cultural relics sites along the 
proposed alignments.  They include seven temples, two pagodas, one memorial house 
and ancient tree and ancient dike, however, no deteriorated impacts is expected or 
relocation is needed due to the construction of proposed new alignment.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (EASSO) 
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham (EASSO) 
Mr Hiroshi Ono (EASRE) 
Ms Trang Phuong Thi Nguyen (EASRE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environment Assessment (OP/BP 4.01).  Although HUTDP would significantly 
contribute to promoting the use of public transportation, reducing traffic congestion, and 
eventually improving air quality in Hanoi, construction and operation of RR2 and BRT 
might cause potential large scale impacts on the environment as follows:  
 
Noise levels would exceed the relevant standards at sensitive sites along RR2 and BRT 
routes.  Since the proposed alignments go through populated areas, heavy machinery and 
transport vehicle operation during the construction phase would cause noise problems.  
 
Page  4
Predicted results of CO and NO2 showed general improving trends towards 2020 due to 
anticipated modal shift to public transportation and tightened vehicular emission control.  
On the other hand, dust and toxic air pollutants from hot asphalt mixing plants during the 
construction work were identified as a major air pollution problem.  
 
Wastewater from bus transit and terminal stations and oily waste from bus cleaning and 
maintenance during the operation phase, and slurry wastewater produced from 
construction sites and domestic wastewater from construction camps during the 
construction phase might cause adverse impacts on water bodies and aquatic life.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).  The Project will affect nine wards and five 
communes in five districts of Ha Noi City. Significant efforts were made in project 
design options to avoid and minimize its resettlement impacts.  According to the social 
survey and preliminary inventory based on the project feasibility study, the project would 
require acquisition of about 55 ha of lands, affecting 10,664 people in 2,415 households.  
This includes 1,112 households who need to be relocated, 326 households who will lose 
more than 30% of their agricultural land holding and 810 households who will have 
business and /or productive assets to be impacted.  For the first phase of the project, about 
31 ha of land would be acquired, which would affect 1712 households, 724 of which 
would need to be relocated and 74 would loss more than 30% of their agricultural land. A 
detailed measurement survey will be undertaken to update the project impacts once the 
project technical designs are completed.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The HUTDP is fully in compliance with the Hanoi Urban Master Plan and Hanoi Urban 
Transport Master Plan.  Predicted results of air pollution showed general improving 
trends towards 2020 when anticipated modal shift to public transportation and tightened 
vehicular emission control are in place.  In order to make sure this air quality 
improvement, besides BRT, Air Quality sub-component of HUTDP will support the 
development of improved air quality management policy making system, motorcycle 
pollution control measures and air quality monitoring system in Hanoi.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In the design of the BRT component, three kinds of alternatives were considered before 
the choice of a closed BRT system trunk and feeder BRT system with special-buses 
running primarily on a network of exclusive bus routes was chosen.  In addition to the 
chosen alternative simple bus priority measures (rejected because of their relatively little 
success in environments similar to Hanoi where there is the potential for significant 
problems of non-observance and enforcement) and open BRTs such as in Seoul, 
Kunming and Taipei where a variety of buses and access and egress from the exclusive 
lane system (rejected because of the potential for control problems leading to excessive 
bunching) were considered.  The BRT system has been designed to be physically 
integrated with a potential urban rail system under consideration for financing from 
Page  5
French bilateral donors. Discussions with Hanoi on the PTA have been coordinated with 
the relevant French donor agencies.  
 
In the design of the Second Ring Road a series of different alternatives were considered 
in view of significant technical, social, economic and financial constraints.  The final 
solution chosen has many features of interest.  First, the inclusion of bus-lanes on the 
main carriageways in the initial phases (to avoid congestion and conflict with local traffic 
and nonmotorized traffic) and the subsequent reservation of an alignment for mass rapid 
transit compatible with longer term growth proposals for the area north of Red River and 
west of West Lake.  Secondly, there are significant reductions in the area within the 
previously defined planning line at Buoi Interchange resulting in a significant reduction 
in involuntary resettlement and associated costs. The final design chosen for the section 
between Cau Giay and Buoi reflects an extensive analysis to provide forecast capacity 
needs in a very tightly constrained space bounded by the dyke and the drainage canal.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment impacts:  A stand-alone EMP was developed, and the proposed measures 
are to be incorporated into bidding documents and contracts.  The EMP defines 
mitigation measures and costs, training plan, environmental monitoring plan, and 
environmental management organizations.  The PMU established under HPC is 
responsible for the implementation of EMP.  Environmental monitoring will be carried 
out by a qualified independent monitoring institution to be selected through procurement 
process.  
 
For the proper implementation of EMP, a specialized social and environmental unit will 
be set up under the PMU with at least one professional staff designated to supervise the 
overall implementation of EMP.  In addition, key staffs engaged in environmental 
management in contractors, construction supervision consultant, road operation company 
and government organizations will receive intensive training.  During the construction 
and first two years of operation phases, noise, surface water and ambient air monitoring 
will be carried out at selected sensitive sites.  
 
Social impacts:  A Resettlement Policy Framework and a Resettlement Plan for the 
phase 1 have been prepared in line with the local laws, regulations and the World Bank's 
policy on Involuntary Resettlement.  Its objective is to ensure that all project affected 
people (PAPs) will be compensated for their losses at replacement cost and will be 
provided with rehabilitation measures to assist them to improve, or at least maintain, their 
pre-project living standards  
 
A
multi-level organization will be established for the management and implementation 
of the resettlement program at Hanoi Municipal, district and ward levels.Ha Noi People 
Committee will have overall responsibilities for implementation of the RAP.  A City 
Steering Council will be established to assist the People Committee in carrying out its 
overall responsibility. The Department of Ha Noi Urban Transport Project Management 
Unit (PMU) will be responsible for implementing the RAP on behalf of Ha Noi People?s 
Committee.  
Page  6
Both internal and external monitoring mechanisms will be established.  While internal 
monitoring serves largely as a PMU internal tool for managing the resettlement program, 
an external agency will be engaged to carry out an independent monitoring, and 
evaluation of the RAP's implementation.  
 
Cultural Property:  There are no significant impacts expected on cultural relics along the 
alignments due to their distance from the alignments and environmental considerations 
incorporated in the engineering design.  However in order to minimize any unexpected 
environmental consequences during construction, prior to the construction the PMU and 
contractors will conduct consultation with relevant authorities and local communities on 
necessary protection measures.  The civil work contracts will include a procedure in the 
event of chance finds during construction.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Environment: Two rounds of public consultation were carried out according to the World 
Bank's guideline in August 2005 (first round), and January/February 206 (second round).  
During this process, a total of more than a thousand project-affected individuals, groups 
and representatives of district PCs, NGOs, wards and communes were intensively 
consulted.  The participants showed concerns about environmental issues during 
construction and operation such as dust, exhaust gas and noise, and requested adequate 
mitigation measures.  Their feedback was reflected in the engineering designs and EMP.  
EIA and EMP were disclosed locally at DONRE, TUPWS offices and relevant 4 districts 
as well as at InfoShop in May 2006.  
 
Social: During the project preparation phase, project information and resettlement 
policy were disseminated through household visits, public meetings, group and focus 
group discussions and the household socio-economic survey.  They were intensively 
consulted and actively participated in discussions on their development needs and 
priorities, about their perception towards project objectives. Their views, concerns and 
recommendations have been taken into consideration in the project design.  This 
consultation process will continue during implementation as further project design 
information becomes available.  The RAP details the plan for consultation during project 
design and implementation, including the procedures, methodologies and subjects of 
consultation.  A Public Information Booklet (PIB) will be prepared and distributed to all 
affected population in the project area. The project has developed grievance redress 
mechanism and described it in the RAP.  It describes the steps and procedures for 
grievance filing as well as the responsible institutions and timeframe for receiving and 
addressing the grievances.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/08/2006 
 
Page  7
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/10/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/10/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
04/10/2007  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/17/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/17/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/17/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  8
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Shomik Raj Mehndiratta 
04/13/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Hiroshi Ono 
04/13/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
04/26/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
04/30/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
05/07/2007 
Comments:   
