Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC938 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/18/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P079665 
Project Name: Vietnam: Second Higher Education Project 
Task Team Leader: Jeffrey Waite 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 16, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: January 16, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Tertiary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
103.10 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
12.10 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
4.80
16.90 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project aims to increase the relevance and raise the standards of higher education, in 
response to changing economic and social needs.  This will be done by supporting specific 
elements set out in the Government's recently approved Higher Education Reform Agenda 2006-
2020" (HERA).  Within the Government?s central agencies, HERA involves modernizing 
structures and systems, improving management and rationalizing the sector?s financing; at 
higher education institutions (HEIs), it involves updating teacher methodologies, promoting 
relevant research and integrating research into teaching.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project will achieve its objectives through support for specific elements set out in the 
Government's recently approved "Higher Education Reform Agenda 2006-2020", namely (i) 
modernizing structures and systems; (ii) improving central Government management; (iii) 
rationalizing the sector?s financing;  (iv) updating teacher methodologies; (v) promoting relevant 
research; and (vi) integrating research into teaching.  
 
Page  2
The Government is currently finalizing its own HEP-2 "Feasibility Report".  This proposal is 
consistent with the current draft of that report.  
 
COMPONENT ONE ("Capacity Building for Policy Development") will provide policy 
analysis and recommendations that result in the Government adopting measures (including 
legislation) and establishing systems that improve the governance, financing and quality of the 
higher education sector.  These activities will also be designed to build capacity in the Ministry 
of Education and Training (MOET), so that its staff can undertake or manage similar policy work 
beyond the life of the project itself.  In order to promote sustainability of the capacity building 
activities, each of the three sub-components will be implemented by the MOET department 
responsible for the relevant policy area: Higher Education Department, Planning and Finance 
Department, and Testing and Education Quality Department.  Coordination across these sub-
components will be assured through the establishment of an Advisory Group bringing together 
on a regular basis the heads of each of the three implementing units with the Project Manager 
and Deputy Manager.   
 
Under this component, the MOET will (A) establish a credit-based degree delivery system, 
adopt a policy/legal framework for private investment in the higher education sector, and build a 
Higher Education Management Information System to monitor the performance of the higher 
education sector; (B) adopt a rational and transparent mechanism for State and user funding of 
HEIs, with means-tested financing policies to support students from disadvantaged backgrounds; 
and (C) adopt a fairer and more efficient HEI admissions system, adopt a set of minimum quality 
standards against which each HEI will be required to assess itself, and establish an independent 
HEI accreditation mechanism to reinforce these minimum standards.  
 
COMPONENT TWO ("Development of HEI Teaching and Research Capacity") will build 
research capacity, improve the quality and relevance of university teaching and research, 
improve institutional management and quality assurance, and support integration between 
university teaching and research.  To do this, the MOET will (A) allocate "Teaching and 
Research Improvement Grants" (TRIGs) to HEIs on a competitive basis against detailed 
proposals;  and (B) deliver training to HEIs in strategy development and institutional 
management, as well as in the preparation, management and monitoring/evaluation of TRIG 
programs.  
 
COMPONENT THREE ("Project Management") supports a smooth and effective 
implementation of the project.  This component covers both project coordination ? management 
and implementation structure and lines of responsibilities, technical planning, procurement, 
financial management and communications and project monitoring and evaluation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Components 1 & 3: Central Ministry of Education and Training;  
 
Component 2: Public universities nation-wide, selected by peer review.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The safeguard issues appear essentially at the level of individual higher education institutions, in 
the design and implementation of TRIG proposals.  Capacity will be developed during the first 
Page  3
year of project implementation, through the activities run under Sub-Component 2.1.  In 
addition, the PMU will be responsible for monitoring overall compliance with any safeguards 
requirements.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham (EASSD) 
Mr Vinh Quoc Duong (EASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
Option 1: Under the TRIGs Scheme (Sub-Component 2.2), HEIs would be able to include 
small works activities (e.g. refurbishment of existing science laboratory) in their grant proposals.  
However, no major civil works would be eligible for consideration.  
 
Option 2: Under the TRIGs Scheme (Sub-Component 2.2), HEIs would be able to include 
major civil works activities (e.g. construction of new science teaching block) and small works 
activities (e.g. refurbishment of existing science laboratory) in their grant proposals.  The TRIG 
Manual would include guidelines to HEIs on good environmental practice for the construction 
phase (e.g. pollution mitigation) and the operation phase (e.g. handling of toxic materials).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
This policy should be left as TBD since a decision to include civil works has not yet been 
finalized.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/06/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  09/06/2006 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jeffrey Waite 
08/22/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
09/18/2006 
Comments:  See comment on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
09/07/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
