Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/17/2007 
Report No.:  AC2942
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P105120 
Project Name:  Additional Financing: Mekong Transport and Flood Protection Project 
Task Team Leader:  Maria Margarita Nunez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASTE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.63
6.63 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed additional credit would support: (i) coverage of a financing gap towards the 
completion of approximately 58 km of provincial level road rehabilitation in order to 
meet the expected project targets of 128 km of rehabilitation works under the existing 
Mekong Delta Network Improvement component; and (ii) project scale-up for the 
construction of the Ganh Hao II (GH2) Bridge, a 600 meter long, 12 meter wide bridge 
located on the project road, National Highway 1 (NH1) passing through Ca Mau city.   
 
3. Project Description 
The additional financing supports two components: (i) the completion of the MDNI 
subcomponent in order to meet the expected project targets of 128 km of rehabilitation 
works on provincial level network (estimated to cost US$14.92 million; of which IDA 
would finance US$13.43 million); and (ii) the construction of the GH2 Bridge, a 600 
meter long, 12 meter wide bridge that is located on the project road NH1 in Ca-Mau city 
(estimated to cost US$14.73 million, US$10.67 million of IDA funds), as well as the 
supervision services for its construction (estimated to cost US$0.9 million of IDA funds).  
 
Completion of the MDNI Sub-component.  Preparation of the remaining 58 km road 
sections of the MDNI component is underway; MOT has thus far selected and approved a 
list of road sections, with the relevant feasibility studies, detailed design, and safeguard 
Page  2
and NCB procurement documents near completion. The selection and preparation of 28 
km final road sections (TV PR911, BD PR 742 and CT PR 927), in consultation with the 
provincial DoTs, has been finalized. The identification of the remaining 30 km, or more 
if cost savings allow, will be carried out subsequently (as the 2nd phase) within the 
agreed selection criteria framework.  
 
Construction of the Ganh Hao 2 Bridge in Ca-Mau city.  The original project has now 
completed NH1 rehabilitation through Ca-Mau city to 24 meter width. With its current 
width of 12 meters the existing Ganh Hao River Bridge is creating severe traffic 
congestion at both approaches and major road safety hazardous location for the mixture 
of two wheel, car and truck traffic. To overcome this constraint, the Borrower has 
requested IDA-financing for a new 12 meter wide bridge, to complement the associated 
highway upgrade.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This ISDS will focus on the safeguards issues associated with the Gan Hao Bridge, as 
issues from the other components of the project are covered by the original project?s 
safeguards documents.  
 
The Ganh Hao Bridge is located on NH1 in Ca Mau city (station km 2247+800 - km 
2248 + 409). It connects five districts of Ca Mau province to Ca Mau city, other 
provinces on NH1, and serves both traffic on NH1 and urban traffic of Ca Mau City.   
NH1 and the road section where the ridge is located represent the backbone of 
communication of the Mekong Delta and the regional link or the main pole of attraction 
like HCMC and Cau Tho.  
 
The selection of the proposed road segments of the 58 km MDNI network is based on 
initial screening criteria established in the original project design, mainly an assessment 
of traffic volume, pavement conditions, function in their immediate and overall road 
network hierarchies, and bridge and ferry load capacities. Candidate roads are evaluated 
by six (weighted) criteria: connectivity, economic benefits, infrastructure costs, minimal 
adverse social and environmental impact, spatial distribution, and support to planned 
development projects.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (EASSO) 
Mr Quang Ngoc Bui (EASSO) 
Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASRE) 
Ms Trang Phuong Thi Nguyen (EASRE) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Ganh Hao Bridge may have significant adverse environmental impacts during its 
construction and operation as the bridge will be located in a predominantly estuarine area 
with significant agricultural activity and shrimp farming and within close proximity of 
mangroves and cajuput forests.  
 
These issues would be taken closely into consideration as part of the engineering design 
of the bridge to ensure the design of the bridge approaches, supporting structures and 
storm water/deck drainage do not significantly alter the present hydrology of these inland 
waterways and/or pollute these waters.  
 
The construction related impacts such as from soil erosion and sedimentation due to 
large scale excavation and handling, transportation, placement and storage of earth 
material, spoil disposal, concreting of footings/supports, etc, are likely to be short term 
and can be effectively mitigated. However, the anticipated longer term impact on the 
environment would most likely be associated with pollution of the Ganh Hao River from 
drainage of the storm water on the bridge deck. However, the design of the bridge deck?s 
drainage would be such that any contaminated drainage water would not be allowed to 
drain directly into the river. Also, as stated earlier above, any bridge 
supports/embankments would be designed so that they do not have a lasting impact on 
the hydrology of the river system.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The potential for negative environmental impact of the project is expected to be minimal 
and limited to the effects of air emissions, noise, erosion and sedimentation, impacts on 
aquatic and vegetation habitat, and effects on public heath, all of which are localized and 
of short term, are manageable with proven road maintenance mitigation techniques.   
 
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The location of bridge is fixed and cannot be changed as it is linking two sections of an 
existing road on either side of the Ganh Hao River. Notwithstanding, the engineering 
design of the bridge will consider design alternatives that would take into account 
environmental considerations such impacts of the bridge during it?s operation stage on 
issues such as hydrology contamination from storm water drainage on the river system.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The GoV in compliance with Banks Environmental Policy OP4.01 and its own Law on 
the Protection of the Environment (2005), has prepared an EIA to ensure these issues are 
clearly identified, analyzed and understood, and that the requisite planning to avoid 
and/or mitigate these issues during all stages of planning, construction and operation are 
in place.  
 
The Bank has reviewed and provided comments on the first draft of the EIA and is 
currently reviewing the revised draft EIA. The revised EIA has been disclosed locally in 
Vietnam and also in the Bank InfoShop.  
 
The Project Office has developed a resettlement action plan (RAP) and environmental 
impact assessment (EIA) for the activities under the additional credit in line with relevant 
government and World Bank safeguard policies (no ethnic minority issues were 
identified).  These documents have been reviewed and cleared, as they comply with 
relevant Bank policies. The EIA and RAP have also been disclosed both in the country 
and at the World Bank InfoShop.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The land acquisition impacts occurring on the road approach on both sides of the bridge 
result in a total of 87 project affected households (PAHs), including 423 persons (PAPs). 
There are no PAPs from an ethnic minority group, and therefore the indigenous peoples 
policy is not triggered. The total residential land area acquired for widening of the road 
approaches is 4159 m2, mainly for the households living along the sides of the road 
approaches who are relying on small shop services. A majority of the PAHs will 
reorganize their houses, while 39 PAHs will be relocated as they preferred to receive cash 
compensation to buy new residential land themselves. In line with Bank requirement on 
social safeguards, the RAP has been developed in full consultation with the local peoples. 
The cost estimate of the RAP is about VND 40 billion (US$2.5 million equivalent) and 
will come from the counterpart fund, including the cost for independent monitoring of 
RAP implementation.  
 
The other stakeholders are the nearby farming communities (paddy and shrimp farmers) 
who may become affected by the bridge construction and operational impacts. The EIA 
process consulted members of these groups and their concerns have been taken into 
consideration.   
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/21/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/21/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/21/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/21/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/21/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/21/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  6
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maria Margarita Nunez 
05/03/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr James Orehmie Monday 
05/03/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
05/14/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
05/14/2007 
Comments:  Please disclose the final versions of EA and RAP by replacing the versions disclosed 
earlier and include the list of places where the documents have been disclosed. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
05/16/2007 
Comments:   
