Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2670 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/20/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P091747 
Project Name: Vietnam: School Education Quality Assurance 
Task Team Leader: Emanuela Di Gropello 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 15, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
45.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
20.00 
 
Foreign Multilateral Institutions (unidentified) 
20.00
45.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The School Education Quality Assurance Program (SEQAP) aims to improve the quality of 
school education, at pre-primary, primary, and secondary levels.  More specifically, SEQAP 
would improve student learning outcomes in the aggregrate, while also increasing the equitable 
distribution of those learning outcomes across the student population (i.e. closing gaps by socio-
economic level, rural/urban area, gender, ethnicity, etc.).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The program would combine support for new quality-enhancing measures that would apply to all 
school-level sub-sectors (Component A), with support of the policy framework and investment 
in the implementation of the Government's policy of extending full-day schooling (FDS) (i.e. 10 
sessions or 35 periods per week) in primary education (Component B).  
 
Component A: Improving Quality across Education Levels through Support for Student and 
Teacher Assessment and School Management  
Page  2
This component would promote quality improvements at all levels of the education system by 
supporting systemic measures in the areas of student learning outcomes, teacher quality and 
management capacity of province, districts and schools.  
 
Component B: 
Improving Quality in Primary Education through Support of the Transition 
to Universal Full-Day Schooling  
 
This component would promote quality improvements in primary education by supporting a 
viable strategy and the related investments for the implementation of full-day schooling, with 
particular focus on disadvantaged locations.  Only about 30% of the primary students are 
involved in full-day schooling, which has been shown to be highly positively related to learning. 
In the most disadvantaged districts, this proportion falls to 9%.With a sharp decline in the school 
age population and the consequent teacher surplus and classroom availability, coupled with an 
increasing budget for education, it is appropriate to consider a move to full day primary 
schooling for all children in Vietnam.  
 
Component C. 
Support for Program Management   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
To be determined   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project will be implemented by the Primary Education Department of the MOET, which was 
directly responsible for preparing the Primary Teacher Development Project (PDTP) and the 
Primary Education for Disadvantaged Children (PEDC) Project, and, as such, has had direct 
experience with the design and implementation of safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
Safeguard policy on environment may apply if new schools are constructed under the project. 
School rehabilitation vs. school construction is however still under discussion.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Safeguard policy on indigenous people will probably apply. Many indigenous people live in 
disadvantaged districts which will benefit from the proposed full-day schooling reform.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/08/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
May 2007 to May 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Emanuela Di Gropello 
01/31/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
02/13/2007 
Comments:  The TTL is to appoint an environment and social specialist to the task team. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
02/01/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
