Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No.: 38352   
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 
:
11/10/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P097670 
Additional Project ID 
P073763)
:
Project Name: Targeted Service Expansion through Water Loss Reduction Ho Chi Minh 
City 
Task Team Leader: William D. Kingdom 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 2007  
Estimated Board Date:  Approval by GPOBA 
in January 2007 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Lending Instrument:  Grant (GPOBA) 
Sector:  Water Supply (100%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services for the poor (P); Municipal governance and institution 
building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
US$5 million 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
 
Other financing amounts by source:  
Environmental Category:  B 
Simplified Processing                        Simple [ ]                         Repeater [ ]  
Is this a transferred project                 Yes [ ]                              No [ ] 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]: 
 
The objective is to increase access of low income households in Ho Chi Minh City (HCMC) to 
sustainable water supplies
.
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]: 
 
The project will reimburse Saigon Water Corporation (SAWACO) a pre-agreed amount for each 
new service connection made which meets the following criteria:  
·
t
he
recipient household is “low-income” as defined by the People’s Committee of 
HCMC; 
·
the service connection is new; 
·
the service connection has resulted in a service to the household (i.e. availability of 
water) for at least 3 months; and 
Page  2
·
A
corresponding saving of 1m
3
/day has been made through audited reduction in real 
water losses. 
 
SAWACO will make service connections on the basis of demand expressed by the households.  
Households will make an application, possibly accompanied by a part payment of the costs of 
connection.  Once the connection is installed and has been working for an agreed period and 
once the corresponding savings in real losses have been certified by th
e
project’s design and 
supervision consultant/ Non-revenue Water (NRW) auditor, SAWACO will be eligible for 
reimbursement of an agreed amount from the OBA project.  SAWACO will be responsible for 
planning new connections such that they meet the project criteria. The People’s Committee (PC) 
of HCMC will provide SAWACO with regularly updated information to enable them to identify 
eligible households.  
 
New connections may be in-fill within the existing network areas or may be made as part of a 
program of extension of the network in which case the project will also make a part payment to 
off-set the costs of extension of the distribution mains to connect low-income households.
 
On behalf of the City PC, Department of Labor Invalids and Social Affairs (DOLISA) will make 
the payments against eligible outputs. The body for the Project administration within DOLISA 
will be the Steering Board for Hunger Eradication and Poverty Alleviation (HEPA). 
 
D.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis 
(if known): 
 
The new connections will include in-fill and construction of extension mains 
anywhere in the city, subject to meeting the project criteria. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:  
 
SAWACO, which would be responsible for overall project implementation, is also implementing 
a
sub-project under the Vietnam Urban Water Supply Development Project. A fully functioning 
Project Management Unit (PMU) has been established for the IDA sub project and will also be 
responsible for implementation of the GPOBA project. 
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(
please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
This GPOBA project is linked to HCMC sub project within the IDA Vietnam Urban Water 
Supply Development Project (Cr 40280). The IDA sub project implementation will be governed 
by the IDA project’s Environment Guidelines (EG) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
for which the World Bank has provided its No Objection. The EG and RPF will be formally 
adopted by the Peoples Committee of Ho Chi Minh City for the IDA sub project and SAWACO 
will be required to implement this GPOBA project in accordance with the adopted EG and RPF. 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:   
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:   
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.   
 
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: 
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
William D. Kingdom 
December 2, 06 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Glen Morgan 
December 2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Hiroaki Suzuki for Keshav Varma 
December 22, 
‘06 
Comments:   
wb88190 
O:\EASUR\Vel\BKingdom\Vietnam\P073763\ISDS-UWSP-OBA_Dec 22 06 rev.doc 
01/08/2007 11:20:00 AM
 
