Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/21/2006 
Report No.:  AC1946
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P082295 
Project Name:  Coastal Cities Environmental Sanitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  William D. Kingdom 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 17, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 21, 2006 
Managing Unit:  EASUR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sanitation (90%);Sub-national government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
124.70 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
37.80 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
4.60
42.40 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective is to improve the environmental sanitation in the project cities in a 
sustainable way leading to an enhanced quality of life for city residents.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1 - Flood control, drainage and wastewater collection  
 
The project will improve the collection of sewage by building new sewers, interceptors, 
rehabilitating existing sewers, and transporting the wastes to new treatment plants.  
Drainage will be provided by rehabilitating existing drains, constructing new drains 
where regular flooding occurs and enhancing the capacity of flood retention ponds.  
 
Existing combined sewer system will be utilized to the greatest extent possible in the 
central urban core areas with high population densities.  Interceptor sewers will be 
constructed to pick up flows that currently discharge at a number of locations along the 
sea front or into rivers.  In newly developing areas separate or combined systems will be 
constructed, depending on assessments of cost effectiveness.  
 
Component 2 - Wastewater treatment plant  
Page  2
New wastewater treatment plant will be built during Phase 2 of the project to meet 
Vietnamese national effluent standards.  In Nha Trang two plants will be constructed, one 
to serve the urban core and a second will serve the southern residential area.  In Quy 
Nhon two wastewater plants will serve the old city area and a third will serve the south-
western area some 15 km form the city core.  In Dong Hoi a single new treatment plant 
serving the city will be constructed and the existing plant at the city hospital will be 
rehabilitated.  
 
Component 3 - Solid waste management  
 
The collection of solid wastes will be improved and they will be transported to new or 
existing sanitary landfills for final disposal.  In Nha Trang a new sanitary landfill will be 
constructed at Luong Hoa and the existing Ru Ri dump will be safely closed. In Quy 
Nhon the existing landfill at Long My will be rehabilitated and expanded.  In Dong Hoi a 
sanitary landfill is under development with bi lateral funding and the project will provide 
additional equipment or functionality as determined during implementation.  
 
SWM collection equipment will be financed for all cities and transfer stations are 
planned for Nha Trang and Quy Nhon.  The amount and phasing of the SWM equipment 
will follow demand over the project life, and will take account of possible PPP activities.  
 
In Dong Hoi the facilities for safe disposal of medical waste will be constructed.  These 
will be operated by the Urban Works Company (UWC) under contract with the hospital.  
 
Component 4 ? Resettlement  
 
Construction of services (roads and utilities) to new housing plots for relocation of 
project affected people in Quy Nhon and Nha Trang.  
 
Component 5 - Household Revolving Fund and School Sanitation Program  
 
Revolving funds will be established in each city to provide small loans for construction 
of household sanitation facilities.  The funds will be managed by the Women?s Union 
according to the procedures set out in the household revolving fund manual.  Eligibility 
criteria and loan terms and conditions are designed to ensure that low income households 
are able to access and to pay back the loans.  
 
Water supply and sanitation facilities will be built at city schools in response to demand 
from those schools.  Demand assessment and proposed investment for different types of 
schools will follow the design standards set by the Ministry of Education (MoE).  
 
Component 6 - Capacity Building and Project Implementation  
 
Support to Project Management Units (PMU) in project implementation including a) 
overall project management support b) preparation of Phase 2 feasibility studies, detailed 
engineering designs and bid documents c) construction management supervision for 
Phases 1 and 2 d) independent safeguards monitoring and e) financial auditing.  
Equipment to support the PMUs will also be financed.  
 
Capacity building for the service providers and city departments including a) 
institutional study to establish long term structure and staffing for service providers b) 
purchase, installation and commissioning of financial management, management 
information, and billing/collection software for the service providers, and training in its 
Page  3
use c) joint development, with other city departments, of procedures and plans to support 
operation and management of new or rehabilitated project facilities d) technical and 
managerial training to the service providers, including operation and maintenance of the 
facilities and in financial planning e) workshops and study tours and f) miscellaneous 
other capacity building activities.  
 
Capacity building for design and implementation of a Healthy City Partnership (HCP) 
including a) development of the framework for design and implementation of the HCP b) 
implementation of the HCP including training and public awareness, small investments in 
goods and works, and small grants and c) preparation and delivery of public awareness 
campaigns to support sanitation behavior change, and explain benefits from the project 
and its costs.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project would be implemented in the following three cities:  
 
Nha Trang is the project?s southernmost city and is the capital of Khanh Hoa Province, 
with a total population of 350,000 and an urban population of 270,000 in 2002.  
 
Quy Nhon is located north of Nha Trang in the south-central region of Vietnam. It is the 
capital city of Binh Dinh Province with a total population of 252,000 and an urban 
population of 232,000 in 2003.  
 
Dong Hoi is the northernmost city of the project and is the capital of Quang Binh 
Province with a total population of 98,000 and an urban population of 58,000 in 2003.  
 
Environmental.  The cities are located in coastal areas of central and south Vietnam. The 
cities have good beaches and other natural or historic attractions which make them 
important tourist destinations. Urban land use is intense and this limits space for the 
provision of solid waste and wastewater facilities. The cities have similar environmental 
sanitation systems consisting of combined sewers that are generally in poor condition. 
Solid waste collection rates average about 70 percent of the generated volumes and 
existing dumpsites lack basic environmental and public health protection measures. 
Flooding due to poor drainage systems, solid and liquid waste management and related 
environmental sanitation issues are major concerns of people in each of the cities.  
 
Social.  The project will bring social and economic benefits to an estimated 600,000 
residents in participating cities. Adverse social impacts mainly involve permanent and 
temporary land acquisition related to the construction of waste water treatment plans, 
landfills, drains and pipelines. No ethnic minorities groups live in the project areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bekir A. Onursal (EASEN) 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (EASSD) 
Ms KayeAnne J. Henry (EASEN) 
Mr John Morton (EASEN) 
Ms Phuong Thi Thanh Tran (EASEN) 
Page  4
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham (EASSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
OP 4.01, Environmental Assessment.  The project would have overall positive 
environmental and social impacts by mitigating flooding and pollution caused by 
untreated wastewater and poor solid waste management. The investments in 
infrastructure have the potential for short-term and site-specific adverse impacts on water 
resources and on residential areas.  Other key environmental impacts include: disposal of 
dredged sludge from drains and from WWTPs, septage collection and disposal, solid 
waste management and treatment of leachates/gases from landfill sites, temporary 
effluent discharge from the improved drainage and sewer systems during Phase 1 and 
effluent discharge from the WWTPs during Phase 2, selection and construction of 
resettlement sites. The Environmental Assessments for the subprojects identified for the 
Phase 1 of the project satisfy the Bank?s requirements for OP 4.01.  
 
OP 4.04, Natural Habitats.  The subprojects do not impact any sensitive sites, critical 
natural habitats or protected areas. Improved waste treatment should benefit the Hon Mun 
Marine Protected Area in Nha Trang Bay by improving treatment of wastewater 
discharged into the bay. The environmental screening and assessment approach for Phase 
2, which is subject to Bank reviews and approval, will ensure that the project will not 
finance conversion of any critical natural habitats.  
 
OP 4.11, Cultural Resources.  Cultural property exists in the project cities but identified 
impacts are limited. Proper construction supervision will be needed during project 
implementation, particularly pipeline excavations and dredging activity. The EA reports 
include construction clauses with explicit procedures in the case of finding cultural 
property and to cover chance finds.    
 
OP 4.12. Involuntary Resettlement.  The Borrower prepared RAPs for Phase 1 activities 
that are acceptable to IDA. The phase I investments would affect 161 households, of 
Page  5
which 77 would be relocated and 78 would be severely affected by losing income 
sources. Land acquisition for the whole project would affect 912 households, of which 
356 households would be relocated and 172 households would be severely affected by 
the loss of income sources. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) acceptable to IDA 
and approved by the Prime Minister and adopted by the participating Provinces was 
prepared for Phase 2 investments. The RAPs for phase 2 investments will be prepared in 
accordance with the RPF.  
 
Indigenous People (OD 4.20) The socio-economic survey found there are no ethnic 
minorities groups living in the project areas. Therefore, OD 4.20 is not triggered under 
this project.  
 
BP 17.50, Public Disclosure.  The Bank?s disclosure requirements have been followed. 
All drafts of the EAs, RPF, RAPs, were disclosed in Washington DC and in VDIC in 
Hanoi by January 19, 2006. The Vietnamese translations were disclosed by January 13, 
2006.  All final versions were disclosed by May 26, 2006. All documents were disclosed 
locally in the city People Committees, the provincial Department of Natural Resources 
and Environment, the Project Preparation Units, and the affected wards to be accessible 
to local NGOs and project affected people.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is expected to have significant positive benefits for the environment, public 
health and the tourism-based economy due to reduced frequency and level of flooding in 
the cities, improved collection and handling of liquid and solid wastes, and improvements 
in sanitation service and capacity.  
 
Wastewater treatment is new for these cities, but appropriate WWT technology has been 
chosen to meet the national environmental standards at acceptable costs. In order to better 
understand the issues associated with making connections to the new sewers, a limited 
house connection program will be implemented prior to completion of wastewater 
treatment plants. This will result in the temporary discharge of some household liquid 
wastes (from gray water and septic tank outlets) into rivers and lakes, until the 
wastewater treatment plant are built. These house connections will only be made where 
studies have shown that the impact of the temporary discharges is within national 
standards. Specific mitigation measures will be adopted to reduce pollution discharge at 
each of the outlets, and water quality of the receiving waters will be carefully monitored.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The proposed project builds on the experience gained to date in implementing the related 
Three Cities Sanitation Project (Loan Agreement No. 3211 ? VN). Alternatives 
considered during the Phase 1 preparation activities have included alternative facility 
sitings and pipeline alignments, treatment technologies and location of temporary outlets 
for drainage and wastewater discharge.   
 
Page  6
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment. EIA reports for each city and a summary EA for Phase 1 have been 
prepared. An Environmental Guideline was approved to guide the preparation of 
environmental documents for Phase 2 subprojects.  
 
The three provincial Project Management Units (PMUs) are new and lacking staff with 
relevant background to supervise the preparation and implementation of safeguard 
policies. To mitigate this, experienced international consultants will be hired during 
Phase 2 to advise and assist local consultants in preparing safeguard documents. The EIA 
reports will be reviewed and approved by the Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Environment (MONRE) or by the provincial DONREs as delegated by MONRE. Regular 
reporting on environmental compliance will be required to be submitted by PMUs to both 
IDA and DONREs.  
 
During implementation, technical assistance will be included in the project to cover 
construction supervision and institutional strengthening. The construction management 
consultants (CMC) will be responsible for the oversight of mitigation measures. 
Independent environmental monitoring consultants (IEMC) will be hired to provide 
guidance to the CMC and also to PMUs in monitoring the overall environmental impacts 
of the project and the implementation of the EMPs. Institutional strengthening will 
include capacity building for environmental management for the PMU staff, constructors, 
and other concerned local stakeholders.  
 
In addition, the project will be implemented in two Phases, with some 60 - 70 % of 
project expenditures occurring during Phase 2 (md-2008 to 2013) by which time the 
Borrower?s Institutional capacity is expected to have significantly improved.  
 
Social. A resettlement policy framework (RPF) acceptable to the Bank has been 
prepared and has been approved by the Prime Minister. Phase 1 resettlement plans 
(RAPs) for each city have been prepared in line with the RPF, and approved by the 
respective PPC. There will be a staff, responsible for RAP implementation in each city?s 
PMU. These staff will be trained on the safeguards policies and their implementation. 
The PMUs will work closely with the local authorities in RAP implementation and 
monitoring. Regular reports on resettlement progress will be required to submit to the 
Bank. RAPs for phase 2 will be prepared in accordance with the approved RPF when the 
subcomponents are defined  
 
Implementation arrangements.  The PMU for each city will establish an office with 
social and environmental specialists to manage and supervise safeguard implementation 
(for phase I investments) and preparation (for later phases). Independent consultants, 
hired by each city, will monitor compliance of safeguards throughout project 
implementation.   
 
Page  7
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project key stakeholders include:  
 
?
Provincial and city People?s Committees? who are responsible for guiding the 
development planning of their respective areas.  
 
?
Provincial Departments of Natural Resources and Environment (DONRE), the 
Water Supply and Drainage Companies and Urban Environment Companies (URENCO) 
who responsible for providing the project-assisted environmental sanitation services.  
 
?
City?s compensation, assistance and resettlement council  
 
?
City?s and ward?s people committees  
 
?
Mass organizations such as the Women, Youth, and Veteran Unions  
 
?
Local residents and business in the targeted service areas.  
 
These key stakeholders have been directly involved in project preparation, involving 
planning meetings, consultations and surveys to date.  Project affected  people include the 
77 households who will need to be resettled as part of Phase 1 activities and for which 
RAPs acceptable to the Bank have been prepared and appropriate resettlement sites and 
budgets are available.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/09/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/19/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/18/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
07/14/2006  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/23/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/13/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/13/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
Yes 
Page  8
review and approve the EA report? 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William D. Kingdom 
06/26/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John Morton 
08/17/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
08/17/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Phillip Brylski 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
07/31/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
08/21/2006 
Comments:   
