Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2738 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/04/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P104848 
Project Name: VIETNAM- HIFU Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Kamran M. Khan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 24, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2007 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Lending Instrument: Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector: General finance sector (100%) 
Theme: Municipal finance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
30.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
To develop HIFU as a model LDIF (by implementing the operational reform package which 
provides internal policy and procedures for financial management, project preparation and 
investment appraisal, social and environmental safeguards, and partnership with the private 
sector) and increase private sector participation in financing cost-recovery oriented municipal 
infrastructure in HCMC.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will have two components. Component A. ($49.5 million) will involve 
provision of IDA credit over the project implementation period to HIFU to make infrastructure 
investments in partnership with the private sector. Component B. ($0.5 million) will support 
monitoring and implementation support which will be closely related to the adoption of the 
operational reforms.  The details of the conditions for the use of IDA credit by HIFU will be 
defined and clearly stipulated in the reform package which will be finalized during project 
preparation period. It is assumed that HCMC PC, DPI and other departments within the 
provincial government will identify projects for HIFU's consideration which can be financed via 
public private partnerships. HIFU will then undertake project structuring/appraisal, and invite 
private investors to participate in the projects.  
Page  2
HIFU will be the implementing agency for the HDP, responsible for preparing and submitting 
all project documentation required for obtaining GOV approval. The project will support the 
policy objectives of the LDIFP and lay the operational foundation for the larger national program 
to support LDIFs in Vietnam. The HDP will involve operational reforms in HIFU and provision 
of IDA credit for HIFU operations. The subprojects financed will involve municipal 
infrastructure, including water supply, distribution and/ or treatment; solid waste management, 
sewerage disposal and/ or treatment; toll roads and bridges; transport logistics; ports; fixed 
infrastructure in support of telecommunications and data/ information technology; residential 
development including for low-income people, industrial parks and other development 
infrastructure, energy transport infrastructure; and health and education infrastructure.  HIFU 
shall not invest in sectors that are prohibited by the Vietnam laws and regulations and/or the 
respective PPC decrees. The key operational manuals, procedures and other recommendation 
designed to improve the performance of HIFU will be implemented over the course of project 
implementation. The Operational Reforms to be implemented under the HDP will require 
approval of the related manuals by HIFU Management and the HCMC PC.  The following 
operational reforms will be implemented under the HDP:  
 
-
Project Preparation and Appraisal Manual: Implement an improved project appraisal system 
over a period of 3 years.  
 
-
Environmental Safeguards due Diligence Procedures: Implement an improved system for 
identifying, managing and monitoring environmental safeguards in HIFU subprojects over a 
period of 3 years.  
 
-
Social Safeguards due Diligence Procedures: Implement an improved system for identifying, 
managing and monitoring social safeguards in HIFU subprojects over a period of 3 years.  
 
-
Private Sector Partner Selection Framework/Manual: Implement a transparent framework for 
selecting private sector partners for investments in HIFU subprojects which will be implemented 
over a period of 3 years.  
 
The financial performance of HIFU (and its compliance as a financial intermediary under Bank 
OP 8.30) will be managed, monitored and supervised according to the following financial 
parameters which have been agreed with HIFU Management and the HCMC PC:  
 
1.
Aggregate equity investments not to exceed [50] percent of paid in equity capital  
 
2.
Debt-to-equity (i.e. Leverage) not exceed [2:1]  
 
3.
Liquid Assets sufficient to cover projected 18 months of operating expenses  
 
4.
Single equity investment not to exceed [5] percent of paid-in equity capital  
 
5.
Single equity investment not to exceed [25] percent of a project/ company  
 
6.
Debt investment in a single project not to exceed [7.5] percent of total capital  
 
7.
Total investment (debt and/or equity) in a single obligor not to exceed [10] percent of 
total fund capital (including debt and equity)  
 
Page  3
The IDA credit will be made available to HIFU according to a proposed on-lending structure 
which will be finalized during project preparation according to the Decree # 131 of the central 
government on ODA management. The structure involves the Ministry of Finance borrowing 
IDA credit from the Bank and then on-lending the funds to HIFU under reasonable terms which 
take into account the cost of foreign exchange risk and other administrative costs.  The 
disbursement of the funds will take place according to the 6-monthly Report-based Disbursement 
Procedures of the Bank, which will require HIFU to present its anticipated capital needs over the 
next 6-months and provide proof of capital used over the previous 6-month period.  It is 
anticipated that there will be two sets of World Bank loan agreements. There will be the standard 
IDA agreement between the MoF and World Bank/IDA, and a project agreement between HIFU 
and World Bank/IDA. The Bank supervision team will ensure HIFU compliance with the terms 
and conditions of the loan agreements.  HIFU will also comply with international standard 
accounting audits and financial management conditions of the World Bank/IDA agreements. In 
addition to institutional development to support the adoption of the reform package discussed 
above, the technical assistance under the monitoring and implementation support will be 
designed to allow HIFU to hire a) consultants for operational advice and on-the-job training over 
the first 3-years of operations, and b) independent consultants to monitor compliance of 
safeguard performance and required fiduciary reviews and financial audits.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The subprojects financed by HIFU under the WB/IDA credit will be located in the HCMC area.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
HIFU has the institutional arrangement to manage investments, and its departments have clear 
understanding of the requirements for implementing the Bank and GOV environmental and 
social safeguard policies during a subproject appraisal, investment and monitoring phases. HIFU 
has staff which is trained in environmental and social management, and they have gained 
familiarity with environmental assessment and resettlement and compensation tasks through 
other projects. Bank safeguards team has already provided some training to the However, HIFU 
the need for tailored training for HIFU staff on environmental and social safeguards has been 
acknowledged and provided under the project design, with a focus on on-the-job training to help 
HIFU manage the subprojects in the initial years. Specifically, the environmental and social 
consultants will help HIFU implement safeguard policies including review of environmental 
assessment and social safeguards documents, preparation of TORs, and monitoring of the 
implementation of environmental management and resettlement plans. HIFU Management and 
HCMC PC have also agreed to fund (with IDA resources) independent monitors to monitor the 
safeguards related performance of HIFU and its joint ventures (subproject specific). Finally, in 
addition to the training and Bank advisory oversight provided under the HDP, HIFU will also 
receive considerable training under the national level Bank project focusing on LDIFs in 
Vietnam (the LDIFP) which is currently scheduled for delivery in FY?08.  The LDIFP will house 
a
TA Window for participating LDIFs, which will be funded under the IDA credit, with 
supplemental funding coming from other donors via co-financing arrangements.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Phuong Thi Thanh Tran (EASRE) 
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham (EASSO) 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Screening mechanism in the sub-project appraisal due diligence framework and the EA.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Screening mechanism in the sub-project appraisal due diligence framework and the EMPF.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
To be managed according to the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and the associated 
implementation and monitoring system   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/02/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/04/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The safeguards team has been actively engaged in the design of this FI project in recognition 
of the critical need to establish sound policy and procedures in HIFU to manage safeguard 
issues in its on-going operations, including the subprojects which will be financed with 
WB/IDA credit. The various safeguard documents (Environment Safeguard Manual, Social 
Safeguards Manual, Resettlement Policy Framework) have been prepared under the direct 
supervision of safeguard staff in the task team according to the ToRs which were reviewed, 
revised and cleared.  
 
The task team plans to conduct a detailed pre-appraisal on March 19-26. It has been agreed 
that the task team will organize the safeguards review after the pre-appraisal, which will 
focus on the project plan to help HIFU implement the manuals and the RPF, i.e., provide any 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
additional recommendations to the task team on how to further mitigate safeguards risks in 
implementation. It is anticipated that the safeguard review will take place in early April, 
2007. The task team plans to conduct the pre-appraisal to an appraisal after the project has 
been approved by the GOV and a safeguards review has been conducted.  It is anticipated 
that the decision meeting to convert the pre-appraisal to appraisal will be organized in late 
April, 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Kamran M. Khan 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Juan D. Quintero 
04/04/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
 
Comments:   
