Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/11/2007 
Report No.:  AC2645
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P101608 
Project Name:  VN-Avian & Human Influenza Control &Prep 
Task Team Leader:  Severin L. Kodderitzsch 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 22, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: February 5, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASRE 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (50%);Animal production (50%) 
Theme:  Other communicable diseases (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Natural 
disaster management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.00 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
5.00 
 
FOREIGN MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS (UNIDENTIFIED) 
10.00
18.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
Consistent with the GPAI, the project's development objective is to support the 
implementation of Vietnam's plans for control of avian influenza.  As stated in the OPI, 
the overall objectives of Vietnam's plans for the medium to long-term control of avian 
influenza is to reduce the health risk to humans from avian influenza by controlling the 
disease at source in domestic poultry, by early detection and response to human cases, 
and by preparing for the medical consequences of a human pandemic if it occurs over the 
next five years   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project comprises three components: Component A -- HPAI Control and Eradication 
in the Agricultural Sector; Component B -- Influenza Prevention and Pandemic 
Preparedness in the Health Sector; and Component C -- Integration and OPI 
Coordination, Results M&E, and Project Management.  Through implemention of these 
components, VAHIP would help consolidate the gains made under AIERP and under 
various human health projects by (a) further strengthening veterinary and human health 
Page  2
services, (b) improving the quality and scope of disease control and surveillance and 
public awareness, and (c) supporting integration of animal and human health activities 
and OPI coordination. The proposed project would focus on support for activities not 
already covered by other donors and financiers, and would be implemented in some 
eleven provinces (see IBRD Map 35196).  
 
Component A -- HPAI Control and Eradication in the Agricultural Sector (US$15 
million).   Component A will be implemented in each of the eleven project provinces and 
will comprise five subcomponents:  
 
Subcomponent A1: Strengthening of veterinary services. This subcomponent will 
provide technical assistance, equipment, training, and allowances to: (a) ensure testing 
needs for avian influenza are met and that the reliability of these tests is improved under 
appropriate biosafe conditions; (b) a portable BSL-3 unit will be established at the Ho 
Chi Minh City Regional Veterinary Centre to enable laboratory workers to isolate viruses 
under biosafe conditions, and (c) strengthen veterinary service networks with a focus on 
community animal health workers;  
 
Subcomponent A2: Enhanced disease control. This subcomponent comprises five 
activities conducted in live-bird markets, slaughterhouses, poultry farms and border areas 
to consolidate gains already made in avian influenza control.  These five activities are (a) 
a
market-based avian influenza control will be introduced at the Ha Vi live-poultry 
market in Ha Tay province, which supplies around 50 percent of consumer demand for 
poultry to Hanoi, (b) procedures will be developed to break the infection chain between 
farms and slaughterhouses, (c) develop pilot disease monitoring systems for large, 
commercial poultry farms to demonstrate sustained freedom from infection with H5N1 
avian influenza, (d) five vaccination related activities, and (e) strengthen animal 
quarantine activities in the border province of Lang Son, a major route for illegally 
smuggled poultry into northern Vietnam.  
 
Subcomponent A3: Surveillance and epidemiological investigations. This 
subcomponent will provide technical assistance, equipment, and training for  cost-
effective surveillance methods.  
 
Subcomponent A4: Support to the Department of Livestock Production (MARD) 
capacity to plan on poultry industry restructuring. This subcomponent will provide 
technical assistance, equipment, training, and allowances to: (a) plan, appraise and pilot 
poultry development schemes that meet economic, social and environmental criteria; and 
(b) conduct studies and pilot schemes or demonstrations for bio-secure, efficient and 
equitable poultry production and processing pilots.  
 
Subcomponent A5: Emergency outbreak containment plan. This subcomponent will 
provide technical assistance, equipment, protective clothing, disinfections, training, and 
contracted services to: (a) enhance early reporting of disease outbreaks by villagers to 
animal health authorities to ensure effective outbreak control, (b) undertake simulation 
exercises in avian influenza outbreak containment, (c) stockpile protective gear and 
Page  3
consumables in strategic locations, (d) establish an emergency contingency to cover the 
cost of large scale vaccination in case of widespread outbreaks, and (e) undertake studies 
on streamlining compensation payments for rapid disbursement in case of avian influenza 
outbreaks.  
 
Component B -- Influenza Prevention and Pandemic Preparedness in the Health Sector 
(US$ 15 million).  This component aims to improve the MOH?s capacity to detect and 
manage HPAI infection in humans and to reduce the impact of any human influenza 
epidemic by strengthening the effectiveness of the sector's response to the HPAI threat, 
consistent with the goals of the government's National Plan for Avian and Human 
Influenza Control.  It has four subcomponents:  
 
Subcomponent B1: Improving the technical quality of the surveillance and response 
system. This sub-component will start with a review of the current surveillance system, 
its performance at different levels, options for better coordination with veterinary 
surveillance, and comparisons with other countries' systems. A key input will be a review 
of the human resource situation, including the adequacy of mechanisms for attracting, 
retaining, and motivating suitable staff.  This work will guide the subcomponent's support 
to implementation of a flexible system appropriate for Vietnam in the project provinces. 
It will also guide support to pilot efforts to implement and integrate the EWARS in the 
routine surveillance system, backed up by funding for mobile rapid response teams and 
for testing the system through simulation exercises. This subcomponent will finance staff 
training, selected equipment items, stockpiles of protective material, and technical 
assistance.  
 
Subcomponent B2: Improving the technical quality and efficiency of curative care 
preparedness. This subcomponent will support the MOH to review (i) the curative care 
sub-sector's strategy to respond to HPAI, focusing on roles of the centre and the 
provinces and the different levels of hospitals; (ii) an estimate of the baseline demand for 
intensive care services and mechanisms to reduce the mismatch between supply of and 
demand for these services across the project provinces, and (iii) the strategy (and action 
plans) to respond to an overwhelming epidemic or public health emergency. On the basis 
of these reviews, the subcomponent will support staff training, acquisition of medical 
equipment, rehabilitation of isolation facilities, and revision of clinical care and infection 
control guidelines. It will also support the revision of epidemic response action plans at 
the central and provincial levels, set up of an emergency hospital management structure 
linked to the PPC and the DOH, completion of the stockpile of personal protective 
equipment and materials for establishing field hospitals, and a contingency budget in the 
case of an outbreak.  Finally, it will finance epidemic simulation exercises to test 
preparedness measures and coordination structures.  
 
Subcomponent B3: Strengthening communication for behavior change in health care 
staff. This subcomponent would fund a KAP survey which will then be used to develop a 
BCC strategy and action plan for the health sector with the following goals: (i) to reduce 
the risk of HPAI and human influenza transmission between patients and from patients to 
health staff, and (ii) to allow preventative and curative staff to educate patients and target 
Page  4
groups in the local population. This strategy would look at communication needs, target 
audiences, and ways of delivering messages under different phases of an epidemic 
(current situation, limited human-to-human transmission, overwhelming epidemic). In 
addition to the technical assistance for the KAP survey and strategy, this subcomponent 
would also finance the adaptation of the strategy by each of the provinces; staff training 
and capacity building measures; implementation needs such as BCC materials; 
incremental operating costs; and evaluation of the BCC program.  
 
Subcomponent B4: Piloting approaches to improving surveillance & response and 
hospital performance in the provinces and districts. This subcomponent would allow the 
provinces to develop and pilot approaches to improving the performance of these key 
systems as the HPAI response moves from an emergency mode to one which must be 
sustainable into the medium term. A focus of this subcomponent will be developing and 
testing novel approaches to coordinated activities with animal health, particularly in 
surveillance and response. Although provinces will be supported in identifying their own 
priorities, well known system-level constraints include staff motivation and performance 
management, participation of private sector doctors in the surveillance system, 
information sharing between the preventative and curative sectors, and management of 
important hospital initiatives such as nosocomial infection control.  Other areas of 
interest are pilots of community health worker involvement in surveillance and potential 
contributions of the newly proposed district preventative medicine centers to case 
detection.  The subcomponent would support technical assistance to identify key issues, 
help provinces develop proposals, and evaluate performance of the pilot activities. The 
technical assistance would undertake a review of human resource issues in the 
surveillance system in project provinces and selected hospitals to help guide the 
proposals.  
 
Component C - Project Management and Capacity Building (US$ 5 million).  
Component C will support the integration and coordination between MARD, MOH and 
other concerned ministries and agencies in implementing the government?s National Plan 
for Avian and Human Influenza Control.  It will also support the design, establishment 
and implementation of a result-based M&E system to evaluate the project?s progress, 
performance, and impact at the sector and regional levels. Lastly, this component will 
strengthen institutional capacity in order to undertake project management in terms of 
planning, coordination, and actual implementation of the overall project at the national, 
provincial, district, and commune-levels.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project would be carried out in eleven provinces: Lang Son, Ha Tay, Thai Binh, 
Thua Thien - Hue, Binh Dinh, Long An, Tien Giang, Dong Thap, Thanh Hoa, Ha Tinh, 
and Tay Ninh.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Lan Thi Thu Nguyen (EASSO) 
Ms Trang Phuong Thi Nguyen (EASRE) 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project would overall have positive environmental and social impacts. The project's 
environmental and social issues relate to two main activities:  
 
Strengthened Veterinary Services and enhanced disease surveillance control in the 
Agricultural Sector. The project will support facilities, equipment, and training to ensure 
that (a) the veterinary diagnostic laboratory network has the capacity and capability to 
meet demands for avian influenza testing. These tests will be performed using 
standardized quality assured procedures under bio-safe conditions; (b) live-bird market 
and slaughterhouse hygiene is improved. Live-bird markets form the hub in the poultry 
marketing chain from which upstream producers, traders and transporters and 
downstream processors and consumers handle poultry. Securing these markets from 
infectious disease is a major step forward in controlling avian influenza, thereby 
protecting the general public and poultry workers from this disease; and (c) disease 
control in poultry sector restructuring guidelines and production models is enhanced. 
Poultry sector restructuring will be focused on the basic rationale for this undertaking, 
namely the prevention of transmissible infectious disease by means of building design 
and location, hygiene and disinfection, vaccination, and sustained disease surveillance.  
 
Improve capacity of the Health Sector in detecting and managing HPAI infection in 
humans.  The project will support facilities, equipment, and training to (a) improve the 
technical quality of the surveillance and response system; (ii) improve the technical 
quality and efficiency of curative care preparedness; (iii) strengthen communication for 
behavior change in health care staff; and (iv) pilot approaches to improving surveillance 
&
response and hospital performance in the provinces and districts. To a large extent this 
entails capacity building activities.  In particular, the project will ensure guidelines and 
practices for specimen collection, handling, and transport which meet international 
standards; improved in-hospital infection control standards, procedures, and monitoring 
Page  6
in normal facility operations and during a pandemic; and agreed, priority measures to 
address health care waste related to project investments in health facilities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project would not cause or contribute to long term or cumulative negative impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
There are no viable long term alternatives to effectively address avian and human 
influenza in an integrated manner. In fact, this project is following with the Integrated 
National Operational Program for Avian and Human Influenza (the OPI, or Green Book), 
endorsed by the Government of Vietnam and the donor community for the medium to 
long term control of avian influenza, and in line with the Emergency Disease 
Contingency Plan for Control of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza in Vietnam and 
approved by MARD on December 5, 2005.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The measures taken by the Borrower are to be considered according to safeguard issues, 
as follows:  
 
On controlling avian influenza and with regard to the temporary construction-related 
impacts, MARD has sufficient experience with the environmental mitigation measures 
used to manage these, as they are commonly used in projects financed by GoV and the 
World Bank. These mitigations will be included in possible construction contracts.  
 
With regard to the human health issues arising from sample collection and testing for 
avian influenza, the issue of capacity has been the subject of technical reviews by several 
agencies, including WHO, FAO, and the CDC, with additional information collected by 
the preparation team. There is good capacity within the National Institute for Hygiene 
and Epidemiology and the Pasteur Institute HCMC for basic handling and typing of AI-
infected samples.  
 
The Borrower will need to address weaknesses in several areas related to safeguarding 
human health:  
 
(a) 
Capacity is weak at the provincial to communal levels on procedures for handling 
and transporting samples to Hanoi and HCMC for testing;  
 
(b) 
Capacity-strengthening measures for infection control in hospital need to be 
strengthened further;  
 
(b) 
The project will finance an action plan to be prepared and undertaken by the 
Borrower in the course of project implementation [to be confirmed with MOH]  
 
Page  7
The project is specifically designed to build capacity in these areas, with investments to 
upgrade laboratory facilities and provide training to improve the safety of lab workers. In 
animal health, the project would require adoption of and adherence to international 
standards for laboratory safety in accordance with OIE standards. The project design 
includes technical assistance and independent inspection of the lab facilities and practices 
to ensure that the appropriate standards are met.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Stakeholders of the project include: (i) poultry farmers throughout Vietnam, and in 
particular those of the projects provinces where most of the project?s activities will be 
implemented; (ii) state institutions such as the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development, the National Institute for Veterinary Research, and the Ministry of Health; 
(iii) and provincial and local officials.  
 
Consultation:  The project has been discussed with each of these stakeholders.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/03/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/15/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/03/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/20/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/20/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Page  8
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Severin L. Kodderitzsch 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Trang Phuong Thi Nguyen 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Lan Thi Thu Nguyen 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
12/06/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
 
Comments:   
