                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                          Report No.: AC2115


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/03/2006

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: West Bank and Gaza                  Project ID: P096777
Project Name: Palestinian NGO Project III
Task Team Leader: Meskerem Brhane
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 3, 2006       Estimated Board Date: December 14, 2006
Managing Unit: MNSRE                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Other social services (100%)
Theme: Social safety nets (P);Participation and civic engagement (P)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER                                                        1.00
        SPECIAL FINANCING                                               5.00
                                                                        6.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed development objective of the project is to institutionalize mechanisms for
supporting the Palestinian NGO sector and thereby provide effective social services to poor and
marginalized communities. This would be measured by (i) the establishment of an NGO
Development Center that successfully mobilizes resources for grant making to Palestinian NGOs
for social service delivery; (ii) increase in the number of the poorest and most marginalized
communities receiving NGO support; (iii) number of NGOs with improved administrative,
financial planning and evaluation systems; and (iv) adoption and monitoring of voluntary
performance and accountability standards by NGOs.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
PNGO III consolidates the achievements of PNGO I and II by moving the driving force for
further NGO development into the hands of Palestinian NGOs. It will support the establishment
of an umbrella organization, the NGO Development Center, that will gradually, assume project
management responsibilities which were handled by an international NGO, the Welfare
Association. PNGO III will support the Center in developing its capacity to implement its
mandate: (a) mobilize funds from diversified sources (local – including the private sector,
donors, NGO networks etc), coordinate, manage and disburse grants transparently to provide
multi-year program-based funding for NGOs (b) provide capacity building services for
Palestinian NGOs in administrative and financial management, planning and evaluation; and (c)
set professional and performance standards in cooperation with sector ministries.

 The project will also provide funding to develop and sustain specific NGO sponsored social
service delivery activities where they have a particular comparative advantage or in remote
localities where the availability of PA services is limited. These funds will be allocated under a
competitive and transparent system, providing access to both large and small NGOs and will be
accompanied with capacity building measures to improve quality of service delivery.
Partnerships between large NGOs and small community-based organizations as well as between
NGOs and other partners will be encouraged. These partnerships could include local
governments, private sector, the PA and donors, thereby expanding opportunities for longer-term
funding through local and donor resources. Selection of NGO interventions would be based on
the PA’s Medium-Term Plan (2006-2008), sector reviews andstrategic planning processes. The
project will have three main components:

 Component 1: NGO Sector Development (US$ 1.5 million)
 i) The Sector Support Program (US$1 million) will provide funding for sector-wide initiatives,
or services for enhancing performance and monitoring social service standards and information
sharing.

 (ii) Technical Assistance and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) (US$ 500,000) will provide
resources for technical assistance intended to support capacity building in a number of specific
areas that are widely identified as a priority for enhancing the performance of NGOs in service
delivery, including M&E, beneficiary impact assessments, implementing accountability and
performance standards, mobilizing and harmonizing funding procedures.

  Component 2: Institutional Development (US$ 1 million)
  This component will support the establishment of the NGO Development Center, an umbrella
organization consisting of the current Supervisory Board, the five Palestinian NGO networks, the
Welfare Association and other members of civil society. It will also support the project’s
management structure.
  Component 3: Grant Making: (US$2.5 million)
  Block grants and training to enhance their capacity (administrative, service delivery,
transparency etc) will be provided to qualifying beneficiary NGOs. Capacity building for
individual NGOs will be mainstreamed throughout all grant programs, emphasizing the need to
ensure the transfer of expertise across NGOs at different capacity levels through formal
partnerships.
  (i) The Development Grant Program (US$1 million) will fund NGOs with proven track records
for implementing successful and innovative social service delivery programs. Projects to be
financed under this component will range between US$100,000 - US$200,000 and be
implemented over 2-3 years. These grants will support longer-term sustainability of critical
services to marginalized communities.
  ii) The Partnership Grant Program (US$1.5 million) will support service delivery by NGOs in a
number of pre-defined programmatic areas. Its objective is to promote partnerships between
NGOs, local governments or other actors for the delivery of priority services for marginalized
groups or those in isolated geographic areas. A specific focus includes those activities targeting
youth

D. Project location (if known)
Throughout the Palestinian territories – West Bank and Gaza

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Client has environmental screening procedures in place. The effectiveness of these
instruments and their application will be assessed during the pre-appraisal mission.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr John Bryant Collier (MNSRE)
   Mr Colin S. Scott (MNSRE)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                              X
    OP 4.01 is likely to be triggered because of the grants to NGOs for small-scale works. The
pre-appraisal mission will confirm this and begin working with the client to prepare an
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) which includes screening criteria and required
mitigation measures for proposed grants to NGOs. The EMP will be prepared and approved by
the Bank prior to appraisal.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                   X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                            X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                       X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                 X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                     X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                         X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 05/31/2006

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   ISDS: N/A
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   An EMP will be completed in May, 2006.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Ms Meskerem Brhane                                             02/09/2006
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Luis F. Constantino
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
