Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/31/2006 
Report No.:  AC2488
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  West Bank and Gaza 
Project ID:  P096777 
Project Name:  Palestinian NGO Project  III 
Task Team Leader:  Meskerem Brhane 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 26, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 14, 2006 
Managing Unit:  MNSRE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (P);Participation and civic engagement (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
1.00 
 SPECIAL 
FINANCING 
5.00
6.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to provide social services to those who are 
poor, vulnerable or affected by the deteriorating socioeconomic conditions by 
establishing an effective mechanism to improve the quality and sustainability of NGO 
social service delivery.  
 
The first two PNGO projects successfully built up Palestinian NGO capacity to carry 
out social service delivery activities.  Now there is a need to consolidate and sustain this 
capacity by moving the driving force for further NGO development firmly into the hands 
of Palestinian NGOs.  To this end, PNGOIII will support the transformation of the PMO, 
the implementing unit within the Welfare Association of the previous projects, into the 
NGO Development Center (NDC), an institution dedicated to grant-making and sector 
development.  At the same time, the project will provide funding to develop and sustain 
specific NGO-sponsored social service delivery activities.  
 
The key indicators for project success include:  
 
(a) 
Services: Percentage of poor and vulnerable groups who have received  improved 
social services;  
Page  2
(b) 
Governance: Percentage of recipient NGOs implementing good governance, 
accountability and  transparency standards as defined in the Code of Conduct; and  
 
(c) 
Sustainability: Mobilization of new funding sources for financing social service 
delivery by Palestinian  NGOs.   
 
3. Project Description 
A. 
Project Components  
 
In order to improve the quality and sustainability of social service delivery by NGOs, 
the proposed project will provide grants to NGOs and contribute towards the 
development of the sector through improved governance and accountability practices.  It 
will also focus on improving access of the poor and vulnerable to these services.  Three 
components are envisaged:  
 
1. 
NGO Grant Facility;  
 
2.
NGO Sector Development; and  
 
3.
Institutional Development NDC.  
 
Component 1: NGO Grants for Social Service Delivery (US$6.623 million)  
 
This component will provide five different types of grants to NGOs for social service 
delivery, focusing on sub-sectors and themes where NGOs have a comparative 
advantage.  These grants will target poor and/or vulnerable groups (people with special 
needs, youth, orphans, women-headed households, etc.).  Some of the sectors and 
thematic areas that will receive priority include Agricultural Activities, Health, Youth 
Development, Early Childhood Development, Mental Health, Disability, and Social 
Protection Services, etc. The five sub-components envisaged are:  
 
(a) 
Empowerment Grants (US$2.290 million) support experienced NGOs in 
providing innovative social services. NGOs will design their programs based on needs 
identified by the community to help them cope with the current crisis;  
 
(b) 
Mentoring Partnerships (US$2.433 million) support social service delivery by 
small community based NGOs partnering with experienced NGOs. It enables small 
NGOs to improve the quality of their social service delivery through knowledge sharing 
and networking with professionalized NGOs operating on a national scale;  
 
(c) 
Grants to Specialized Health Providers (US$1.6 million).  In response to the 
current crisis in health services, this subcomponent supports NGO hospitals in the West 
Bank and Gaza which are providing specialized health care services (physical therapy, 
neurosurgery, ophthalmology, and cancer treatment) none of which are available in the 
current public health system. This subcomponent is demand-driven expressed in 
proposals by the health providers in response to the health care needs of the population. 
The intervention is closely coordinated with the ESSP and will not duplicate any of its 
services;  
 
Page  3
(d) 
Piloting NGO-Local Government Partnerships (US$0.3 million) through joint 
activities designed and implemented by municipalities and NGOs.  This contributes to 
improved coordination, planning and service complementarity among locally based 
NGOs and local Government, leading to sustainability;  
 
(e) 
Emergency grants to NGOs (Euro 6 million) to support communities impacted by 
the current economic crisis through short-term employment generation.  Donor financing 
for this subcomponent has already been mobilized through parallel financing by Agence 
Francaise de Developpement (AfD).  With the availability of additional donor funds, 
other types of emergency needs may be financed under this sub-component.  
 
NGOs are only eligible to receive one type of grant at a time.  In addition to the grants, 
NGOs will benefit from capacity-building activities such as participatory monitoring and 
evaluation, project implementation, administration, finance, accounting and budgeting.  
 
The above grant sub-components create a platform to leverage funds from other donors.  
The Bank funds allocated for the project are too limited to address the increasing needs of 
communities.  Therefore, additional funding for the grants program is critical for 
achieving results on the ground.  
 
Component 2: NGO Sector Development (US$1.1 million)  
 
This component aims to develop the NGO sector as a whole to become more 
responsive, transparent and accountable to Palestinian communities by setting standards, 
promoting collaboration within the sector and strategic policy research and planning.  In 
order to achieve this goal, three subcomponents are proposed:  
 
(a) 
Governance (Code of Conduct)(US$0.6 mmillion): preparation and 
implementation of an NGO Code of Conduct with an emphasis on accountability, 
transparency and governance.  NGOs will receive coaching, mentoring and training.  
NDC will focus on bringing about organizational and behavioral change; and  
 
(b) 
NGO Sector Coordination (US$0.29 million): establishment of a process of NGO 
Coordination and Information Exchange.  This sub-component includes three activities:  
 
i. 
Support to the existing four NGO networks representing over one thousand 
NGOs, promoting knowledge sharing, collaboration and coordination among members;  
 
ii. 
Support to thematic NGO networks such as health, youth disability, service 
providers, etc., to promote knowledge sharing and coordination of interventions for 
enhanced service quality and efficiency;  
 
(c) 
Policy and Research (US$0.21 million): Preparation of a study which promotes 
areas of cooperation between NGOs and the private sector; a study documenting donor 
resources to Palestinian NGOs; and a study to promote complementarity between the PA 
and NGOs.  
 
Component 3:  Institutional Development of NDC (US$2.27 million)  
 
This component supports the organizational effectiveness of NDC, a newly established 
institution and the former PMO of PNGOI and PNGOII.  Three subcomponents are 
planned:  
Page  4
(a) 
Establishment of a Resource Mobilization and Communications Unit (US$0.502 
million), which will raise funds for the purpose of grant making to Palestinian NGOs 
creating a future mechanism to attract and funnel resources to the NGO sector and 
therefore promote sustainability;  
 
(b) 
Establishment of an outcome-based M&E system for NDC (US$0.325 million), to 
track results on the ground and train grant recipients on outcome-based project 
monitoring; and  
 
(c) 
Establishment of NDC and Project Management of the overall program 
(US$1.450 million), subcomponent finances the management of the grant award and 
implementation process, supervision of sub-projects and capacity-building activities.  A 
learning and staff development plan will be prepared to upgrade the skills of key staff in 
areas relevant to their work. Annual financial and management audits will be conducted 
by external auditors.  The management costs will be covered by the Bank on a declining 
basis: 100% for the first year, 50% in year two and 25% in year three.  The funding gap 
will be financed by a grant from the Welfare Association, proceeds from NDC?s 
fundraising activities and management fees from both current and future donor projects.  
The diversity of income sources will ensure NDC?s financial viability towards 
sustainability and serve as an exit strategy for the Bank.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be located throughout the West Bank and Gaza.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John Bryant Collier (MNSRE) 
Mr Colin S. Scott (MNSRE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  5
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The decentralized and sub-project focus of PNGOIII prevents identification of any 
specific environmental issues that may be raised by sub-projects at the appraisal stage.  
However, the experience from PNGOI and PNGOII, as well as with demand-driven 
projects in other countries, point to a wide range of potential environmental impacts 
including those on water quality, wastewater treatment, air quality, natural resources 
management, solid waste, medical waste, etc.  
 
Under the World Bank's Policy on Environment Assessment (OP 4.01), PNGOIII has 
been classified as a category B project, meaning that there is a potential for limited 
adverse impacts.  
 
The environmental criteria and procedures will be made available to all grant applicants.  
As all sub-projects funded under PNGOIII are to be stakeholder driven and implemented, 
those immediately affected by the sub-projects will be directly involved in every stage of 
environment assessment and resulting mitigation measures. The EMP will ensure that 
NGOs and their contractors are trained in chance find procedures prior to any 
construction.  
 
The project has been rated an Environmental Category B based on the experience from 
PNGOI and PNGOII. The EMP was disclosed in WBG starting October 20, 2006 on the 
NDC website. The finalized EMP was submitted to the Infoshop on October 25, 2006. 
The finalized ISDS was submitted to the Infoshop on October 31, 2006.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Operations Manual for PNGOII included screening procedures for all sub-projects. 
This procedure has been reviewed by the project team and found to be in keeping with 
the Bank's policy as well as ensuring that all proposed sub-projects fall into categories B 
or C under that policy.  However, these screening criteria are not consistently applied 
across funded sub-projects; therefore, PNGOIII will include a capacity building program 
for staff to ensure consistent screening and follow-up. NDC has updated its existing 
overall Environmental Management Plan (EMP) in preparation for the appraisal of 
Page  6
PNGOIII, outlining screening criteria and procedures as well as the necessary follow-up 
actions.  This EMP has been reviewed prior to appraisal and found to be acceptable to the 
Bank. It will be implemented by the NDC team as part of their core activities.  World 
Bank supervision will include review of these procedures and allocated budget to ensure 
they are consistently followed.  No proposed sub-projects that fall into environmental 
category A will be financed under this project.  
 
The majority of the individual sub-projects financed by NDC, have no, or only minor, 
adverse environmental impact. However, to ensure that any adverse impact is properly 
mitigated, the following actions will be taken into account under PNGOIII:  
 
(a) 
NDC staff (or consultants) trained for basic environmental screening will review 
all proposed sub-projects in order to identify any  that may carry the risk of adverse 
environmental impacts;  
 
(b) 
for those sub-projects that carry risk of small scale, or minor environmental 
impacts, preparation and design work for sub-projects will include an EMP that addresses 
mitigation measures to be undertaken during construction and operation of the particular 
intervention (for example repairing a road or upgrading a school or health center);  
 
(c) 
in the limited number of cases where adverse environmental impacts are such that 
a
full environmental impact assessment (EIA) is required (for example constructing or 
upgrading a small waste water treatment plan), that EIA and the accompanying EMP will 
be prepared and reviewed prior to commencing work on the sub-projects; and  
 
(d) 
the potential for cumulative effects from the various sub-projects must be tracked 
and monitored to guard against inadvertent environmental impacts.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The primary stakeholders are NGOs and the communities within which they operate. The 
draft EMP has already been disclosed on NDC's website. NGOs will be fully trained in 
its implementation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/12/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/21/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/25/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  7
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Meskerem Brhane 
10/31/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John Bryant Collier 
10/31/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Colin S. Scott 
10/31/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Luis F. Constantino 
 
Comments:  The project has been transferred to the TTL on 02/01/06. Therefore no need for 
Regional Safeguards Advisor'signature. 
