Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3072 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/26/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: West Bank and Gaza 
Project ID: P105404 
Project Name: Second Solid Waste and Environment Management Project (SWEMP-2) 
Task Team Leader: Ibrahim Khalil Dajani 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 2, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 1, 2008 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Solid waste management (85%);Sub-national government administration (15%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P);Municipal governance and 
institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.50 
 Financing 
Gap 
5.50
6.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main objective of the project is to improve the municipal solid waste collection and disposal 
system in about 25 municipalities and surrounding local councils in the Southern West Bank.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Southern West Bank Solid Waste Management Project (SWMP) in the southern 
West Bank region would build on the recent achievements of the first SWMP including the 
establishment of a Joint Services Council, a regional approach for solid waste management and 
improved cost recovery mechanisms. The proposed project would be implemented by the High 
Joint Services Council (HJSC) through its technical/administrative secretariat which will initially 
be created financed by the project as a Project Management Unit (PMU). The PMU would 
manage project implementation and coordinate the participation of key stakeholders and donors; 
it would also be responsible for monitoring and evaluation of the project during implementation 
and upon completion including preparation of the Implementation Completion and Results 
Report (ICR). The project scope would consist of:  
Page  2
Component 1: Institutional Strengthening (US$2.0 million): This component would support: a) 
institutional building of the High Joint Services Council for Solid Waste Management in 
Bethlehem and Hebron (the Council) and municipal and village councils; b) training to 
participating mayors in policy formulation in SWM, and training of municipal operational and 
administrative staff in effective solid waste management; c) EQA institutional strengthening in 
monitoring and reporting; and d) Project Management Cost which would support operational 
cost of the Project Management Unit (PMU) including salaries of contracted staff and office 
operations and maintenance cost.  
 
Component 2: Infrastructure Development, Landfill Construction and Equipment Supply 
(US$15.0 million): This component would support the construction and initial operation of a 
sanitary landfill; waste collection and transport equipment and facilities; rehabilitation and 
closure of existing dump-sites including interim operational improvements for proper use during 
the period of construction of the new sanitary landfill; the construction/improvement of off-site 
infrastructure (access roads, water, wastewater, drainage and power supply); and the construction 
of solid waste transfer stations to optimize collection and transportation to the sanitary landfill 
site.  
 
Component 3: Public Awareness (US$0.25 million). This component would finance the design 
and implementation of an awareness campaign in the southern West Bank (Bethlehem and 
Hebron governorates) communities. This campaign would aim to facilitate project 
implementation, public involvement in proper collection, recycling, establishing appropriate 
tariffs, and public support of new SWM policies. This component would also finance study tours 
of mayors and municipal staff in solid waste management.  
 
Component 4: Innovation and Learning Intervention (US$0.75 million):  The project would 
implement a number of pilots in the areas of waste minimization and recovery. This will be 
based on the findings and recommendations of specialized feasibility studies that the project will 
finance on waste minimization and recovery (recycling and composting), cost recovery, and 
promoting public-private sector partnerships.  
 
The project cost, excluding land acquisition if any, is estimated in the order of about US$16-18 
million equivalent. The project would be financed by an IDA grant of about US$10-12 million 
equivalent plus about US$6-8 million equivalent from donors. Initial consultations with donors 
have identified interest from the European Commission (EC), Japan and Italy to finance 
primarily equipment and technical assistance for local governments (a share of components 1 
and 2). The Bank would then finance the construction and initial operation of the sanitary land 
fill and off-site infrastructure, institutional strengthening, public awareness and incremental 
operating cost (a share of components 1 and 2, and component 3). Land for the sanitary landfill 
site and transfer stations would be provided by the concerned stakeholders.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Southern West Bank, West Bank and Gaza   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
An Environmental Quality Authority (EQA) already exists within the Palestinian Authority 
institutional structure since 1997. The EQA has been overseeing the implementation of the first 
generation - West Bank and Gaza - Solid Waste and Environmental Management Project which 
became effective in December 2000. The EQA has been exposed to the Bank's environment and 
social safeguards and qualified staff in the area of environmental monitoring and reporting. The 
feasibility study will further assess EQA's capacity and recommend further capacity building 
programs, if needed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jaafar Sadok Friaa (MNSSD) 
Ms Meskerem Brhane (MNSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This is a category A project due to its possible impact on the environment in particular that 
related to proximity to urban population and ground water acquifer.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
To be determined by the feasibility study and environment impact assessment that will be 
prepared by the client.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
This safeguard may be triggered depending on the siting of the regional sanitary landfill 
which will be financed by the project.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/21/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
project feasibility study and an environmental / social impact assessment will be launched 
during the period of July and October 2007. The results, in terms of a report, EIA and 
Environment Management and Monitoring Plan, will be completed by end of April 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ibrahim Khalil Dajani 
07/23/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong 
07/24/2007 
Comments:  Acting on behalf of Sherif Arif, Regional Environmental and Safeguard Advisor 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan 
07/26/2007 
Comments:  Acting on behalf of Hedi Larbi, Sector Manager for Urban and Transport 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
