Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2983 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/13/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: West Bank and Gaza 
Project ID: P104257 
Project Name: GZ-Village and Neighborhood Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Meskerem Brhane 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 8, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: February 26, 2008 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (40%);General information and communications sector 
(20%);Sanitation (20%);Roads and highways (20%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Community driven projects typically involve service delivery or improved livelihood objectives 
whilst achieving social development gains through participatory processes often described as 
enpowering. In the case of WBG, different permutations of these objectives might be advocated 
but the identification mission, carried out in early May 2007, concluded the objective should be 
simple enough to be achievable in the four-year life of the project with modest financing.  
 
The proposed project development objective (PDO) is therefore: Within a fragile context, to 
promote a local development approach which enables communities (including those which are 
marginalized or vulnerable)  to participate in the management of development resources.  
 
Following the above objective, the result by which the project outcome would be measured is 
the increased capacity of a defined number of communities, yet to be determined, to manage a 
certain number of sub-projects according to the principles and practices of the project model.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
To keep it simple, the project would be no more than three components:  
 
Component 1: Implementation of Subprojects Using a CDD Approach  
 
The VNDP will provide block grants to communities to finance a subset of projects. Eligible 
communities will be sampled to include a diversity of localities (West Bank/Gaza, rural/urban 
etc) with a preference given to those areas which are not currently benefiting from the Municipal 
Development Fund. It may also intervene in refugee camps located within the district of 
identified project sites, although eligible activities would stay clear of UNRWA's mandate.  
Participating communities will be responsible for allocating the budget across different activities. 
They will be empowered to manage the subproject grants themselves and implement these 
subprojects, including through such mechanisms as community procurement.  
 
Activities included in Component 1 will vary according to community needs but examples 
might include small-scale infrastructure (such as family-friendly parks or recreational areas, 
access roads, small local water supply, school enhancement, etc.) and social programs and 
activities (activities promoting social inclusion, informal education etc). VNDP will adopt an 
open-menu approach but will establish criteria for selection based on a negative list 
(interventions that cannot be eligible).  The subprojects will be selected through a participatory 
process through which groups that have traditionally been excluded from decision making 
processes (youth, women, the poor, etc.) will also take part. The selection of subprojects should 
take into account existing district and national development plans as well as those of line 
ministries and donor programs in order to ensure that there is complementarity of interventions 
and no duplication of effort.  
 
Component 2: Capacity Building for Communities & Local Government Units (LGUs)  
 
This component will provide resources necessary for accompanying communities (including 
Community Based Organizations and NGOs) throughout the four-year life of the project in 
implementing component 1. It will also support (and create incentives for) small LGUs in 
cooperating together to plan and implement joint programs.  Training will be carried out for local 
level actors in developing project proposals, developing business plans, enhancing community 
participation and partnership with LGUs. Capacity building will also support communities in 
leveraging funds from other sources (including their own resources) to implement remaining 
subprojects and improve coordination and harmonization with the interventions of other actors 
within the locality. The proposed approach will promote self-help mechanisms, increased sense 
of community ownership, and greater partnerships between communities and LGUs. It will also 
provide an effective framework for constructive interaction among community members (from 
different clans, religious affiliation, etc.) in designing and implementing community projects that 
are mutually beneficial thereby promoting social cohesion.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Support for the Counterpart Institution  
 
This component will support the central level government counterpart as it works to oversee 
and supervise the implementation of the project by local communities, including promoting the 
participatory planning process and maintaining a knowledge base for local development. Further 
support to the counterpart could include facilitating harmonization of local development 
Page  3
approaches that are being funded by various donors so as to promote efficiency and economies 
of scale, without sacrificing innovation and flexibility. The counterpart will gain the skills in 
documenting lessons and sharing these across participating communities. An effective, results-
based monitoring and evaluation system will be established that will track implementation 
progress and a learning-by-doing approach.  
 
Potential Counterpart and Donors: The Bank's counterpart for this project will be the Ministry 
of Local Government (MoLG) complemented by an Advisory Committee composed of key 
stakeholders, such as Ministry of Planning, Ministry of Public Works, Department of Refugee 
Affairs and civil society representatives. Several donors have expressed strong support for the 
project and the team will be working closely with them to ensure technical collaboration and co-
financing.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Project will be in selected locations of the West Bank and Gaza. Exact sites will be determined 
by preappraisal.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower's institutional capacity on the Bank's safeguards policies is weak since the 
Borrower has not implemented projects which have triggered these.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Huong-Giang Lucie Tran (MNSSD) 
Mr Colin S. Scott (MNSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
A
partial environmental assessment will be carried out during project preparation. 
Subprojects that could cause the significant conversion or degradation of a natural habitat will 
not be supported. This will be specified in the project's manual of procedures and will be 
included in the negative list of projects.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
The team will determine whether or not the cultural resources safeguards policy will be 
triggered when the types of interventions to be undertaken are clarified. This will be by 
preappraisal. Whether or not the Physical Cultural Resources OP is triggered, "Chance Find 
Procedures" will be included in the EMP. These procedures will specify that the country's 
applicable laws will be followed.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/13/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/31/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An EMP will be prepared using the Bank's Manual for Safeguard Compliance in CDD 
projets in the MNA Region. Several environmental "screens" will be identified to prevent, or 
at least minimize, potential environmental and social impacts. Subprojects that could be 
classified as a Category A project will not be considered. Safeguards compliance will be 
monitored throughout the subproject cycle.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Meskerem Brhane 
05/24/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
06/06/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Luis F. Constantino 
06/06/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
