Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/13/2006 
Report No.:  AC2126
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  West Bank and Gaza 
Project ID:  P074594 
Project Name:  Emergency Municipal Services (Rehab. II) 
Task Team Leader:  Stephen George Karam 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 31, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 14, 2006 
Managing Unit:  MNSIF 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (80%);Other social services (20%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal finance (S);Social safety 
nets (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00 
 
FRANCE: FRENCH AGENCY FOR DEVELOPMENT 
14.80 
 
NETHERLANDS, GOV. OF THE  (EXCEPT FOR MOFA/MIN.OF 
DEV.COOP.) 6.30 
 SPECIAL 
FINANCING 
10.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
9.10
40.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main objectives of EMSRP II are to: (a) help mitigate further deterioration in the 
delivery of essential municipal services, including solid waste collection, street lighting, 
provision of water, wastewater and electricity services (where such services are provided 
by municipalities), and street cleaning, among other services, through rehabilitation of 
damaged or deteriorating infrastructure and the provision of non-wage budgetary support 
for direct service cost inputs; (ii) create temporary job opportunities at the local level 
through the launching of labor-intensive employment generation schemes, proportionally 
allocated on the basis of an unemployment index; and (iii) pilot innovative initiatives that 
foster Local Government-NGO collaboration in response to urgent community needs and 
assist municipalities in recovering costs for the provision of services.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
Project Components and Estimated Costs.   The total cost of the proposed Project is 
currently estimated to be about US$40.2 million, out of which US$10 million is proposed 
to be financed in the form of a grant by the World Bank through the Trust Fund for Gaza 
and the West Bank (TFGWB), and further commitments of EURO 5 million from the 
Government of the Netherlands and EURO 12 million from Agence Fran?aise de 
D?velopment.  Other donor funding commitments are pending.  A two year Emergency 
Recovery Grant would include the following components: (a) Emergency Municipal 
Service Assistance Grants; (b) Labor-Intensive Emergency Employment Generation; (c) 
MDF Innovation Window; and (d) Project Management Costs, as further detailed below: 
 
Component 1:  Emergency Municipal Services Assistance Grants. (Total component 
cost: US$29.7 million, IDA financing US$7.0 million; Government of Netherlands, US$3 
million equivalent; AFD US$13 million equivalent; Financing Gap of US$6.7 million).  
This component would finance (i) rehabilitation and reconstruction of damaged 
municipal infrastructure and facilities, as well as the supply of equipment to sustain 
municipal service provision, and (ii) non-wage recurrent expenditures as direct inputs to 
the provision of essential municipal services over a period of up to two years.  
Allocations would be awarded upon approval of an Emergency Assistance Application, 
which would be evaluated and appraised by MDLF.  An indicative list of priority areas 
requiring support based on an MDLF survey carried out in August 2006 is provided 
below: 
 
?
Water and wastewater services.  Maintenance and rehabilitation of existing 
municipal water and sewerage networks, wells and reservoirs; provision of chemicals for 
water purification; repair and maintenance of equipment, such as pumps, generators, 
vacuum tanks, and vehicles; purchase of spare parts, goods, vehicles and fuel; payment of 
water and wastewater bills, and equipment;  
 
?
Solid waste services.  Service contracts for solid waste collection, as well as labor, 
dumping fees, solid waste containers, tools, trucks and compactors, spare parts for solid 
waste trucks, fuel, vehicle lubricants, insurance, equipment, materials, and other related 
direct running costs for municipal services;  
 
?
Road rehabilitation and maintenance services.  Goods and works for maintenance, 
rehabilitation and reconstruction of existing internal roads, including traffic signs, road 
line demarcations, safety rails, traffic signals, street lighting, sidewalks, fuel, vehicle 
insurance and road maintenance tools and equipment;  
 
?
Electricity services.  Supply and replacement of transformers and electrical 
panels, electrical cables and poles, accessories, spare parts, maintenance tools and 
equipment, vehicle insurance, fuel, vehicle lubricants and electricity bills as a direct input 
to service provision costs.  
 
Component 2: Labor-intensive Employment Generation.  (Total Component Cost: US$ 
6.1 million: of which Government of the Netherlands, US$3.0 million equivalent, and 
IDA financing US$1.10 million; Financing Gap of US$2.0 million).  This sub-component 
would finance labor-intensive temporary employment sub-projects that are identified and 
implemented by Municipalities in coordination with locally-based community groups.  
Past experience has shown that pre-designed schemes often lack ownership and 
Page  3
acceptance at the community level, making community engagement vital to success.  
Funds would be earmarked for municipalities on the basis of an unemployment index for 
the Governorate in which they are located.  This allocation method would ensure that 
localities in greatest need of assistance would be eligible to receive a greater share of 
resources.  Distribution of grant proceeds would be linked to the annual budget 
preparation cycle and are expected to be implemented over a period of 18-24 months. 
The Government of the Netherlands has pledged co-financing toward this component 
and, based on past experience, it is expected that it would mobilize other donor co-
financing to leverage the Bank?s contribution.  To be eligible for financing made 
available under this Component, municipalities would be required to complete a section 
of the Emergency Assistance Program application form, which has been prepared by the 
MDLF and is included in the Technical Operations Manual. Sub-project designs would 
need to ensure a minimum of 50% labor content.  Indirect employment impact through 
the use of locally-manufactured construction inputs (calculated at 20 percent of the 
estimated input cost) could be combined with the direct labor content to meet this 
threshold.  Sub-projects in a variety of sectors, including agriculture, NGO-based 
services, etc., would be eligible for financing, provided they meet the labor intensive 
criteria. Assistance to municipalities in preparing their sub-projects would be provided by 
MDLF staff and regionally-based local technical consultants for extension services 
(including preparation of simplified standard bidding documents, training and public 
awareness regarding labor-intensive project design and implementation) as may be 
requested by the municipality. The municipality may also choose to seek assistance from 
NGOs or specialized consultants.  Financing for this technical support would be provided 
under Component 4 of the proposed Project.  The MDLF would also be responsible for 
coordinating donor-financed responses to employment creation needs: 
 
Component 3: MDLF Innovation Window (Total component cost: US$1.20 million, 
IDA financing US$1.20 million. This component is divided into two sub-components: 
 
(a)  Piloting pre-paid metering systems at municipalities. (Total sub-component cost: 
US$ 0.50 million, IDA financing US$0.50 million). This subcomponent would be 
implemented at no more than 3 pilot municipalities and tested as a means of enabling 
municipalities to enhance local revenue collection and thus improve cost recovery.  This 
pilot would be informed by the successful model already tested and under 
implementation at the Jerusalem Electric Utility Company.  The subcomponent would 
finance the purchase of over 3,500 new meters, administrative systems and technical 
assistance to guide the piloting process.  Successful implementation of the pilot could 
enable follow on assistance from other donors. 
 
(b) Piloting Local Government-NGO collaboration for emergency and other joint 
programming purposes. (Total sub-component cost: US$ 0.7 million, IDA financing 
US$0.7 million.)  This pilot activity is being prepared in coordination with a parallel 
Bank-financed operation (NGO Project III).  The main aim of this pilot is to encourage 
greater coordination and joint programming by local governments and NGOs at the local 
level through the requirement of a joint funding proposal.  NGOs would be financed 
under the NGO III Project, while municipalities would be financed under EMRSP II.  
Page  4
EMSRP II would likely finance physical rehabilitation and/or expansion of public 
facilities, parks and other venues within which NGOs would provide programming for 
social activities for youth, children, and women.Public awareness campaigns to promote 
conservation, public health, environmental management are proposals likely to receive 
support.  The LGU component would involve financing for small-scale civil works and 
goods not to exceed an aggregate value of US$70,000 per subproject and would likely 
include playground and park rehabilitation, fencing, sports facilities (soccer/basketball) 
and amenities to provide a platform for NGOs to organize community activities for 
youth, children, women, etc. Sub-projects would not involve any greenfield type 
investments. Moreover, such rehabilitation works are likely to have a positive impact on 
the environment, including repair to facility internal water/wastewater connections and 
improved management of facilities.  In addition, municipalities will be actively 
encouraging NGOs to organize and prepare public awareness campaigns to promote 
water conservation, environmental health, clean-up campaigns, etc. 
 
Component 4: Project Management Costs. (Total component cost: US$3.2 million, IDA 
financing US$0.7 million, Government of Netherlands financing of US$0.3 million; AFD 
financing of US$1.8 million equivalent; Financing Gap of US$0.4 million, based on 
projected implementation and monitoring/evaluation costs of other donor contributions).  
 
(a) 
MDLF Management Fee.  (US$1.6 million; IDA US$0.7 million; Netherlands 
US$0.3 million; AFD US$ 0.6 million equivalent). Sub-component costs to administer 
donor funds, based on a 5 percent administration fee). MDLF prepared a fully costed out 
budget for the implementation of EMSRP II.  Taking into account its fixed and variable 
costs, including staff, equipment and operating costs, MDLF?s projected budget would be 
approximately 5 percent of total project financing.  This administrative fee was reviewed 
and assessed to be reasonable.  
 
(b) 
Technical assistance and monitoring.   (US$1.6 million).  In addition to MDLF?s 
Management Fee, additional costs will be incurred to ensure effective project 
implementation, including financing of the three regional based extension service 
consulting assignments to support municipalities in preparing and implementing their 
Emergency Assistance Programs; a technical review audit; environmental and social 
safeguard reviews; training in procurement and financial management; a beneficiary 
impact assessment; and other small, specialized technical assistance assignments.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
EMSRP II would finance sub-projects in the eligible 131 municipalities in WB&G as per 
the criteria set by the MDLF. It is worth mentioning that the population in these 
municipalities comprises nearly 67% of the WBG population.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Colin S. Scott (MNSRE) 
Mr Ibrahim Khalil Dajani (MNSIF) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
This is an emergency project prepared under OP 8.50 and as such the EMP will be 
finalized prior to effectiveness.  This project would likely include investments related to 
rehabilitation, maintenance and upgrading of internal and access roads, water and 
sanitation services, and storm water drainage networks, maintenance of schools, health 
centers and community centers, as well as other municipal assets. Moreover, it would 
finance the purchase of small quantities of chlorine for purifying water supply and 
pesticides for pest control in water supply as well as insects (mosquitoes) and rodents. 
The project would also finance labor intensive physical interventions in an attempt to 
help in alleviating the high unemployment created by the deterioration of the economic 
conditions in WBG. These interventions may be in the area of agriculture, landscaping, 
parks, expansion of public facilities such as schools, health service centers, community 
centers and other venues.  
 
It is expected that all of these interventions will yield positive impacts on the 
municipalities and the environment. It is also recognized that some negative impacts 
which are easily mitigated may occur due to the implementation of the rehabilitation and 
maintenance sub-projects. One such potential risk is PCB contamination and other 
hazardous chemicals. The draft Environmental Management Plan (EMP) which was 
prepared specifically for this project will be finalized before effectiveness.  The EMP 
would ensure that mitigation measures are identified and followed during the various 
stages of project implementation. A Pest Management Plan is also planned to be prepared 
and incorporated in the final EMP by December 31, 2006.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The following are the expected impacts:  
 
?
Dust, noise and odor due to demolition and new construction;  
 
?
Increased air pollution due to traffic congestion;  
 
?
Increased traffic accidents;  
Page  6
?
Risk for aesthetic and vegetation;  
 
?
Inadequate handling of construction waste;  
 
?
Risk for road accessibility and health;  
 
?
Excessive use of chemical dosage in the water purification process and pesticides 
application during pest control; and  
 
?
Risk for cultural heritage assets.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The only alternative would be to limit the list of sub-projects that will be financed by 
EMSRP II to those with no impact what so ever on the environment. However, EMSRP 
II in this case may become so narrow in scope and therefore irrelevant and non-
responsive to emergency needs.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
During project preparation, MDLF has prepared a draft   EMP from EMSRP II with 
support from consultants. This EMP will be finalized before effectiveness and would be 
publicly disclosed in the client country and the Bank would, in turn, be authorized to 
disclose the EMP to its infoShop.  The Project would contribute to environmental 
improvements by increasing municipal service quality and coverage, including solid 
waste collection and management and wastewater services, among other local community 
identified priorities. A limited number of micro civil works sub-projects are expected to 
be financed under the Project, depending on demand, similar to those implemented under 
previous projects in WBG, including the Emergency Services Support Project, Municipal 
Infrastructure Development Project, Emergency Response Program, Community 
Development Projects I and II and Emergency Municipal Services Rehabilitation Project 
(EMSRP). Given that most of the likely investment activities would support rehabilitation 
and improvements to existing infrastructure and service delivery with a sub-project value 
that is not expected to exceed US$300,000 and would not require land acquisition or 
resettlement, subsequently, the EMP would be monitored through Bank supervision 
missions and reviewed during the Project mid-term review.  The EMP will identify the 
potential impacts of subprojects, provide the necessary mitigating measures, as well as 
guidelines on site assessments and designs that will be prepared for infrastructure sub-
projects to be rehabilitated and improved under this Project.   The need for mitigation 
measures is likely to be limited.  However, should the need arise, the costs for  the 
preparation of environmental assessment as well the mitigating measures would be 
financed out of the allocation provided to municipalities through their EAP allocations.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders for this project include the Municipal Development and Lending 
Fund and the eligible municipalities. An Environment Audit was carried out by an 
independent qualified consulting firm recruited by the MDLF. The Audit was performed 
through a well designed consultation process with the stakeholders and sample 
beneficiaries. An additional desk top review was also carried out by the MDLF to cover 
Page  7
those investments that we not included in the EA. This primarily related to municipal 
service delivery and job creation type sub-projects which were financed by EMSRP at a 
large scale. Learning from this review (quarterly progress reports that were prepared by 
the consulting firms recruited by the MDLF to supervise EMSRP) will be incorporated in 
the EMP. The result of the Audit and the EMP will be posted on the websites of the 
MDLF as well as the municipal bulletin boards.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/10/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/02/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/13/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The Project may involve the use of pesticides in the participating municipalities but at a 
small scale.  This would require mitigation in the form of a Pest Management Plan which 
is planned to be completed before Project effectiveness and would become part of the 
final EMP.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
No 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
No 
Page  8
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Stephen George Karam 
11/08/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Colin S. Scott 
11/09/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Ibrahim Khalil Dajani 
11/08/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr John Bryant Collier 
11/09/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
11/10/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hedi Larbi 
11/08/2006 
Comments:   
