Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2989 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/07/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: West Bank and Gaza 
Project ID: P084461 
Project Name: GZ-ELECTRIC UTILITY MANAGEMENT PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Somin Mukherji 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 14, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 3, 2008 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (90%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Access to urban 
services and housing (P);Regulation and competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
143.00
143.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objectives are: (i) improved quality of service, indicated by reductions 
in voltage fluctuations in voltage fluctuation and the number and duration of power 
outages;(ii)enhanced sectoral efficiency through interalia improved collection performance and 
lower technical/non-technical losses;(iii)NEDCO is fully operational; (iv)reduced fiscal burden 
of the sector on PA’s budgetary resources through interalia lower deductions from clearance 
revenues for arrears owed to IEC; and (v)a realistic firm timetable for routing a large proportion 
of the bulk power from IEC to the West Bank through new substations in areas under Palestinian 
control.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Project would finance the following categories of the PA’s planned investments 
for the short and medium terms (up to four years): (i) development of the distribution system in 
the northern area of the West Bank; (ii) development of new bulk 161/33/22kV supply 
substations in the northern and central areas of the West Bank; (iii) development of the 
Page  2
transmission network in the West Bank; (iv) installation of SCADA in Gaza; (v) reconfiguration, 
rehabilitation and extension of distribution networks in the West Bank and in Gaza; and (vi) 
installation of prepaid meters and automatic meters reading systems throughout West bank and 
Gaza.  
 
The proposed Project would also provide technical assistance to PEA and the utilities for the 
following purposes: (i) institutional and capacity building of the PEA and the utilities in the West 
Bank and Gaza; (ii) strengthening of the Northern Electric Distribution Company (NEDCO); (iii) 
undertaking the next stage of reforms and for building the capacity of the new regulator (PERC); 
and (iv) promotion of renewable energy, particularly in rural areas.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
West Bank and Gaza   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be determined   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Meskerem Brhane (MNSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Preparation of an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) study has been initiated by the 
recipient.  A draft EIA report will be made available by early November 2007. An EMP will be 
produced accordingly.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
A
resettlement policy framework (RPF) is currently being prepared by the recipient.  A draft 
RPF should be made available by September 2007.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/15/2008 
 
Page  3
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
November 15, 2007   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Somin Mukherji 
06/07/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
06/07/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
06/07/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
