Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/29/2007 
Report No. 39879 
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  World 
Project ID:  P100198 
Project Name:  Second Critical Ecosystem Partnership Fund (CEPF 2) 
Task Team Leader:  Kathleen S. MacKinnon 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID: P100198 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 6, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: September 19, 2007 
Managing Unit:  EASRE 
Lending Instrument:  GEF Grant 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity  (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
25.00
Bilateral (AFD) 
25.00 
 
MacArthur Foundation                                                                   12.00 
 
Others (tbd)                                                                                     18.00 
Environmental Category: C 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ x] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to strengthen the involvement and effectiveness of 
civil society in contributing to the  conservation and management of globally important 
biodiversity.  
 
The global environment objective is to  achieve sustainable conservation and integrated 
ecosystem management in areas of globally important biodiversity, through consolidating 
conservation outcomes in existing CEPF regions and funding to new critical ecosystems.  
 
3. Project Description 
 
The  Critical Ecosystem Partnership Fund is a global program, with different donors 
supporting different time slices. This project would build upon the experiences and 
lessons learned during the first phase of CEPF to consolidate and expand  the  program in 
14 hotspots, including nine new hotspots. The number of hotspots approved for new 
investment would continue to be staggered to ensure adequate funding and 
implementation capacity. In each hotspot, disbursement of grants will be guided by 
Page  2
ecosystem profiles based on a stakeholder-driven prioritization process to create a shared 
strategy from the outset.
 
The project would  provide strategic assistance through grants to locally-based NGOs, 
community groups,  indigenous peoples, the private sector and other civil society partners 
to support: a) strengthened protection and management of biodiversity within selected 
hotspots and critical ecosystems, b) increased local and national capacity to integrate 
biodiversity conservation into development and landscape planning, and c) expanded and 
improved monitoring and learning to demonstrate biodiversity impact and enable 
adaptive management and replication. The project  includes four interlinked components: 
 
Component 1. Strengthening protection and management of globally significant 
biodiversity. CEPF-2 would focus on key biodiversity areas and address threats to 
biodiversity across broad landscapes that include a matrix of land uses, including 
protected areas, biological corridors and high value conservation sites in production 
landscapes, including indigenous reserves, community and private lands managed for a 
conservation objective. Support to civil society groups would contribute to the 
strengthened protection and management of more than 20 million hectares of key 
biodiversity areas within hotspots, including at least 8 million hectares of new protected 
areas. CEPF-2 would also support activities that contribute to improved conservation of 
biodiversity within biological corridors and production landscapes as well as trans-
boundary collaboration to protect key areas that straddle national borders. Specific 
activities will be selected on a competitive basis at the ecosystem profile level but could 
include activities under the following themes: a) protected areas and other key 
biodiversity areas; b) consolidation of biodiversity conservation corridors; including 
collaboration with the private sector; c) community and Indigenous Peoples initiatives; d) 
innovative financial mechanisms for sustainability; and (e) multi-regional priorities.
 
Component 2:  Increasing local and national capacity to integrate biodiversity 
conservation into development and landscape planning and management. This component 
would support activities that seek to integrate biodiversity conservation in production 
systems and sectors, including
 
training of civil society groups to plan, implement, and 
monitor biodiversity outcomes  as effective partners in sustainable development. Such 
participation will build on local knowledge and technical expertise, and leverage social 
capital to bring innovative ideas to solving local problems. The program will focus 
especially on mainstreaming biodiversity conservation and sustainable use in production 
landscapes through strategic and effective alliances to increase impact and sustainability. 
Grant making will foster alliances by identifying and linking potential partners; helping 
to design integrated and complementary management approaches; supporting 
partnerships within civil society as well as with development institutions, government 
agencies, corporate partners, and others. Activities under this component  would 
strengthen civil society capability for advocacy and influence over development decisions 
and national strategies at local, regional and trans-boundary scales.  
 
Component 3: Monitoring and knowledge sharing
.
This component would support 
monitoring and evaluation of both individual projects and hotspot programs to assess 
Page  3
conservation outcomes and to derive good practice and sharing lessons learned within the 
hotspot. Activities include 
 a) systematic analysis and documentation of grantees’ 
performance against individual project and ecosystem targets; b) assisting civil society 
groups, including local communities and Indigenous Peoples, to engage in participatory 
monitoring; and c) and  expanding and formalizing information sharing and learning 
opportunities across the hotspot. Additionally this component would support specific 
activities to strengthen outcomes monitoring and to document, disseminate and replicate 
lessons learned and good practice.   
 
Component 4: Ecosystem profile development and project execution. This component 
would support project management including a) the development and updating of 
ecosystem profiles to guide hotspot investment strategies b) overall execution and 
administration of the global program by CI, through the CEPF Secretariat and c) support 
to locally-based Regional Implementation Teams (RITs) to lead grant-making and 
monitoring and capacity building activities in the hotspots.  
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
 
The project would provide investments of up to14 hotspots globally to be chosen from 
the 30 hotspots which are eligible for Bank and GEF funding. It is expected that CEPF 
investments will target high biodiversity areas in nine new hotspots as well as support for 
consolidation of conservation activities in some hotspots which have already received 
support under the first phase of the CEPF. Investments will be guided by ecosystem 
investment strategies which require approval by the CEPF Donor Council. Investment 
strategies have been prepared for three new hotspots and would be the first to be 
implemented: Polynesia-Micronesia, Indo-Burma (Indochina region); and the Western 
Ghats and Sri Lanka (focusing on the Western Ghats region). Other ecosystems for 
investment would be chosen based on biodiversity status and threats, conservation needs, 
social and political environment, and current or planned investment by other donors. 
Investments are likely to target protected areas,  biological corridors and other key 
biodiversity areas, including community-managed areas and indigenous reserves. Explicit 
efforts will be made to assist local and indigenous communities to access grants for 
biodiversity conservation and management within the hotspots. 
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anthony J. Whitten (EASRE) 
Mr Svend Jensby (EASSO) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
Forest OP would be triggered but not applied 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
Environmental issues. The project will address priority conservation objectives and is 
thus expected to have a highly positive environmental impact. Project activities will be 
selected on a competitive basis according to criteria that will ensure that resources are 
directed to the most important biodiversity issues while ensuring minimum adverse 
environmental effects. This project is fully consistent with the Bank’s Natural Habitats 
and Forest policies. It would not cause, nor facilitate, any significant loss or degradation 
of forests or other natural habitats. By design, CEPF would finance activities that 
promote conservation of natural habitats and threatened species and prevent, or reduce, 
habitat loss or degradation by providing strategic assistance to engage NGOs, community 
groups, and other civil society partners in conservation in biodiversity hotspots.  .  
 
Social issues. Many of the projects under CEPF-2 are expected to be small-scale and 
provide positive impacts for local communities, including greater empowerment of local 
civil society groups to participate in active conservation and natural resource 
management. Direct positive impacts include creating employment opportunities, 
promoting community management of natural resources, development of ecotourism and 
capacity building. However, some  projects may have the potential for adverse impacts 
on the livelihoods of local populations, particularly in the short term prior to 
implementation of more sustainable management practices.  These include projects that 
result in some form of restrictions of access to natural resources, projects that induce 
changes in livelihood and natural resource practices, and projects that affect Indigenous 
Peoples. Accordingly an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) and Process 
Framework for Involuntary Restrictions  have been prepared with guidelines included in 
the Operational Manual.  
 
Page  5
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
Long term and future impacts of the Project are envisaged to be highly positive and  will 
contribute to the overall improvement natural resource management and greater 
engagement of local civil society actors in biodiversity conservation and natural resource 
management.   The CEPF program will have explicit initiatives designed to engage, 
empower and benefit local communities and Indigenous Peoples. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
Although the project has an overall category of “C”, individual subprojects at the 
ecosystem level will all be screened for compliance with Bank safeguards policies both at 
the time of grant application and during implementation. Based on review of lessons from 
the CEPF program to date,  explicit guidance and clarity on the application of safeguard 
policies have been prepared for CEPF-2, including an Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) and Process Framework for Involuntary Restrictions. These 
frameworks include the requirement for Regional Implementation Teams (RITs) to 
consider alternatives to minimize adverse safeguard-related impacts in their decision on 
grant applications. The IPPF and Process Framework for the overall CEPF-2 project and 
for individual ecosystem profiles and sub-projects will be disclosed at the Bank’s 
InfoShop. As needed, specific instruments will be developed for sub-projects funded by 
CEPF-2. The CEPF Operational Manual has been updated to include guidance on 
safeguards issues. Training by Bank staff on Bank safeguards will be provided to key 
CEPF Secretariat staff, including Regional Grant Directors and to Regional 
Implementation Teams. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
The key stakeholders of the program are the CEPF Secretariat, Regional Implementation 
Teams (locally-based organizations who will be selected on a competitive basis) and civil 
society groups within the hotspot.  The program is designed to increase the participation 
of local civil society stakeholders in biodiversity conservation  and natural resources 
management. Ecosystem profiles  provide the basis for strategic business planning and 
implementation within selected hotspots.  Profile development  would be led by civil 
society partners within the hotspot and based  on stakeholder-driven prioritizing 
processes to identify conservation targets, major threats, socioeconomic factors, and 
current conservation investment. Specific efforts will be made to inform and  involve 
affected people in the planning, design, implementation and monitoring of  individual 
projects and the overall ecosystem programs. As necessary, capacity building activities 
shall be undertaken to strengthen consultation and participation skills of the stakeholders.  
Page  6
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
1/17/07 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
See below 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
4/30/07 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Process Framework Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
1/17/07 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
to be 
disclosed 
when 
ecosystem 
investment 
profile 
launched 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
4/30/07 
 
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
1/17/07 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 to be 
disclosed 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
4/30/07 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The process documents will be on the CEPF website and linked to the Grant 
Applications.  Once individual Hotspots have been selected for investments and  the 
Regional Implementation Teams  are in place they will prioritize the posting of the 
relevant documents on their websites and in the country PICs as well as drawing the 
attention of applicants to the documents as part of Grant Application..  
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 
–
Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
 
Page  7
credit/loan? 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes. To 
be applied 
as needed 
to sub-
projects 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 
–
Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a Process Framework for Involuntary Restrictions been prepared? 
Yes. To 
be applied 
as needed 
to sub-
projects 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Will be 
made 
available 
in target 
countries 
when 
ecosystem 
profiles 
launched.  
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  8
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Kathleen S. MacKinnon 
04/20/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Anthony J. Whitten 
04/20/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Svend Jensby 
04/20/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
 
Comments:   
