Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/23/2006 
Report No.:  AC1881
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID:  P086865 
Project Name:  RY-POWER SECTOR 
Task Team Leader:  Somin Mukherji 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 22, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 30, 2006 
Managing Unit:  MNSIF 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (P);Access to urban services and housing (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
15.00
25.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objectives are to: (a) relieve critical supply constraints; (b) 
improve the overall technical efficiency and quality of electricity supply; and (c) support 
the GOY’s initiatives in reforming the sector, strengthen corporate governance, and 
improve organizational effectiveness of PEC through capacity building and training.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Project will comprise two main components: (i) power system 
strengthening and efficiency improvement; and (ii) capacity building and sector reform.  
 
The power system strengthening and efficiency improvement component includes the 
following sub-components: (i) the generation sub-component where an additional 160 ton 
per hour boiler will be procured and installed at the existing Al-Hiswa Power Plant; (ii) 
the transmission sub-component will finance construction of new transmission lines, 33-
kV switchgears, substations and expansion of existing sub-stations in the Hodeidah and 
Dhamar areas; (iii) the distribution sub-component includes the supply, delivery and 
installation of goods such as cables, conductors, transformers, etc. in 18 governorates; 
Page  2
(iv) the loss reduction sub-component will focus on the reduction of commercial and 
technical losses through the installation of meters and reactive compensating equipment; 
and (v) a pilot schemes sub-component will finance the implementation of one or two 
pre-paid meters pilot schemes.  
 
The capacity building and sector reform component includes the following sub-
components: (i) conduct Loss Reduction Study and Energy Audit (feeder wise) of the 
distribution system; (ii) carry out a Tariff Study that would take into account how the 
poor might be affected by possible changes in the tariff structure; (iii) improve financial 
(including inventory) management and audit control; (iv) assist with the implementation 
of the reform program through strengthening of corporate governance; (v) improve the 
quality of customer services (including developing a system for instalment payment for 
connection charges); and (vi) carry out training and capacity building of PEC.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Al-Hiswa plant is located in Aden governorate, which is about 10 kilometers north-west 
of Aden city.  The transmission lines will be installed in Hodeidah and Dhamar areas.  
The distribution upgrading will be spread over 18 governorates including Amran, Hajjah, 
Sa’adah, Sana’a, Aden, Al-Dhale, Lauder, Ibb, Lahj, Taiz,Hodeidah, Al-Mahweet, Attaq, 
Wadi-Hadramawt, Sahel-Hadramout, Al-Maharah, Al-Baida and Dhamar.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Wendy E. Wakeman (MNSRE) 
Mr John Bryant Collier (MNSRE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
Page  3
The transmission line component will likely involve a small amount of land acquisition 
for transmission tower footings. Accordingly, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
has been prepared to provide guidance on how to compensate affected people in such 
cases.  The objective of the policy is to ensure that any involuntary loss of assets or 
relocation of economic activities or residence are minimized and fully compensated and 
that adequate procedures exist for prior consultation of all affected persons, assessments 
of losses and entitlements, handling of complaints/disputes, and monitoring of outcomes.  
 
In addition, an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) was prepared to ensure that 
international standards for height of transmission lines, distance from habitation, 
livestock, etc. are included.  With regards to improvement to the distribution systems, the 
EIA details proper hazardous waste disposal for equipment being replaced, particularly 
with regards to PCB contaminated oils and equipment.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The GOY financed the cost of carrying out an Environmental Impact Assessment and 
preparing a Resettlement Policy Framework aimed at mitigating possible environmental 
and resettlement issues.  PEC, the implementing agency, is familiar with the Bank’s 
safeguard requirements and will include an Environmental Mitigation Plan in the scope 
of works for every contract.  This will be included as a covenant in the legal agreement to 
ensure compliance.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Both the Environmental Impact Assessment and the Resettlement Policy Framework 
have been disclosed locally and in the InfoShop. Informal consultations with project-
affected people will take place at the project site/s and, as well, there will be formal 
briefings of findings with Governors and other stakeholders.  Acquisition of land or other 
assets and the preparation of remedial plans will require formal consultation with project-
affected people.  After this consultation any remedial plans will be made clear to the 
project-affected people together with: (i) compensation rates for all categories of affected 
persons; (ii) eligibility criteria for all other possible forms of assistance; and (iii) 
grievance procedures.  Key stakeholders include the project-affected people, the project 
implementing agency (PEC), and local government and Governorate officials.   
 
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/29/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/14/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/14/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/22/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/14/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/14/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Page  5
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Somin Mukherji 
01/19/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John Bryant Collier 
01/19/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Wendy E. Wakeman 
01/19/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
01/23/2006 
Comments:   
