Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/14/2006 
Report No.:  AC2537
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID:  P086308 
Project Name:  RY-Second Vocational Training Project 
Task Team Leader:  Gillian M. Perkins 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 15, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2007 
Managing Unit:  MNSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Vocational training (100%) 
Theme:  Other social protection and risk management (P);Small and medium enterprise 
support (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to pilot and demonstrate institutional mechanisms that can 
direct training more closely to employment needs in Yemen through (i) increased 
participation of employers in the design, delivery, and financing of training programs, 
and (ii) strengthened policy development through evidentiary-based decision making 
supported by expanded attention to M&E.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1:  Policy, Planning and Management. This component will finance technical 
assistance, training, and IT equipment with the objective of strengthening MTEVT 
capacity for PM&E, information management and project management.  
 
Component 2:  Design and Delivery of Training Programs. The objective of this 
component is to promote employer participation in the design and delivery of (i) five new 
technician-level pre-service programs, (ii) in-service programs in six pilot institutes, and 
(iii) development of instructors' occupational skills. The new pre- and in-service 
programs will be targeted to the fisheries, food processing and construction sectors. 
Instructor development will focus on developing occupational skills in the fields of civil 
Page  2
works; commerce, accounting and business administration; electrical maintenance; and 
mechanical maintenance. The project will finance training, TA and equipment to develop 
these activities in existing training institutes. Minor refurbishment of facilities will be 
undertaken in some cases, and an additional classroom is to be constructed at one of the 
campuses.  
 
Component 3:  Reform of the Skills Development Fund. The objective of this 
component is to support reform of the SDF and build its organizational capacity, under a 
revised law granting autonomy in its operations under private sector management, to 
identify and finance the in-service training needs of enterprises. The project will provide 
training and technical assistance, while equipment needs are to be met by the SDF.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project activities related to information management will be countrywide. The training 
institutes that will pilot the new pre- and in-service activities are located in Sana'a, Aden, 
Taiz and Mukalla.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A  
 
All safeguards responsibilities have been transferred to the task team from MNA 
safeguard unit.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
Page  3
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  4
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Gillian M. Perkins 
11/08/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mourad Ezzine 
11/08/2006 
Comments:   
