Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2927 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/05/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID: P103922 
Project Name: YEMEN: Adaptation to climate change using agrobiodiversity resources 
in the rainfed highlands of Yemen 
Task Team Leader: Kanta K. Rigaud 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 2, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 6, 2008 
Managing Unit: MNC03 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Crops (60%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Biodiversity (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Intl. Center for Agri. Research in the Dry Areas (ICARDA) 
0.30 
 
HIPC-Transfers from IDA grants 
3.00
3.30 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Yemen's economy, the poorest among the Arabian Peninsula countries, relies mostly on 
agriculture which contributes more than 15% to GDP and employs more than 55% of the active 
population. Poverty is widespread in the rural areas, home to 83% of the poor, who derive their 
livelihoods and incomes exclusively from agriculture and agriculture-related activities. Rainfed 
agriculture in the highlands represents more than half of the total cultivated area of Yemen.  
 
Climate change is a real concern for Yemen. Most climate modeling scenarios indicate that the 
drylands of West Asia and North Africa will be the most affected by droughts and high 
temperatures in the years to come.  A greater frequency of droughts and flash floods has already 
been observed in recent years. Rainfed agricultural areas are the most vulnerable to the impact of 
climate change. Lower rainfall, a consequence of climate change, would have immediate 
detrimental impacts on rain-based agricultural systems. One study estimates that climate change 
Page  2
could lead up to 50% reduction of crop yields for rain-based agricultural crops by 2020 (Agoumi, 
2003).  
 
The communities in the highlands in Yemen retain important agrobiodiversity and traditional 
knowledge related to the utilization of their agrobiodiversity resources. Yemen is well known for 
its agrobiodiversity based on the large number of landraces of barley, wheat, sorghum, millet, 
lentil, and cowpea which have evolved over more than two thousand years, and for the 
construction and management of terraces which help minimize land degradation and improve 
water use efficiency. A large number of landraces of different crops are still used within the 
prevailing and diverse farm systems to meet the food needs of these communities and those of 
their livestock. Most of these landraces have accumulated adaptive attributes for coping with the 
adverse environmental and climatic conditions and to the need of local communities. This 
invaluable agrobiodiversity should be conserved, both in-situ (on-farm) and ex-situ (genebanks), 
as it provides an important genetic base for crop improvement programs, specifically for the 
development of crop varieties which are likely to be better adapted to impending shifts in 
climatic patterns.  
 
Adaptation to climate change entails a process of building a country's adaptive capacity to 
respond and adjust to climate variability and extremes by increasing its ability to moderate 
potential damages, take advantage of new opportunities due to climate change and cope with the 
consequences of the adverse effects. To achieve optimum adaptation on the ground, it is critical 
to downscale regional and global predictive climate models and develop vulnerability profiles, at 
the appropriate scale, for these communities. This localized information and prediction models 
would ensure that appropriate coping mechanisms are mobilized through improved extension 
delivery systems to the farming communities.  
 
Both agrobiodiversity conservation and adaptation to climatic changes have been identified as 
issues of importance to the country by Yemen's Ministry of Water and Environment, the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation, the General Authority for Research and Extension and 
other research and development institutions, including universities (Sana?a University and 
others) and some local NGOs (Sustainable Agriculture Association and others).  This priority is 
evident in two recent initiatives in the country:  
 
(i) Yemen recently completed its National Adaptation Plan of Action. This proposed project 
will directly target the top two of the four articulated priorities in the Plan, namely: 1. Improving 
community resilience to climate change through the development of sustainable rural 
livelihoods; and 2. Improving agricultural production under erratic rains and changing climatic 
conditions.  
 
(ii) The Government's Rural Development and Agricultural Development strategies not only  
stress the importance of agriculture as the driving force for development in the highlands of 
Yemen, but also the need to take advantage of local agrobiodiversity and local knowledge to 
prevent further land degradation and to help farmers adapt to climate change.  
 
This proposed GEF project is closely linked to the World Bank financed 'Rainfed Agricultural 
and Livestock Project' (RALP) which focuses on highland agriculture and has a component to 
promote community-based seed increase of landraces of field crops. This project will supplement 
the RALP through research and pilot projects in areas that address the global aspects of 
adaptation to climate change and conservation and utilization of agrobiodiversity resources. The 
RALP will help provide continuity to implement the findings of the GEF project, as well as a 
Page  3
stronger institutionalized connection with the counterpart agencies, which will be crucial for the 
sustainability of the GEF-financed project.  
 
In cooperation with international and regional organizations, Yemen has developed over the 
years, a strong partnership with ICARDA through the implementation of several research 
projects, including some which focused on the preserving local agrobiodiversity and improving 
the productivity of traditional farming systems.  
 
While Yemen has some technical expertise related to the conservation of plant genetic 
resources, including in-situ and ex-situ collections, it has no capacity to link agrobiodiversity 
resources and conservation with coping mechanisms for communities to adapt to climate change 
through predictive modeling. This project provides an opportunity to fill critical gaps of 
information and propose coping mechanisms which will be mainstreamed directly through the 
World Bank-financed RALP project.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project Objective is to develop coping strategies for adaptation to climate change for farmers 
who rely on rainfed agriculture in the Yemen highlands, through the conservation and utilization 
of biodiversity important to agriculture (particularly the local land races and their wild relatives) 
and associated local traditional knowledge.  
 
In terms of its overall strategic approach, the project seeks to integrate adaptation to climate 
change with the conservation and utilization of agrobiodiversity resources by:  
 
(i) bringing together local/traditional knowledge, particularly that of female farmers, with 
modern farming techniques and practices;  
 
(ii) developing vulnerability profiles at the appropriate (community/district/governorate) level 
for target species/varieties, and  
 
(iii) developing adequate and appropriate coping mechanisms as well as policy, institutional 
and technology options.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will focus on the rainfed agricultural systems of at least two of the governorates that 
are the focus of the RALP, and will explore other areas which meet specific criteria of 
indigenous knowledge and in-situ conservation of agro-biodiversity.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project will utilize the same PIU as the RALP, and in that context will build on the capacity 
arrangements for safeguard compliance that have been recommended through that project. Any 
additional requirements for capacity will be identified during the preparation stage.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
A
partial EA will be undertaken during preparation, and an EMP prepared.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
TBD   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
TBD   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
TBD   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
TBD   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
TBD   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
TBD   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
TBD   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
TBD   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
TBD   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/15/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
May 2008   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Kanta K. Rigaud 
05/24/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
05/25/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Luis F. Constantino 
05/25/2007 
Comments:   
