Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2443 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/20/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID: P089761 
Project Name: Yemen Girls Secondary Education Project 
Task Team Leader: Ayesha Y. Vawda 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 13, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: October 1, 2007 
Managing Unit: MNSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Secondary education (100%) 
Theme: Gender (P);Education for all (S);Education for the knowledge economy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
3.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed development objective is to: Reduce the gender gap in secondary education while 
laying the basis for related improvements in the quality, relevance and efficiency of secondary 
schooling. In addition to direct measures to increase the enrolment of rural girls, sustainable 
improvement in the equity of access to secondary education will also depend on developing 
curricula that are more relevant to current social and economic needs (and therefore attractive to 
students and parents), and on improving cost effectiveness to make the expansion of enrolments 
fiscally sustainable.  
 
Success in achieving this objective will be further defined and may be measured by the 
following outcome performance indicators:  
 
(i) 
Increase the share of girls in total enrolments, especially in rural areas, and in the districts 
where existing gender disparities are most extreme.  
 
(ii) 
Reduce drop-out of girls and boys in Grades 10-12.  
 
(iii) 
Increase the grade 12 completion rate of girls as a percentage of the age group.  
Page  2
(iv) 
Improve cost effectiveness in the use of inputs (buildings, teachers, and/or learning 
materials).  
 
Output and outcomes: Performance indicators will be further elaborated and identified during 
project preparation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed operation will complement existing and new operations in the other education sub-
sectors and, in particular, the on-going basic education projects. The selection of project 
activities will be based on: (i) their expected cost-effective impact on the development objective; 
(ii) their feasibility of implementation within available capacity; and (iii) synergies and 
complementarities with the basic education development program. It is proposed to structure 
components according to functional implementation categories, rather than project objectives, to 
simplify and reduce the burden on coordination in the implementation process. Each proposed 
component could include elements, such as the following, contributing to gender, 
quality/relevance and efficiency objectives:  
 
Component 1: Construction and physical inputs: Support new construction targeted to 
communities where access is the primary constraint to girls'enrolment; provide facilities and 
equipment meeting the needs of girls in rural secondary schools.  
 
Component 2: Teacher training and deployment: Develop a program to increase supply of rural 
female teachers. Introduce measures to deploy teachers more efficiently. Develop training to 
support new curricula.  
 
Component 3: Curriculum development and learning materials: Develop and pilot new 
secondary curriculum options and related learning materials. Improve quality and cost 
effectiveness in procurement/distribution of textbooks and learning materials.  
 
Component 4: Awareness and incentives: Complement on-going initiatives in basic education 
with selected interventions at the secondary level to discourage girls from dropping out of school 
and encourage school-level initiative. Measures under consideration include: (i) cash transfers to 
households conditional on girls' attendance and performance in school; and/or (ii) promotion and 
funding of proposals designed at the school/community level.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Countrywide.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Ministry of Education has already adopted EA procedures, agreed with the Bank, and 
developed the necessary capacity to implement these procedures relating to school construction 
and facilities for the on-going Basic Education Development Project (BEDP). These same 
procedures would be applied to any school construction activities under the proposed Girls 
Secondary Education Project. Information will be obtained early in project preparation to 
confirm effective application in practice of these existing EA procedures in implementation of 
the BEDP. If and when the Safeguards Specialists are satisfied that the existing Environment 
Management Plans (EMPs) procedures are adequate and effective, a separate EMP will not be 
required for the Girls Secondary Education Project and the responsibility for conformity with 
Safeguards Policies will revert to the SMU.   
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kanta K. Rigaud (MNSRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
See section E.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
To be determined.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/16/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
.
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ayesha Y. Vawda 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mourad Ezzine 
 
Comments:   
