Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3071 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/17/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID: P088435 
Project Name: RY-PORT CITIES DEVELOPMENT II 
Task Team Leader: Sameh Naguib Wahba 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 10, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 28, 2008 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (30%);General industry and trade sector 
(30%);General transportation sector (20%);Power (20%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Municipal governance 
and institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
15.50
15.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overarching aim of the Port Cities Development Program is to transform strategic Yemeni 
port cities into regional growth centers by creating an enabling environment conducive to private 
sector investment.  Building on the efforts started under Phase I of laying the policy, regulatory 
and institutional foundation for promoting private sector-led growth at the city level, the 
development objective of Phase II of the PCDP (PCDP II hereafter) is to attract private 
investment in the three port cities of Aden, Hodeidah and Mukalla that would contribute to 
economic growth and job creation, by alleviating critical infrastructure and institutional 
constraints to private investment.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed PCDP II would undertake selected strategic investments to alleviate critical 
infrastructure and institutional constraints to private investment in Aden, Hodeidah and Mukalla.  
Infrastructure investments would make available serviced land in a privately developed/managed 
economic zone and reduce the power supply deficit within the Free Zone in Aden, make 
Page  2
available serviced land in a privately managed industrial zone in Hodeidah, and improve the 
quality of infrastructure serving the tourism and services sectors in Mukalla.  Phase II would also 
focus on strengthening the institutional foundation for local economic development in the three 
port cities through capacity building and support of municipal management capacity, the LEDDs 
and investor service centers, the authorities overseeing free zone and industrial zone 
development, and city-level public-private partnerships for service delivery.  
 
PCDP-II would preliminarily cost about US$50.5 million equivalent and would be implemented 
over a five to six year period by the PCDP NCU with the support of the Aden, Hodeidah and 
Mukalla LEDDs.  Implementation oversight, inter-agency coordination, and the enactment of 
necessary national level reforms would be assured by the Port Cities Inter-Ministerial Committee 
(PCIC), created under Phase I as the Program?s steering committee.  The PCIC is chaired by the 
Prime Minister and includes the Deputy Prime Minister for Economic Affairs/Minister of 
Planning and International Cooperation as Vice Chair, the Ministers of Finance, Industry and 
Trade, Transport, Public Works and Highways, the Chairmen of the GIA and AFZA, and the 
Governors and Presidents of the Chambers of Commerce in the three cities.  
 
Component 1: Infrastructure investments in Aden in support of the Free Zone development 
($20m eqvt)  
 
PCDP II would finance priority infrastructure investments in Aden to enable the Free Zone to 
realize its potential and leverage private investments in manufacturing, real estate development 
and tourism.  An intervention to enable the supply of land for industrial and economic activities 
in serviced, well-located and professionally-managed zones is a key priority to the PCDP.  The 
likely PCDP II intervention is to facilitate a privately developed/managed economic zone within 
the Free Zone, including technical assistance in the transaction tendering, negotiations and 
contracting process, as well as financing of the off-site infrastructure and possibly elements of 
the on-site infrastructure (as determined by the feasibility and market studies) that would be 
needed to make the transaction happen.  
 
In enabling the privately-developed/managed economic zone, particular focus will be placed on 
ensuring dedicated and reliable power supply within Aden Free Zone, in alignment with the 
GOY power/energy sector strategy and the GOY- and donor-supported investment program.  A 
possible PCDP II intervention is to make available small power generation capacity (e.g. 20-
40MW through a public-private-partnership arrangement, as determined by the market and 
demand assessment) that would meet the short-term needs of the economic zone and which, as 
the GOY?s power generation investment pipeline comes into service, would evolve into the 
dedicated back-up power for the zone (a prerequisite to attract investors).  
 
The importance of ensuring adequate and reliable power supply is confirmed by the ICA, which 
reveals it as the leading infrastructure constraint to doing business in all of Yemen, as well as in 
Aden where the available capacity barely meets the needs of residential customers.  Where 
power supply is available, it is unreliable.  Firms thus find themselves forced to opt for out-of-
system generation through private diesel generators.  As one major local investor puts it, 
?sufficient and reliable power supply is a must if Aden is to ever live up to its role as the 
commercial capital of Yemen,? hence PCDP-II?s emphasis on ensuring dedicated power supply 
to meet Aden Free Zone?s investment needs.  Aden?s ability to have reliable power is also 
Page  3
critical if the city is to succeed in hosting the Gulf region football tournament of 2010, which is 
expected to receive major media attention and attract large numbers of visitors and prominent 
political and business figures.  The GOY plans to utilize the Aden 2010 event to position the city 
as Yemen?s economic capital and an important regional tourism and business destination within 
the GCC.  
 
Component 2: Infrastructure investments in Hodeidah in support of industrial development 
($15m eqvt)  
 
PCDP II would finance priority infrastructure investments in Hodeidah to enable the city to 
realize its industrial development potential and strengthen its food processing/agro-industry and 
manufacturing base in line with its existing endowments.  Hodeidah possesses a 28 square 
kilometer land tract, located 16 km from the city center and 5 km from the port on the road 
leading to the Saudi Arabian border, and which was designated for industrial use.  At the April 
2007 Investor Conference, GIA received project requests for 180 hectares in the Hodeidah 
industrial estate, and which could provide prospective anchor tenants.  
 
An investment to enable the creation of an industrial estate in Hodeidah is a key priority to the 
PCDP, and will build on the outcomes of the feasibility study and the improved regulatory 
framework.  The likely project intervention is to facilitate a transaction for a private 
developed/managed model industrial estate in Hodeidah, including technical assistance in the 
tendering, negotiations and contracting process, as well as financing the off-site and as needed 
the on-site infrastructure (per the feasibility and market studies) that would make the transaction 
happen.  Likely investments within the context of the Industrial Estate would also include 
enabling the creation of an incubation facility for technology transfer and adaptation, market 
research, support to small agro-industries, laboratories, and strengthening linkages between 
industrial and agricultural activities in cooperation with government and private sector 
institutions.  
 
Component 3: Infrastructure Investments in Mukalla in Support of Tourism Development 
($10m eqvt)  
 
PCDP II would finance a set of infrastructure investments to enable Mukalla to become the 
?Gateway to the Hadramout?? a destination for international tourists (attracted by Hadramout?s 
cultural heritage and Socotra island?s unique bio-diversity), regional visitors and Yemeni 
expatriates (especially from Saudi Arabia with cultural and family links to the Hadramout area), 
local visitors, and a place to do business.   Investments for the promotion of tourism as an 
economic growth sector require a city-wide approach.  To that end, Component 3 is comprised of 
3
sub-components that target enabling private investment in the tourism sector and improving 
visitors? entry-point and destination infrastructure:  
 
?
Tourist Village. Facilitating a transaction for private development of a tourist village in 
Mukalla, within a planned tourism development zone on the city?s seafront, including demand 
assessment, site identification, likely development components (hotel, facilities, artisanal 
complex, multi-purpose leisure/entertainment facilities, etc), technical assistance in the 
tendering, negotiations and contracting process, and financing off-site infrastructure 
improvements as needed to make the transaction happen including site access, power, water 
supply and wastewater among others;  
Page  4
?
Gateway Infrastructure. First, improving and expanding the terminal building and 
infrastructure of Rayan International Airport, with technical support to strengthen airport 
management and marketing, is key to efficiently handle the flow of visitors to Mukalla.  Present 
facilities are inadequate to handle the current 116,000 passengers per year, and further 
congestion is expected with an increase in the number of passengers and international flights due 
to the introduction of the Open Skies policy in mid-2006.  Intervention would enable the airport 
to benefit from the liberalization of air traffic and accordingly attract more airline companies and 
handle a greater number of visitors.  Second, decongesting and rehabilitating the Mukalla port, 
including building facilities to accommodate passenger cruise ships and yachts and separate piers 
for dhows and fishing vessels, are critical to improve the port?s organization and ability to 
efficiently handle both visitors and cargo.  The proposed improvements would serve the dual 
purpose of improving in the short term the port?s organization for commercial activities and its 
ability to accommodate cruise ships and yachts, and subsequently evolving in the long-term 
(upon the operation of a new commercial port in Dhabba) into a full-fledged leisure/ artisanal 
port and marina.  
 
?
Revitalization of Old Mukalla. Targeted public asset management, infrastructure and 
urban design improvements in the city?s historic center are necessary to improve visitors? 
experience and quality of life for residents and leverage private investment in tourism and 
services.  These would include establishing tourism facilities, amenities and attractive public 
spaces (including a visitor center and museum through adaptive reuse of the Sultan Palace, 
waterfront amenities and public spaces, tourist itineraries, etc), and improving traffic circulation 
and reducing congestion in the city center through enhancing the road network and improving 
traffic management (parking, traffic reorganization, signaling, vehicular and pedestrian 
circulation separation).  
 
Component 4: Institutional Strengthening (5.5m eqvt)  
 
Fiscal profile studies carried out under Phase I in all three port cities revealed serious problems 
of revenue inadequacy, heavy reliance on central transfers, and non-buoyant unpredictable 
revenue streams.  Under Phase II, all three cities would receive support in the areas of budgeting, 
revenue enhancement and asset management through support provided to the LEDDs and 
finance departments, including automation of systems wherever necessary and technical 
assistance.  
 
PCDP-II would also finance consultancy services and related goods and works needed to 
strengthen the functioning of key local institutions with local economic development 
responsibilities and assist them in fulfilling their important mandates.  Institutions covered would 
include:  
 
?
LEDDs in Aden, Hodeidah and Mukalla, including strengthening their working 
relationship and collaboration with the different local authorities and line ministry departments, 
strengthening their monitoring, evaluation and reporting capacities, and assisting them in their 
strategic planning and policy advisory role vis-?-vis local authorities.  This would include 
assistance in the preparation and implementation of asset management strategies;  
 
?
Investor Services Centers in the port cities, including functional/spatial organization, 
equipment, capacity building, and technical assistance to enable them to effectively perform their 
function;  
Page  5
?
Aden Free Zone Authority, including functional and spatial reorganization, equipment, 
capacity building, and technical assistance needed to enable them to effectively perform their 
function; and  
 
?
Regulatory authority overseeing industrial zone development, as per the 
recommendations of the regulatory framework study currently underway (whether strengthening 
an existing authority or assisting the GOY to establish a new entity).  
 
PCDP II would also finance consultancy services and technical assistance related to national 
and local level policy reforms, especially in the areas of business registration streamlining, the 
port sector and strategy implementation through the LEDDs.  This component will also finance 
necessary feasibility and design studies of priority city economic development investment 
projects (which would be packaged for other donor financing), and supervision of construction 
works.  Support would also finance outsourcing functions and as needed management services 
for the three city LEDDs.  Finally, this component would finance project management consisting 
of NCU staff, technical assistance and consultancy services, training, and NCU incremental 
operating expenses.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Phase II of the PCDP would be implemented in the three port cities of Aden, Hodeidah and 
Mukalla.  Proposed infrastructure investments in Aden would support the development of an 
economic zone within the Free Zone.  Proposed infrastructure investments in Hodeidah would 
support industrial development in the designated Industrial Estate.  Proposed infrastructure 
investments in Mukalla would support tourism development through the rehabilitation of 
gateway infrastructure (airport and port), revitalization of Old Mukalla and enabling a privately-
developed tourist village on Mukalla's coast in a location to be specified in the designated 
tourism zone in the master plan.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower's implementation entity?the PCDP NCU?has over five years of project 
implementation experience spanning Phase I preparation and implementation. The NCU staff 
includes a qualified social/ community liaison officer who oversaw the consultant team preparing 
the draft Resettlement Policy Framework and who is responsible for ensures community 
participation and involvement in asset management in the different investments financed under 
PCDP (and which was successfully completed in the case of the Sirah fish market).  
 
To further enhance implementation capacity in the preparation for project roll-out at a larger 
scale and simultaneously in three port cities during Phase II, the plan is to strengthen the NCU 
with several qualified staff, including a local environmental specialist to oversee the 
implementation of the Environmental Management Plan.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSSD) 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed (MNSSD) 
 
Page  6
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
PCDP II would be classified Environmental Category A.  As such, project preparation 
activities include an Integrated Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (IESIA), which 
encompasses environmental impact assessments (EIA)?through a blueprint or framework 
approach, as needed?for each investment to examine potential environmental impacts, and 
develop alternatives to avoid or mitigation measures against any adverse impact.  Procurement of 
this assignment, financed under the PHRD, is underway.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
In anticipation of the likelihood that PCDP II would trigger OP 4.12 on Involuntary 
Resettlement, with activities displacing residents or negatively affecting economic activities, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework is currently being finalized under PCDP I, and is a trigger for 
advancement to PCDP Phase II (a first draft was completed, and the final document is expected 
to be completed by December 2007, well ahead of Project Appraisal).  Should PCDP II trigger 
OP4.12, a Resettlement Action Plan or an Abbreviated Resettlement Plan would be prepared as 
part of project preparation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/20/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Significant progress has been achieved regarding the preparation of the Resettlement Policy 
Framework, which is a trigger for advancement to PCDP Phase II. A first draft was 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
completed and reviewed by IDA, and a final draft is expected on or before December 2007, 
well ahead of Project Appraisal.  
 
The Integrated Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (IESIA) assignment is 
planned to be launched on or about February 1, 2008 (nearing the readiness of the different 
feasibility and design studies).  The assignment?s Terms of Reference were cleared by the 
IDA team?s environmental and social experts in August 2007.  The procurement process for 
this assignment, to be financed under the PHRD grant, has already been launched.  The RFP 
with the shortlist were cleared by IDA during the September 2007 identification mission.  A 
draft IESIA report would be prepared and disclosed in Infoshop by June 26, 2008 with the 
final report to be completed in line with reviewer and stakeholder comments and the outcome 
of Project Appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sameh Naguib Wahba 
10/12/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hedi Larbi 
 
Comments:   
