Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/07/2007 
Report No.:  AC1672
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Zambia 
Project ID:  P093611 
Project Name:  Additional Financing to Road Rehabilitation & Maintenance Project 
Task Team Leader:  Petrus Benjamin Gericke 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 12, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Regional integration (S);Natural disaster 
management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the ongoing RRMP does not change due to the additional 
financing. It remains to support the Government in implementing the ROADSIP II 
Program, including: (a) preserving its public core road network; (b) development of 
adequate institutional capacity for effective, efficient, equitable and sustainable 
management of the public road infrastructure, and road safety; (c) extension of urban and 
rural transport infrastructure and services for increased accessibility; and (d) extension of 
community transport infrastructure.  
 
The proposed additional financing would support the reinstatement of key river 
crossings damaged by flooding during the last rainy seasons to original levels of service.  
 
Project preparation ensured that activities planned under the Project comply with and 
include safeguard, financial management and procurement requirements and 
accommodate other cross-cutting issues like HIV/AIDS.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Additional Financing activities are fully aligned with the RRMP scope of works and 
will support three of the four components:  
Page  2
Part A: Civil Works for Road Maintenance, Upgrading and Rehabilitation: This 
component will focus on the reinstatement and reconstruction of identified structures 
where urgency for action exists, as described in Part A.3. Support under this component 
will include reinstatement, rehabilitation and improvement of about 190 smaller river 
crossings in three Provinces and four National Parks and the construction of a large 
bridge at Chiawa on the Kafue River.  
 
Part B: Engineering and other Technical Services: This component will consist of the 
assessment, design, supervision and project management consultancy services in support 
of the works described in Part A.  
 
Part C: Institutional Development and Capacity Building: This component will support 
the newly established RDA, tasked to manage the core road network, through 
strengthening of the newly established Bridge Management Unit (BMU) and the offices 
of the Provincial Engineers. This would include capacity building and training support, as 
well as support for the provision of bridge inspection vehicles, office equipment and 
bridge management systems.  
 
Implementation Arrangements  
 
The RDA established a Bridge Management Unit as part of its organogram. The RDA 
will manage implementation of the Project through this Unit. The NRFA will continue as 
the project coordinator as part of its responsibility to manage the road sector funding.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project covered the entire country during the assessment and design stage. Flowing 
from the designs the project will support four works contracts, one each in the Luapula 
Province, the Northern Province, the Copperbelt Province and then one for works in four 
National Parks. These contracts are all for the rehabilitation of small structures (culverts 
and bridges with spans less than 15 meters). Additionally, the project will support the 
construction of a large bridge across the Kafue River at Chiawa.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTS3) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Not applicable.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 Not applicable.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The first year works supports the rehabilitation and re-instatement of existing structures 
with minimal or negligent environmental impacts like small earthworks at bridge 
approaches and works site clean up. Appropriate mitigation arrangements have been 
included in the specific environmental management plans for each civil works contract. 
These safeguard requirements for all first year project activities have been assessed and 
cleared for disclosure.  
 
The planned bridge at Chiawa is scheduled as part of the second year works. Its 
Environmental Assessment and Mitigation Plan will be reviewed and cleared for 
disclosure prior to commencement of works.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Environmental and Social Management Unit of the RDA was involved from project 
inception and reviewed all reports and designs for compliance with safeguards 
requirements. The EMU staff will ensure that the required environmental clearances and 
permits are obtained and will carry out the environmental and social management 
oversight.   
 
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/12/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/05/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/31/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  5
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Petrus Benjamin Gericke 
02/07/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Nina Chee 
02/07/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
02/07/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Colin P. Rees 
02/07/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
02/07/2007 
Comments:   
