Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/03/2006 
Report No.:  AC2090
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Zambia 
Project ID:  P071259 
Project Name:  Water Sector Performance Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader:  N. Jane Walker 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 2, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 18, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTU1 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (100%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
23.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to support the GRZ's on- going commitment to 
urban and rural water sector reforms by improving access and sustainability of water 
supply and sanitation (WSS) services for consumers in Lusaka and by supporting a more 
comprehensive institutional structure which will lead to a sector wide approach for WSS 
investments.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is proposed as an APL in two phases. Phase I (2006-2009) has two 
components.  Component A supports a Development Financing Agreement (DFA) for 
Lusaka Water and Sewerage Company (LWSC) underpinned by immediate efficiency 
and management improvements and aims to ensure operational cost coverage. 
Component B supports institutional capacity building to prepare Ministry of Local 
Government and Housing (MLGH) to manage a coordinating mechanism for the rural 
water sector. Phase II (2009-2012) is expected to begin immediately after Phase I and 
will include funds to scale up of infrastructure investments in urban areas, support rural 
investments, and provide further assistance with institutional development and capacity 
building.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will support urban water supply in Lusaka through the DFA designed to 
improve operational and financial efficiency of LWSC that will ultimately result in better 
service delivery for Lusaka residents.  
 
The project will support capacity building of MLGH based in Lusaka to build a 
coordinating mechanism to develop the institutional structure for rural water supply and 
pave the way for a coordinated approach for water supply sector.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Banumathi Setlur (ESDQC) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There will be a significant net positive social and environmental benefit to the people of 
Lusaka once the works in Phase I are completed. Phase I involves primarily rehabilitation 
of works. However, limited negative environmental and social impacts will occur for 
short periods. By careful pre-planning by the Engineering firm contracted to undertake 
the rehabilitation works, negative impacts can be addressed through an Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP). There will also be a resettlement policy framework that sets 
out the compensation policies in case any physical relocation is caused by the project, 
any loss of land or loss or damage to other assets or livelihoods.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There is no long term negative impact associated with the Phase I of the project. The 
works envisaged do not call for any permanent land acquisition or destruction of houses 
and not necessitate any movement or resettlement of people. The bulk of the impacts fall 
Page  3
under Construction phase works, mainly trenching and excavation works. There are two 
categories of trenching works, firstly water supply lines, and secondly sewer pipelines.  
 
The secondary or indirect impacts of the trenching works will be disruptions to traffic, 
pedestrians, and safety issues where trenches are located along pedestrian pathways and 
where they may temporarily block access to private and/or public property in both 
residential and commercial areas in Lusaka, and disruption of assets in limited cases in 
order to access and rehabilitate service lines. These impacts can be minimized, in terms 
of severity and duration, by ensuring that the excavation and construction works are 
limited to short working sections, that works are carried out rapidly and efficiently, and 
that temporary access to premises are included. The remainder of the impacts will be site 
specific, and generally within the LWSC operating sites. The EMP for the project is 
designed with specific attention to anticipated impacts from the rehabilitation works and 
subsequent operating phases. Any compensation related to the associated works of the 
project will be addressed using the resettlement policy framework. Phase II of the APL is 
expected to include larger capital works. There will be an EIA and the associated 
safeguard documents will be prepared as required for the Phase II.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
As the adverse effects do not initiate any significant safeguard issues such as land 
acquisition or resettlement of people, considering any other project alternative was not 
necessary.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The negative impacts will be mitigated with an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) 
which will enable environmental mitigation measures to be effectively integrated into 
project planning and implementation. Within the Environmental Management Planning 
process, the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has identified 
the need for increased effort and cost to mitigate the impacts, and an increased effort to 
ensure that the EMP is fully implemented by the organization contracted to undertake the 
civil and mechanical works. LWSC will coordinate the EMP by hiring an Environmental 
Officer for the duration of the project on a part-time basis. To build capacity on 
environmental issues on a long-term basis, resources are included in the credit to train an 
Environment Officer within LWSC.  To address any compensation issues arising from 
loss of assets or land, a resettlement policy framework will be in place during the 
implementation of the project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The public consultation and awareness program involved (i) Informal meetings held at 
community level in the areas of potential works (ii) Ad hoc discussions with key 
Government agencies and NGOs as appropriate (iii) A formal workshop for key 
stakeholders held to present the report findings.  Informal meetings with community 
leaders in affected areas have ensured that people who will be impacted by the works 
Page  4
program are both aware of the impending project and are aware of the probable effects. 
Any relevant comments or concerns raised by the community at this stage have been 
incorporated into the EMP.  
 
During the ESMF process, public consultations have been held during meetings and site 
visits together with LWSC in areas of potential civil works. These meetings and site 
visits helped to determine the proposed scope of works and the LWSC’s intended work 
methodology. These were used to determine the probable impacts on the physical and 
social environment.  
 
In addition to the site inspections and consultations within the LWSC, extensive 
consultations were carried out with key stakeholders from different departments within 
Government Ministries and Departments and statutory bodies, and with representatives of 
communities that will be affected by the rehabilitation works program. These were 
conducted by the Consultant's Sociologist and Community Health and Safety Specialist. 
Additional communications were held with the Environmental Council of Zambia 
regarding the expected levels of impacts and proposals to cover the likely approach of the 
ESMF, mainly through an EMP.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/19/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/30/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/03/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/19/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/30/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/03/2006 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
Yes 
Page  5
review and approve the EA report? 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms N. Jane Walker 
05/03/2006 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Banumathi Setlur 
05/02/2006 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
05/02/2006 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
05/03/2006 
Comments:   
