Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2931 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/20/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Zambia 
Project ID: P102459 
Project Name: Commercial Agriculture Project 
Task Team Leader: Paavo Eliste 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 19, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 2, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%);Irrigation and drainage 
(40%) 
Theme: Other rural development (P);Water resource management (P);Rural markets (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to improve the supply response to market opportunities for 
specifically targeted commercializing smallholders through public-private partnerships with 
commercial farmers.  This will be achieved by improving smallholder and commercial farmer 
access to irrigation and market information, and by strengthening land administration and land 
use planning.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would support the following components:  
 
Irrigation Development.  The proposed project will assist the Government in the 
implementation of priority irrigation development activities under the National Irrigation Plan 
(NIP) and to achieve its targets under the Fifth National Development Plan (FNDP). The main 
thrust of the project is based on comprehensive approaches which link water management to 
specific market opportunities. Given the general scarcity of resources for irrigation development, 
creative approaches and partnerships are needed for irrigation development.  This will mean that 
the Government and Cooperating Partners need to work directly with the private sector as 
Page  2
implementing partners.  The project would aim to support development of the irrigation sub-
sector through at least three entry points.  
 
First, through investments to support civil works and equipment for water mobilization, 
conveyance, delivery to and rehabilitation or improvement of collective or individual irrigation 
schemes.  The IDA funds would be designed so as to match or complement funding of the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives (MACO) public investment budget, and of the 
Irrigation Development Fund (IDF).  The proposed investments would include collectively 
managed sub-projects for small and medium size outgrowers, development of the irrigation 
schemes for priority farm blocks, and those proposed by large scale commercial farmers which 
serve equitably all concerned water catchment users through the public-private farmer 
partnerships for the financing, construction and management of collective water mobilization and 
supply irrigation and/or multi-purpose schemes.  
 
Second, through institutional and social development activities that help to: (i) Implement some 
of the NIP?s more critical interventions (i.e. establishment of cost effective and sustainable 
irrigation development funding and management mechanisms); (ii) Pilot the implementation of 
some of the provisions of the new Water Resources Management Bill (to be enacted) as they 
relate to irrigation, such as the establishment of catchment or sub-catchment councils and water 
users associations; (iii) Technical assistance and advisory services for eligible public-private-
farmer partnerships; and (iv) Support MACO core functions as they relate to irrigation and water 
resources management (i.e. inventory of existing irrigation schemes; needs assessment of water 
resources availability; feasibility and design studies; data and policy analysis; monitoring and 
evaluation; capacity building and training, etc.).  
 
Third, through supporting the private sector in the development of a proper and efficient supply 
of irrigation equipments for all types of farmers, with a particular focus on Emerging 
Commercial Farmers (ECF) and smallholders.  
 
Land Administration and Land Use Planning.  To address issues in land access and land tenure 
and transferability in the broader context of commercial agriculture development, the following 
types of interventions are suggested: (i) streamlining and simplification of land allocation and 
registration to cut processing time and costs; (ii) modernization and strengthening of national 
level land administration services to increase efficiency and transparency in physical and land 
use planning, surveying, registration, valuation, arbitration and land information system (LIS) 
and the management of state lands; and (iii) decentralization of land administration to selected 
provinces, districts and municipalities with high growth potential to handle increased volumes of 
land transactions and disputes.  
 
Furthermore, the proposed project would support technical assistance and professional services 
for surveying and land use planning; equipment and materials for services such as land use 
planning and surveying; land information capture and presentation in the form of digital data and 
maps; IT equipment for LIS; office buildings especially for decentralized land administration; 
buildings and equipment for supporting land transactions and the management and storage of 
land records; logistical equipment and vehicles to support field activities; and incremental 
operational expenditures such as support for Land Tribunal activities to eliminate a back-log of 
Page  3
land cases.  Spatial land use planning database will be developed which would combine various 
spatial data layers (i.e. soil productivity, vegetation cover, land use, water courses, hydrology 
analysis, areas prone to flooding and drought, roads and other infrastructure, settlements, crop 
distribution, domestic and export market access indexes) and convert them into a dynamic and 
flexible planning tool, which could be used to prioritize areas of high commercial agricultural 
potential for infrastructure development.  
 
Market Development and Information.  Zambia faces high transport cost to global export 
markets.  The project would provide resources for agricultural and marketing support activities 
which are related to the development of commercial agriculture opportunities, and which 
complement the proposed investments into irrigation development and land administration.  This 
will include identification of opportunities to access regional markets, domestic markets (i.e. 
stock-feed based industries) and import substitution (i.e. bio-fuel industry).  Technical assistance 
will be provided for market analysis, strategic planning, prioritization of public sector policy 
initiatives for competitive agriculture development, and addressing existing policy and 
regulatory constraints.  Some support could be also provided for the technical assistance for the 
Farm Block Development program (FBD) to ensure the adequacy of the planning and design 
process involving private sector partners, and support Zambia Development Agency?s (ZDA) 
efforts to promote investment in agro-processing to potential investors.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The locations of irrigation sites will be in high agricultural potential areas close to major 
transport routes, most likely in Southern, Central, and Eastern provinces. Exact locations will be 
determined during project preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has limited capacity to address safeguards policy issues.  The safeguards 
instruments (e.g. EMP, RPF, IPMP, RAP) will (i) outline institutional arrangements, including 
the roles and responsibilities of various stakeholder groups to implement and monitor 
environmental and social mitigation measures, and (ii) include capacity building activities to 
strengthen their ability to act effectively on those responsibilities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN) 
Mr Jorge E. Uquillas Rodas (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Irrigation civil works will require environmental planning and assessment to avoid or 
minimize adverse impacts. Environmental Impact Assessments, including Environmental 
Management Plans (EMPs), will be prepared for each site at which physical investments in 
irrigation infrastructure will be made.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Any potential impacts of irrigation civil works on natural habitats will be addressed when 
meeting environmental assessment (OP4.01) requirements.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
New irrigated agriculture may require increased pesticide use and the implementation of IPM 
approaches.  An Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) will be prepared if needed.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Application of the Physical Cultural Resources OP will be determined during Project 
preparation based on the specific sites at which physical investments will be supported.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Land acquisition may be required in the development of new irrigation civil works.  A 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will prescribe the preparation of Resettlement Action 
Plans (RAPs), with physical relocation and compensation procedures where such land 
acquisition is involuntary.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
New irrigation civil works will involve dams, which are likely to meet the definition of large 
dams, in which case the measures detailed in this OP to ensure the safety of these structures will 
be applied.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
New irrigation will affect water quantity and quality on international rivers.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/15/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Required safeguards instruments (e.g. EMP, RAP, RPF, IPMP) will be prepared, reviewed 
and disclosed prior to appraisal.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Paavo Eliste 
08/14/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
08/15/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
08/17/2007 
Comments:  If in the course of preparation of the project a categorization of B appears more 
appropriate, the rating should be changed. 
