Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/05/2006 
Report No.:  AC1952
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Zambia 
Project ID:  P070063 
Project Name:  Agricultural Development Support Program 
Task Team Leader:  Tijan M. Sallah 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 5, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: May 18, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTS1 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural extension and research (40%);Agricultural marketing and trade 
(30%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Decentralization (S);Rural markets (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to advance smallholder agriculture 
commercialization along value chains through (a) providing resources for working capital 
and term lending for capital investments in productive and marketing assets/activities to 
improve productivity, quality and efficiency of supply chains; (b) targeted investments 
into public/collective goods, such as feeder roads and into key public service functions; 
and (c) building market, technical and managerial knowledge of farmer groups and 
producer organizations through extension and technical advisory services.   
 
3. Project Description 
In order to achieve its objectives the project is organized around three components, 
namely (i) Support to Farmers and Agribusiness Enterprises; (ii) Institutional 
Development; and (iii) Project Management and Coordination.  
 
Component 1: Support to Farmers and Agribusiness Enterprises. The component has the 
following three sub-components:  
 
Page  2
(a) 
Supply Chain Credit Facility (SCCF).  The component will provide a line of 
credit, on a demand driven basis, for those investments geared to improving the supply 
chains of existing and emerging contract farming systems.  The SCCF would enable 
those Zambian agro-enterprises, traders or nucleus and commercial farms working with 
smallholders under an outgrower scheme, or any other form of arrangement, to borrow in 
foreign exchange to finance capital investments, seasonal inputs and export activities.  
The line of credit will be made available through eligible participating financial 
institutions (PFIs), under the supervision of an Apex organization, who will then on-lend 
to those qualifying agribusinesses/ commercial farmers with PFIs assuming the credit 
risk.  The SCCF would support three broad activity clusters: (a) productivity 
improvement and up-scaling of existing outgrower/contract farming schemes; (b) 
establishment of new contract farming enterprises; and (c) upgrading the processing and 
marketing capacity.  
 
In addition, the project would provide limited resources to support the following 
activities: (a) technical assistance to the APEX Organization; (b) training for the 
Environmental Assessment Capacity Building for PFIs; (c) development of training 
material on agricultural risk appraisal; and (d) preparation of guidelines for the 
development of comprehensive business plans.  
 
(b) 
Market Improvement and Innovation Facility (MIIT).  The facility would provide 
financial resources, on a matching grant (MG) basis, for the development of innovative 
business linkages between smallholders and other actors in the supply chains, introduce 
innovative technologies, and demonstrate improvements to a broader audience of supply 
networks.  Eligible applicants for MGs would include organized producer associations 
that market smallholder produce, and agro-enterprises, traders, input providers and 
nucleus commercial farms working with smallholders.  
 
(c) Feeder Roads Improvement Facility.  The project would provide resources for the 
rehabilitation and maintenance of feeder roads of economic importance in high 
agricultural potential areas on the basis of core network management supported through 
the Rural Accessibility and Mobility Program (RAMP).  The activities include: (i) needs 
assessment and prioritization study at inception; (ii) feasibility and engineering studies; 
and (iii) undertaking road rehabilitation, supervision and maintenance investments. Other 
costs include environmental studies, capacity building and training for the Road 
Development Agency (RDA) and National Road Fund Agency (NRFA) to enhance their 
management capacity, tender advertisements and contract preparation and contingencies.  
 
Component 2: Institutional Development.  The project would provide support to 
selected MA
CO core functions.  It would strengthen MACO’s services related to: policy 
analysis, agricultural statistics; market information and capacity in trade negotiations; 
seed certification and control; as well as food safety and quality standards and 
phytosanitary services.  Support would be also provided for monitoring and evaluation of 
the overall development programs of MACO, including strengthening of the National 
Early Warning System.  Activities would include staff training (both short term and long 
term), study tours, participation in domestic and regional workshops, procurement of 
Page  3
equipment (office, computing, laboratory and testing), vehicles and incremental operating 
costs. The project would increase the capacity of the CDT to do entomological research 
work and to supply an increased amount of foundation seed to the cotton industry for 
further multiplication of quality seed by the industry itself to be, in turn, provided to the 
smallholders.  
 
Component 3: Project Management and Coordination.  The project implementation will 
largely rely on existing MACO institutions and structures.  However, it would strengthen 
MACO’s implementation capacity by establishing the National Coordination Office 
(NCO). The NCO would be staffed with specific professional functions (project manager, 
financial management/accounting, procurement and M&E) and would also have the 
required support personnel, all recruited on a competitive basis.  The NCO would hold 
the overall project implementation responsibility, albeit the actual execution of most of 
project activities is with delegated bodies. In addition, the NCO would provide services 
to other donors who choose to implement their projects through the MACO structures.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The demand driven nature of line of credit and matching grant activities means that these 
investments are not limited to any specific geographical area.  The feeder roads 
rehabilitation investments are focussing on the areas of high agricultural potential. The 
project will target selected districts in Eastern, Southern and Lusaka provinces for feeder 
roads rehabilitation investments. The final sites for the project rehabilitation works will 
be determined based on the needs assessment which will be carried out before project 
effectiveness.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTS1) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The potential environmental concerns are those associated with (a) project-financed 
capital investments and seasonal inputs by commercial farmers, which lead to higher 
levels of agricultural commercialization of smallholders, and (b) increased value added 
processing and marketing capacity of traders and agribusinesses involved in the 
commodity supply chains.  These concerns will be addressed by ensuring that financing 
institutions have the capacity, with Bank and GoZ support, to work with applicants to 
avoid or minimize the associated biophysical and human health risks.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
This is an EA Category “B” project.  Actual project investments are demand driven and 
will only be determined during implementation.  The Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared to address the substantive requirements 
of the OP4.01 and OP4.09, the latter primarily for livestock hygiene facilities and weed 
control around project-funded facilities. The ESMF also contains a screening procedure 
for determining if a resettlement plan is required for any particular investment according 
to the Resettlement Policy Framework prepared according to the requirements of OP4.12.  
 
The ESMF separately addresses different project components as follows:  
 
1.
Component 1.1: Support to supply chains through a line of credit to finance 
working capital and investment term lending. Project funds will flow to commercial 
banks for on-lending.  This is a financial intermediary (FI) arrangement, and each FI (i.e. 
commercial bank) will be required to screen proposed investments and ensure that sub-
borrowers comply with the applicable World Bank safeguards policies and similar 
Zambian requirements.  The ESMF specifies what investments (by type and/or location) 
must be approved by an FI and by the World Bank and Zambia government.  
 
2.
Component 1(a)(ii): Support to supply chains through limited matching grants to 
support capacity development of smallholder producer groups and associations.  These 
grants will be managed by the Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives according to 
procedures specified in the ESMF to ensure that grant-supported investments comply 
with the applicable World Bank safeguards policies and similar Zambian requirements.  
 
3.
Component 1(c): Feeder Roads Improvement Facility for the rehabilitation of 
feeder roads of economic importance in high potential areas.  The sub-component would 
be implemented through the National Roads Fund Agency (NRFA).  The NRFA has a 
Page  5
well-established Environmental Management Unit that can competently handle World 
Bank safeguards, and similar Zambian, requirements.  The ESMF describes the 
procedures for planning, review and approval by the NRFA to ensure that project-
financed investments comply with the applicable World Bank safeguards policies and 
similar Zambian requirements.  
 
Apart form the NRFA, The Borrower has limited safeguards policies capacity.  The 
ESMF and RPF (i) outline institutional arrangements, including the roles and 
responsibilities of various stakeholder groups, to implement and monitor environmental 
and social mitigation measures, and (ii) include capacity building activities to strengthen 
their ability to act effectively on those responsibilities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/05/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/15/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/09/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/05/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/15/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/09/2005 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/14/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/15/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/14/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  6
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager review 
and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by the regional safeguards 
team?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager 
review and approve the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Tijan M. Sallah 
12/14/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
 
 
Comments:   
