Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC599 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/21/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Zambia 
Project ID: P077452 
Project Name: Zm: Increased Access to Electricity & ICT Services 
Task Team Leader: Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P076320 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 12, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (70%);Renewable energy (20%);Telecommunications (10%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
55.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
2.50 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
17.50
17.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to facilitate a significant improvement in the quality of life 
of rural households as well as the incomes/jobs generated by rural enterprises by increasing the 
access of households, enterprises and social facilities to electricity and ICT services.  
 
2a. Project Global objective  
 
The project’s global objective, in line with GEF Operational Program 6 (OP6), is to remove the 
barriers to, and reduce the implementation costs of, renewable energy technologies to help 
mitigate greenhouse gas emissions. Proposed GEF co-financing is attuned to OP6 strategic 
priorities – expanding productive uses of renewable energy (institutional solar PV systems for 
social services) and promoting power sector policy frameworks supportive of renewable energy 
(stand-alone grids).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
•
Project components  
Page  2
Component Preliminary 
 
 
Costs (US$M)  
 
1.
TA and Capacity Building 
13.0  
 
Electricity 8.0 
 
 
ICTs          2.0  
 
Cross-sectoral  
3.0  
 
2. Investment projects  
 
Electricity 57.0 
 
 
a. Connections (grid and off-grid) and generation 
55.0  
 
b.
SHS of different sizes 
–
households only          2.0  
 
ICTs 10.0  
 
Cross-sectoral  
5.0  
 
Total Project Costs 
85.00  
 
It is expected the IDA credit would be about $ 55 million, with GEF $10 million (about $7.5 
million for ‘smart subsidies’ for investments, and about $2.5 million for technical assistance and 
capacity building), PCF $2-3 million, and the remaining financing coming from other (including 
private) sources.  
 
TA and Capacity Building  
 
There is a significant need for TA and capacity building, arising from the “break with the past.” 
This will cover: (a) enhancement of the legal and regulatory framework for electricity and 
telecoms; (b) initial operation of rural electrification and communications institutions; (c) an 
indicative national master plan for expanded electricity access, including feasibility studies for 
small hydropower projects; and (d) renewable energy training and capacity building, and cost-
shared business development services to qualified private sector parties.  
 
Electricity investments  
 
These will be: (a) distribution extensions in ZESCO main grid; (b) independent grids 
owned/operated by ZESCO or other service providers, and relying on renewable energy-based 
generation; (c) ‘cross-sectoral’ solar photovoltaic (PV) investments in remote social service 
facilities of GRZ or other official agencies to meet their high-priority electricity/ICT needs; and 
(d) small solar systems for household and other private users with sufficient affordability for 
cash purchases.  Investments in renewable energy independent grids and solar PV systems will 
be supported by partial and declining GEF grants or PCF ‘carbon credit’ purchases.  
 
Page  3
ICT investments  
 
The project will support: (a) expansion of rural telephone networks, (b) expansion of internet, 
and (c) ‘cross-sectoral’ investments in remote social service facilities of GRZ or other official 
agencies to meet their high-priority ICT needs.  
 
Alternative development interventions/approaches. First, the project does not include thermal 
fuels (wood fuels, LPG) because the GRZ indicated that they wanted a separate project to 
address those markets.  Second, an ICT component was included in view of the synergies on the 
supply side, as well as the potential for much greater combined impact. Third, the option of sole 
reliance on private sector was abandoned in favor of a public-private partnership model, because, 
at present, in Zambia, it is difficult to induce the private sector to undertake any significant 
investments in rural infrastructure.  
 
Lending instrument. A SIL is proposed, as it will provide the time and resources to provide 
meaningful support to Zambia. An APL is not suitable because the Government is just starting to 
break with the past, and it is difficult to establish the timeline of long-run progress.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is national in scope.  Specific commercially-oriented investment opportunities will 
be identified during project preparation.  Additional investments will be developed during the 
implementation phase.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
ZESCO has in-house capability and experience with preparing disclosable safeguard studies.  
The review and supervision capabilities of the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources 
and the safeguard capabilities of the local consulting community will be assessed during project 
preparation, and capacity building included in the project if necessary.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTS1) 
Mr Gordon Appleby (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Investments will involve construction of power lines and small renewable energy plants.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Investments may impinge on natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Investments may impinge on relevant forest land.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
Cogeneration investments may have direct causal links to agriculture activities involving pest 
management.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Investments could involve cultural property.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Investments will involve land acquisition.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
Dams or weirs will be included. They are likely to be small, but there is some possibility that 
this safeguard may be triggered.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
Mini-hydro investments may involve international waterways.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/01/2004 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESMF is planned for completion by October 2004.  As mentioned above, subproject-
specific studies will be prepared in line with the overall subproject preparation schedule, 
recognizing that approval and disclosure will be a condition of disbursement against the 
subproject.  
 
An Environment and Social Safeguard Framework (ESMF) will be prepared for the project 
in light of the fact that not all investments are known in advance. In accordance with the 
ESMF, Environmental Screening, Environmental Impact Assessments, and Resettlement 
Plans will be prepared, reviewed, disclosed, and supervised for subprojects.  These 
subproject studies will be prepared as appropriate to the schedule of the subproject.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Arun P. Sanghvi 
04/13/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
04/13/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Arun P. Sanghvi 
04/13/2006 
Comments:   
