Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  38073 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/09/2006 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Zambia 
Project ID: P095193 
Project Name: Zambia Local Development Program (LDP) 
Task Team Leader: Mirey Ovadiya 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 8, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 8, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTH1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (40%);Health (20%);Primary education (20%);General 
water, sanitation and flood protection sector (10%);Roads and highways (10%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Social safety nets (P);Social risk mitigation (S);Other social development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
28.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.00 
 
GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) 
16.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
36.00
72.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The program will aim to support the implementation of the national decentralization policy 
which has the following objectives: (i) to transfer decision-making authority, functions, and 
resources from the center to the lower administrative levels with matching financial resources 
with a view to improve effectiveness and efficiency in service delivery; and (ii) to develop the 
capacity of Councils and communities in development planning, financing and coordinating 
delivery of services.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed LDP will have two entry points for program implementation: (i) PEMFA/PSM; 
and (ii) fiscal decentralization. The LDP menu of activities will be primarily determined by the 
objective of making local authorities functional and preparing the ground for sector devolution. 
Following the June 2005 identification mission, the Government, WB and cooperating partners 
discussed and confirmed the proposed components.  
Page  2
This program will build on the existing institutional mechanisms from the Zambia Social 
Investment Fund (ZAMSIF) which closed on December 31, 2005.  In particular, a core group 
from the ZAMSIF implementation team will be responsible for the preparation of the proposed 
program carrying the lessons learned forward, and during implementation, for providing 
technical support to local administrations to improve their financial performance and service 
delivery capacity to become fully functional in a decentralized system.  The new project will be 
designed with an exit for the implementation team, that is, mainstreamed implementation 
arrangements by the end of the project will replace the current implementation team.  
 
The project will consist of three components.  Component 1: Fiscal Grants (US$35.5 million) 
The fiscal grants component will provide performance based grants to local councils within the 
framework of an inter-governmental fiscal transfer system.  There will be three types of grants 
provided to the local councils based on minimum conditions of access and performance criteria.  
These are:  (a) restructuring grant as a one time grant to assist the councils to pay debts and 
unpaid pension contributions, and finance key infrastructure needs (i.e. council facilities, staff 
housing); (b) recurrent grant to fund core staffing and operations needs of councils to perform 
core functions effectively, and (c) capital grant to fund priority investments as defined by the 
district development plan.  The latter will be executed similarly to the demand-driven projects 
under ZAMSIF.  (A list of possible sub-projects is listed above).  Component 2: Capacity 
Development (US$4.2 million)The capacity development component will support the adoption 
of the systemic reforms on public expenditure management, budgeting, planning, and civil 
service reform which have been launched within the framework of the PSRP at the district and 
sub-district levels.  Component 3: Institutional Support to Service Delivery (US$2.1 million) The 
objective of this component is to maximize the service delivery and local economic development 
impact of the capital investments and other development initiatives conducted by District 
Councils in partnership with District Boards, CBOs, and other local stakeholders.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
This is a project that is nation-wide in scope that will focus on activities developed under the 
Ministry of Local Government and Housing.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Zambia has sufficient environmental and social safeguards capacity to implement this program.  
This project builds on the institutional capacity acquired during the 10 years implementation of 
the Zambia Social Invesment Fund (ZAMSIF), which closed on December 31, 2005.  
 
Regarding lessons learned under ZAMSIF, the training modules developed and capacity built 
by ZAMSIF within the district staff was appreciated and ensured that environmental issues were 
adequately addressed throughout the project cycle; the setting up of a specific Environment Task 
Force at a project site ensured that environmental issues were addressed; there was increased 
awareness on the importance of protecting and managing the environment among beneficiaries.  
 
As the Zambia LDP will undertake infrastructure development in similar manner like in the 
ZAMSIF, it is considered that the existing safeguard measures and screening mechanisms are 
adequate.  
Page  3
In light of the description of current capacity and because Zambia has successfully 
implemented ZAMSIF for many years, LDP will be better implemented due to the existing 
capacity.  Furthermore, the ESMF will include capacity building measures targeting the relevant 
stakeholders.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Policy OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessmentwill be triggered under this project as a 
consequence of the type of sub-projects to be financed, most of which will be community based 
and of small infrastructure in nature.  Specifically, a generic list of the types of subprojects that 
may be financed on a demand-driven basis will include:  (1) Education -- construction and 
rehabilitation of school buildings, supply of equipment and furniture for schools, (2) Health -- 
construction, rehabilitation and supply of medical equipment and utilities, (3) Transport -- 
construction and rehabilitation of new bridges and rural and community roads, (4) Urban and 
Rural Water Supply -- sinking of new boreholes, water wells, rehabililtation of old boreholes and 
supply of equipment, (5) Sanitation -- construction of ventilated Pit Latrines (VIP), construction 
of medical waste disposal facilities, construction of rubbish pits and small waste water 
treatments, (6) Forestry -- establishment of new woodlots, reforestation of degraded and 
deforested areas, tree planting for wind breaks, (7) Agriculture -- construction and rehabilitation 
of small scale irrigation canals, construction of new small dams, soil conservation and 
agroforestry, (8) Flood Protection Barriers -- construction and rehabilitation of new storm drains 
and flood control, vegetation planting for flood control, (9) Community Infrastructure -- 
construction of community structures (markets), and their major and minor rehabilitation.  As a 
result of these small scale projects, there may be erosion around premises/project site, 
inappropriate medical or other solid waste sites, etc. for which an environmental assessment may 
be needed.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
In the context of this project, the team will explore the potential for triggering of the pest 
management OP at appraisal.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
In the context of this project, the team will explore the potential for triggering of the 
international waters OP at appraisal.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  4
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/26/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Given the lack of knowledge at this stage, regarding the number, scale and location to be 
funded under these sub-projects, the Borrower will update the environmental and social 
management framework.  This safeguard instrument will describe the screening, review and 
approval process of the sub-projects and implementation and monitoring arrangements for 
safeguard measures.  Once the update of the ESMF is completed - incorporating lessons 
learned from ZAMSIF, it will be submitted for review and clearance.  Upon approval, it will 
be disclosed in country and at the Bank Infoshop, prior to appraisal.  
 
The Sector Management Unit has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Mirey Ovadiya 
11/09/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
11/09/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Dzingai B. Mutumbuka 
11/09/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
