Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/29/2007 
Report No.:  AC2080
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Zambia 
Project ID:  P077452 
Project Name:  Zm: Increased Access to Electricity 
Task Team Leader:  Xiaodong Wang 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P076320 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 30, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (70%);Renewable energy (30%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
12.00 
 
EC: European Commission 
14.00 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
20.00
46.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
2.1 
The objective of this project is to develop and support initial implementation of a 
commercially-oriented and sustainable framework for increasing access to electricity 
services. Such an access expansion framework follows the principle that REF managed 
by REA will provide partial capital subsidy to all service providers, including both 
ZESCO and the private sector, and tariff revenue should recover remaining capital cost, 
bulk supply, and operation, and maintenance (O&M) costs. In addition, it includes both 
grid and off-grid options to complement each other, which will be defined based on a set 
of transparent project selection criteria following economic and financial principles. The 
project will support capacity building of key sector institutions (REA, MEWD, ERB, and 
ZESCO) and operationalization of REA, and will also finance initial investments. These 
initial investments, will increase electricity access in rural and peri-urban Zambia to 
productive enterprises, service delivery facilities (in health and education), and to 
households with the capacity to pay for electricity.  
 
Page  2
2.2 
The presumption is that increased access to electricity, when combined with other 
key growth-inducing factors that inter-play, will lead to the development outcomes 
sought at the strategic level:  i.e. higher raised incomes, employment generation and 
improvements in the quality of life in rural areas. Furthermore, there is a strong 
expectation that the development of a successful and substantial track record of 
operational experience by REA, ZESCO and the private sector, will lead to the 
mainstreaming of rural electrification on a larger scale, thereby enabling a shift away 
from project-by-project support to sector syndication approach.  
 
2.3 
The project?s global objective, in line with GEF OP6, is to remove the barriers to, 
and reduce the implementation costs of renewable energy technologies to help mitigate 
greenhouse gas emissions.  
 
2.4 
(i) number of connections through grid and off-grid electrification; (ii) number of 
projects implemented; (iii) increased access rate in terms of a larger share of population 
with access to electricity services; (iv) reduction in ZESCO distribution losses in targeted 
investment areas; and (v) reduced outage rates in targeted investment areas.  
 
2.5 
Zambia has a low electrification rate in Africa; as noted above, the percentage of 
the population with connection to electricity supply is currently about 20 percent and less 
than 2 percent in rural areas.  Provision of modern fuels, notably access to electricity, is 
viewed by the government as a pre-requisite to foster economic development and social 
equity in both rural and urban areas.  Similarly, under the Bank CAS for Zambia, access 
expansion was an important objective.  The customers targeted under this Project are 
primarily poor consumers located in rural towns and villages as well as peri-urban areas.  
 
2.6 
The rationale for Bank involvement is four-fold.  First, the World Bank would 
provide critical financial support needed to enable ZESCO and REA to scale up 
electrification over the next five-year period, in particular given the increased balance of 
payment constraints being faced by the Government of Zambia (GoZ).  Second, the Bank 
will build capacities to operationalize REA to promote and fund productive rural 
infrastructure. Essential complements to the envisaged capacity building will be a policy 
framework as well as sound financing mechanisms. IDA?s role is to accelerate the 
learning curve of REA by supporting them with international best practice advice, 
providing technical assistance to establish a new and effective access expansion 
framework, and providing them with their initial capitalization for the first round of 
investments in line with the framework.  Third, the Project will provide a vehicle for 
continued dialogue between the Bank and the GoZ on key institutional, regulatory and 
energy policy issues.  Fourth, Bank involvement is viewed as catalytic to attract other 
donors. Once REA is in a position to demonstrate their performance (with the initial 
support from the Bank and SIDA), it is expected that that other financing partners would 
also step in and support investments in access expansion by channeling their funding, 
which is the primary focus of this project.  The proposed engagement of the Bank is 
therefore catalytic as well as knowledge based, and is intended to draw upon the Bank?s 
rich international experience and the lessons learned from similar projects elsewhere. 
Several donors, including SIDA, JBIC, and EU have expressed interest in the area of 
Page  3
rural electrification, and would likely be willing to contribute with funds provided that 
ZESCO and REA can demonstrate the analytic rigor and results consistent with Bank 
requirements (including its safeguard policies). The Bank is committed to working 
together and in coordination with these donors and has established a dialogue of 
collaboration.  
 
Higher Level Objectives to Which the Project Contributes  
 
2.7 
The Project will bring grid and off grid electricity services to 70,000 households, 
public facilities (schools, clinics, church, etc.), and commercial establishments (farm 
blocks, agriculture processing mills, water pumping, shops, etc.), benefiting a total 
population of 550,000 inhabitants. Access to affordable and reliable electricity will 
improve the quality of life and create new business opportunities, including shops, 
artisans, flour mills and other services. It will also provide enhanced income-generating 
opportunities, support strengthened health care and education services, improve 
agricultural productivity (e.g., through improved irrigation points and more efficient 
localized livestock vaccination services). Better and cleaner lighting will have a positive 
impact on the operating hours of the schools and on the hours available for children to 
study at night. Public street lighting will also improve the quality of life and safety of the 
population living in the communities.  
 
2.8 
The proposed project is consistent with the framework laid down in the Poverty 
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). The PRSP recognized the direct relationship between 
energy and poverty and that increasing access to electricity is needed to contribute to 
poverty alleviation. The proposed project is linked to Strategic Area 1 of the CAS -- 
Sustained Economic Growth Anchored in a Diversified and Export-oriented Economy. 
The CAS calls for reliable access to power, water and telecoms and also for integrating 
environmental concerns into development, which are key elements of this project.   
 
3. Project Description 
3.1 
The total project cost is estimated to be around $80.5 million, of which IDA $30 
million, GEF $4.5 million, EU $14 million, government $12 million, and equity and debt 
from project sponsors and consumers $20 million (including ZESCO and private 
developers). This project targets at providing electricity services to 70,000 new customers 
including households, public facilities (schools, clinics, church, etc.), and commercial 
establishments (farm blocks, agriculture processing mills, water pumping, shops, etc), 
benefiting a total population of 550,000 inhabitants.  
 
3.2 
The IDA and GEF funding is fully blended. The IAES project has six 
components: (1) intensification within existing ZESCO grids in peri-urban areas; (2) grid 
extension to rural areas; (3) isolated grids such as mini-hydro; (4) solar PV systems for 
public institutions (schools and clinics), commercial establishments, and households; (5) 
energy efficiency (EE) and demand side management (DSM); and (6) technical 
assistance. GEF will provide support to component 4 and 6. The project components are 
described in the following paragraphs.  
 
Page  4
3.3 
In addition, a larger access expansion program includes potential funding from 
JBIC, SIDA, and additional EU grants. JBIC is currently reviewing the government?s 
request for $202.8 million parallel co-financing to this project, following the on-going 
JICA Rural Electrification Master Plan Study.  This request is broken down into three 
components: (i) intensification (peri-urban) (US$ 17.9 million), (ii) grid extension to 
rural areas (US$ 136.6 million), (iii) isolated grid in rural areas (US$ 48.3 million) and 
(iv) consulting services. ZESCO will be the implementation agency for the possible 
Japanese ODA loan component, who will own, operate and maintain the infrastructure, 
and will be responsible for carrying out JBIC procurement procedures and guidelines. 
SIDA plans to provide $10-15 million per year in the energy sector of Zambia. 
Furthermore, EU has approved an additional $13.8 million to REA, with $12 million co-
funding from the government, for access expansion. If materialized, this larger access 
expansion program can assist the government in achieving the target of 30% access rate.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be national in scope, focusing on peri-urban and rural areas. During 
project preparation the paucity of information means that the exact location of these 
activities will not be known. However during implementation, the location of project 
investments will become known, as implementation of the project is informed by the on-
going Rural Electrification Master Plan, Private Sector Participation (PSP) interest, and 
the existing location of transmission and distribution network.  
 
The intensification component will be located in peri-urban areas, while the grid 
extension component is likely to closely follow the existing corridors of the transmission 
and distribution network. A more spatial coverage of the country may emerge for the 
micro-hydro and solar PV components.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  5
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Project investments will include mini/micro-hydro generation as well as network 
expansion. These investments are expected to have overall positive social impacts, 
simply because increased access to reliable power services facilitate improvements in 
health and education facilities, agricultural processing, employment creation 
opportunities, etc.  Potential negative social impacts are expected to be small, but will not 
be ignored.  These are primarily associated with temporary and permanent use of small 
areas of land for the investments. A resettlement policy framework (RPF) has been 
prepared and disclosed, which will guide project activities in this regard.  
 
The project investments are also expected to have only a modest impact on the 
environment.  The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), 
approved and disclosed, will be designed to ensure that the environmental and social 
issues associated with this program are adequately analyzed and understood, and that all 
associated adverse impacts are identified through screening, and are also effectively 
mitigated and monitored.  Each investment supported by the project must comply with 
the applicable provisions of both the RPF and ESMF.  
 
Environment Issues  
 
The project is likely to have several positive environmental impacts.  The emphasis of 
the project on expanding access with renewable energy sources rather than fossil fuels 
will have favorable impacts on local air quality and noise levels, as well as reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions. In addition, the TA component of the project will support the 
finalization and adoption of national guidelines for the environmental management of 
energy sector investments, and REA will collaborate with the Department of Fisheries to 
promote aquaculture at mini-hydro sites.  
 
The potential adverse impacts with greatest spatial coverage are those associated with 
investments in distribution systems.  These impacts are typically modest and relatively 
easy to manage through good engineering and construction practice.  More complex 
impacts, though of more limited spatial extent, are those associated with investments in 
small hydro, in particular those associated with changes in hydrologic regime, including 
impacts on downstream water uses, aquatic ecosystems, obstruction of fish passage, and 
inundation of terrestrial habitat.  Additional minor potential impacts are associated with 
the disposal of lead-acid batteries used in conjunction with solar panels.  
 
The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is designed to ensure 
that the environmental and social issues associated with this program are adequately 
analyzed and understood, and that all associated adverse impacts are identified through 
screening, and are effectively mitigated and monitored.  Each investment supported by 
the project must comply with the applicable provisions of both the RPF and ESMF, for 
which appropriate procedures have been incorporated in REA?s Operational Manual.  
Page  6
Capacity for implementation of these procedures has been established at REA through the 
appointment of well-qualified environmental and social specialists, and is further ensured 
by ZESCO?s well-established and experienced environmental and social management 
unit.  To address the potential adverse impacts on aquatic ecology of small hydro 
investments, REA will seek the guidance of the Department of Fisheries on a case-by-
case basis, in particular to determine whether fish passes or ladders should be provided 
depending on the presence of migratory species of fish at a given location.  
 
Examples of specific positive environmental outcomes will be:  
 
The implementation of the project ESMF document will increase in Zambia the practice 
of subjecting the government's own development projects (especially energy and power 
projects) to an environmental management process, in the prevailing situation where a 
national environmental policy and regulatory framework are weakly enforced. The ESMF 
offers the opportunity to identify potential project impacts, mitigate them verifiably 
through monitoring while building capacity for environmental management within 
institutions, local governments and private operators. The project offers opportunities for 
development and exploitation of renewable sources of energy.  
 
Examples of specific negative environmental outcomes may be:  
 
Poor planning resulting in poor choice of location of power systems and infrastructure 
that ultimately lead to land degradation and soil erosion, water (surface and ground) 
contamination, degradation/loss of natural habitats and wetland ecosystems is made.  
 
During construction, poor performance of civil works contractors (and their supervisors) 
leading to unsuccessful implementation of the required mitigation measures.  
 
Poor implementation of maintenance plans during operational phases of the 
infrastructure and generation facilities if the private operators, maybe due to lack of 
funds, negligence of staff or failure in monitoring this stage.  
 
Social Issues  
 
Overall, the project will likely have positive social impacts in Zambia.  The project will 
increase access to reliable and clean energy services in rural areas, and it will provide 
access to energy for public facilities such as clinics and schools.  Further, structural 
reforms in the energy sector should lead to increased economic activity that will in turn 
raise individual and household incomes in rural areas, due to private capital and labor 
investments, employment opportunities and increased commercial activity.  
 
In terms of social safeguards, the IAES project has relatively limited adverse impacts 
that will nonetheless be addressed in project design, implementation and monitoring.  
Loss of cultural property should be avoided wherever possible (i.e., with the possible 
exception of small hydropower) through the sub-project screening process to ensure that 
all facilities should be located away from cultural sites.  Impacts on indigenous peoples, 
if any, will be similarly avoided through the sub-project screening process unless the 
indigenous people themselves fully support the initiative.  
Page  7
The major potential social impact is involuntary resettlement, which is taken up below:  
 
Since land acquisition will be required under the project for small hydro, generation 
plants, and transmissions lines, the Bank policy on involuntary resettlement applies to 
project activities. For this reason, the Project has developed an approved Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) to guide the development of any required Resettlement Action 
Plans (RAPs).  
 
The RPF provides several measures not only to ensure that involuntary resettlement is 
minimized but also, where unavoidable, to ensure that the legal and customary rights of 
the affected population are fully respected.  In the first instance, the project screening 
process will identify whether land is required, and, if so, whether that land is inhabited, 
occupied or claimed.  If so, the project screening process requires that alternative sites be 
investigated for the physical infrastructure.  The preliminary selection of sites will be 
done in a participatory manner at the local level so that any potentially affected people 
are given the opportunity to voice and have registered their opinions and objections.  
 
If land acquisition is unavoidable, the RPF has provisions for independent assessments 
to be carried out by professional property values paid for by the Developer. (The Project 
Affected Person also has the legal right to hire his or her own property value, and if the 
two valuations differ significantly, to have the matter reviewed administratively.)  
Compensation payments and any resettlement costs will be financed by the developer, 
therefore will be part of the overall budget of the individual project. These determinations 
will be done for the preparation of the RAP, which must be approved by the Bank before 
the project works can begin, and all compensation and resettlement will be completed 
before construction can begin.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Please see above.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Routing of electricity network lines will take environmental and social aspects into 
consideration in conformance with the ESMF and RPF.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Effective implementation of environmental and social safeguard issues for the IAES 
projects will be achieved by establishing an institutional framework with qualified and 
experienced staff at the two implementing agencies: ZESCO and REA.  
 
ZESCO has an Environmental and Social Affairs Unit, established in 1996 under the 
Bank Power Rehabilitation Project. They are responsible for environmental and social 
issues related to ZESCO operations. The unit consists of 15 staff, including 
Page  8
environmental scientists, social scientists, hydrologists, ecologists, land acquisition and 
resettlement specialist, environmental technology specialists, etc. Many of the staff hold a 
bachelor and master degree. They have undertaken numerous projects to conduct 
environmental impact assessment, develop environmental management plan, and address 
resettlement issues for ZESCO generation, transmission, distribution, rural electrification, 
power rehabilitation projects. In sum, ZESCO has extensive expertise and strong capacity 
in environmental and social issues. During discussions with this unit under ZESCO, it 
was agreed that REA can tap their resources and expertise in environmental and social 
issues whenever necessary.  
 
REA is a relatively new organization, set up under the Rural Electrification Act, and has 
recently recruited well-qualified environmental and social specialists.  In addition, REA?s 
Operational Manual establishes the environmental and social management procedures to 
be followed in preparing and appraising investments.  This will make it possible to co-
ordinate environmental matters and will ensure institutionalization of the EA processes.  
 
The project will support the finalization and adoption of the existing draft EIA Review 
Guidelines for the Energy Sector.  The Government stakeholders involved in this process 
will include the Ministry of Energy and Water Development, REA, ZESCO, MTENR, 
ECZ, ERB, the Ministry of Justice and the Zambian Bureau of Standards.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The ESMF and RPF are disclosed in the country and InfoShop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/10/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/16/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/11/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/05/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/06/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  9
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Xiaodong Wang 
10/29/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin 
10/29/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Gordon Appleby 
10/29/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Tjaarda P. Storm Van Leeuwen 
10/29/2007 
Comments:   
