Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS 
DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.:  AC951
Date ISDS Updated: July 14, 2004 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION
A.  Basic Project Data
Country: Afghanistan
Project ID: P083964
Project Name: Education Quality 
Improvement Program
Task Team 
Leader: Keiko Miwa
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 10, 2004
Estimated Board Date: July 29, 2004
Managing Unit: South Asia Region, 
Human Development Unit
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan
Sector: General education sector (100%)
Theme: Education
 for all (P);Education for 
the knowledge economy (S);Gender (S)
Safeguard Policies Specialist in the task team: Christophe Bosch
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): 
IDA
: 35.0
B.  Program Objectives 
The program aims to improve the quality of edu
cational inputs and processes as a foundation for 
a long
-
term strategy to improve the quality of educational outcomes.  This will be achieved 
through: (a) the focus on schools and communities to strengthen their capacity to better manage 
teaching
-
learning 
activities; (b) the investment in human resources (teachers, principals and 
educational administration personnel) and physical facilities; and (c) institutional development of 
schools, District Education Departments, Provincial Education Departments, and t
he Ministry of 
Education. The program also aims to promote education for girls by putting a priority for female 
teachers and students in each component activity.
C. Project Description 
Component 1: School Grants
The first component provides grants to sch
ools to support two complimentary objectives through 
a greater emphasis on school
-
 and community
-
based decision making.  First, the school grants 
will support efforts to enhance quality of education, i.e., teaching
-
learning inputs, processes and 
outcomes t
o equip students with well
-
developed literacy, numeracy, critical
-
thinking and 
problem
-
solving skills. It aims to support conditions which improves teaching and learning and 
enables effective school environments. Second, these school grants will support im
provement of  
basic school facilities (primary, middle and secondary schools) at existing government registered 
schools with teachers on payroll.  Priority will be given to (i) girls schools; (ii) co
-
educational 
schools; and (iii) boys schools which plan t
o open up sections/shifts for girls. The program will 
continue the school
-
level grant program piloted in five provinces (Badhakshan, Bamiyan, 
Page  2
Kapisa, Logar, Parwan) under the ongoing project to expand the school improvement grant to 
another five provinces 
in the Southern Region.  
Component 1.1: School Grants for Quality Enhancement
School Grants for Quality Enhancement would be provided to schools for quality improvement 
activities based on School Improvement Plans prepared by the Parent Teacher Associa
tions 
and/or School Management Committees. School Improvement Plans will be developed by the 
Parent Teacher Associations/School Management Committees and technical assistance provided 
by District and Provincial Education Departments, as well as Non
-
Governm
ental Organizations 
active in the area. School Management Committees would include the members of Community 
Development Councils where the National Solidarity Program is being implemented in order to 
ensure the synergy between community development and sch
ool management and avoid any 
duplication. The School Improvement Plan will outline a plan for three years with activities for 
the first year being more detailed. Based on the School Improvement Plan, the grant can finance 
activities such as training of tea
chers, additional teacher support for supervision, education 
materials and supplies, supplementary readers, toolkits, expenditures for workshops, seminars, 
meetings and transportation for teachers and Parent Teacher Association members to participate 
in ap
propriate meetings, etc. The grant will aim to develop healthy linkages between schools, 
communities and local government while supporting and empowering schools and communities 
as managers
.
Component 1.2: School Grants for Infrastructure Development
Inf
rastructure Development Grants
would be provided based on priority criteria for repair and 
rehabilitation of school facilities.  These grants would also finance limited new construction of 
school buildings which are already registered with the Ministry of 
Education. The communities 
in difficult access areas may follow traditional approaches to school design and construction 
methods.  The program would assist the Ministry of Education in reviewing technical approaches 
and developing guidelines on appropriate
 school building options. Support to the communities 
for the improved building model would be provided under the program from the Department of 
Construction in a limited number of selected provinces and by the Non
-
Governmental 
Organizations, as technical s
upport agency, in other provinces.
During community mobilization activities, the Ministry of Education, through the Provincial and 
District Education Departments, and with the support of Non
-
Governmental Organizations 
where appropriate, will disseminate i
nformation on school grants. Provincial and District 
Education Departments will conduct a rapid assessment of the status of school construction/ 
rehabilitation in order to avoid any duplication. The program will require: (a) a system of 
technical and socia
l facilitators; (b) active school and community representation in the form of 
Parent Teacher Associations/School Management Committees which include the members of 
Community Development Councils; (c) a process of technical review of the School Improvement 
Plan and provision of technical assistance during its implementation; (d) support to the 
school/parent teacher association for financial management, procurement and implementation 
management; (e) full transparency, through a proactive program of social aud
it oral and written 
disclosure (financial information posted in school); (f) an efficient, reliable and rapid system for 
Page  3
local
-
level disbursements; and (g) a process of quarterly evaluation and review to adapt the plan 
as appropriate.
Component 2: Support
 to Schools through Institutional and Human Resource Development
This component would provide technical and financial support to training of key personnel to 
enable them to carry out respective tasks more effectively and to support school
-
based 
managemen
t. Training of teachers, school principals and staff of Provincial and District 
Education Departments would be the primary activity in this component supplemented by the 
grants provided to Provincial and District Education Departments for their institution
al 
development (including infrastructure).    
Component 2.1: Teacher Training
This component will support the multi
-
stakeholder effort to Teacher Education Program, where 
the Ministry of Education, Ministry of Higher Education, Academic Council of Educ
ation are 
jointly taking the lead and development partners (UNICEF, USAID, Denmark and the World 
Bank) are providing technical and financial support.. This component focuses on training and 
support for teachers, principals Provincial and District Education
 Departments officials.  The 
new terms of reference for each level of function will be developed as well as the human 
resource development plan, based on the new terms of reference.  The training and support 
program will help educators and administrators p
erform their new functions more effectively.  
The Ministry of Education is currently developing a national unified teacher training curriculum 
which is competency
-
based and modularized. A key expected outcome is teachers who have 
undergone a  program of tr
aining that widens their subject content base and develops “modern” 
and student
-
centered pedagogical skills.  The quality of the planned teacher education programs 
will depend on the quality of the instructors or trainers. The upgrading and updating of tra
iners 
will systematically be supported by this component.
Implementation strategies for teacher training are to bring the training closer to schools instead 
of bringing teachers to Kabul or to Provincial capitals, and to provide continuous support and 
fee
dback to teachers.  For example, to reduce the professional isolation of teachers, particularly 
those in rural schools, Teacher Resource Centers attached to a school may be effective. At the 
district level, a cluster of 10
-
12 schools will have one TRC. The
 component will finance 
different implementation modalities (e.g., mobile team, cascade model, teacher resource centers, 
etc.) in ten Provinces where the School Grants are also implemented. Based on the evaluation 
during the first year, the expansion strat
egy for the second and third year would be decided.   
At the Core Team of the Teacher Education Program and the Teacher Training Department of 
the Ministry of Education, an international and national technical assistance team of education 
specialists wou
ld provide support for the implementation of the new teacher training curriculum, 
and provide training and advice to in
-
house trainers.  The international nature of the team would 
be to help capture a wide range of
innovations and techniques relevant to mo
dern pedagogic 
approaches.  
Page  4
Component 2.2: Training of Principals
To enhance the capacity of school principals as good administrators/managers as well as 
instructional leaders, training of school principals would be supported in this component. 
First, 
the program will support the Ministry of Education in reforming the selection criteria for school 
principals.  Second, the responsibility and accountability structure of school principals would be 
enhanced and defined, and training modules would be develop
ed according to the new functions.  
The new functions would focus on effective management skills as well as instructional leader 
capability.  International good practice would be utilized in redefining the functions and selection 
criteria, and developing t
raining modules.  Master trainers would be trained as well as trainers 
from Non
-
Governmental Organizations would be contracted to provide training at Province
-
 and 
District
-
level and to facilitate cross fertilization through school principals workshops, et
c.  
Component 2.3: Capacity Building of District and Provincial Education Departments 
At the provincial level, Provincial Education Department’s capacity to manage a quality
-
based 
provincial education system needs a special focus, and should include ov
ersight and coordination 
of the inputs provided by other agencies.  While the Provincial Education Departments will 
follow the policy directives of the Teacher Training Department, Ministry of Education in 
relation to project implementation, sufficient dev
olution of authority will need to take place 
which will allow Provincial Education Departments to take decisions on an agreed range of 
activities in order to expedite implementation progress. Important among these will be the ability 
of Provincial Educatio
n Departments timely clearing/approving expenditure under a pre
-
arranged ceiling without reference to Teacher Training Department, Ministry of Education and 
decisions on recruitment of trainers and teachers. Regular in
-
country training would be provided 
in
 areas such as planning, management and administration, recruitment of personnel, budget and 
financial management, accounting, education development, and monitoring and supervision of 
teaching, etc. The Provincial Education Departments action plan for trai
ning would include 
management and administrative training required at the District Education Department level.  At 
the school level, training programs for school principals will be organized by Provincial 
Education Departments with support from District Ed
ucation Departments and Non
-
Governmental Organizations in school management and administration including office, 
personnel, budget and accounting.  
Provincial Education Departments and District Education Departments would be provided with 
funds to develo
p institutional and physical capacity.  Fund amounts would be decided using a 
formula with both fixed and per capita components. This component will be closely coordinated 
with Afghanistan Stabilization Program.  
Component 3: Policy Development and  Moni
toring and Evaluation
Component  3.1: Policy Development
As a continuation of the technical assistance under the ongoing education project, this 
component would support the Ministry of Education implement a medium
-
term policy 
framework, and make any ne
cessary adjustment, as well as to prepare a sound National 
Development Budget each year through technical assistance and capacity building activities. The 
Page  5
component also would assist in the capacity building of the Ministry of Education officials to 
enable
 them to utilize the Education Management Information System, currently being 
developed in the Ministry of Education.  It will support the annual exercise of data collection 
from schools in order to promote the use of data in planning and decision making.
Component 3.2: Monitoring and Evaluation
The Monitoring and Evaluation component, as an integral part of the program, would provide 
timely and adequate information to the relevant stakeholders on project implementation 
performance, process, outputs and o
utcomes.  The main objective of the monitoring system is to 
provide timely feedback so that lessons can be learned on a real time basis and mid
-
course 
adjustments can be initiated when necessary.  It will put in place a system to monitor  and 
evaluate the 
implementation of the main interventions: activities related to teacher development, 
provision of school improvement grants to schools, rehabilitation and construction of schools, 
and policy development.
The monitoring and evaluation system would have f
our components: (i) implementation 
monitoring 
–
 physical and financial, (ii) process monitoring, (iii) post
-
implementation 
monitoring, including monitoring of sustainability of school grant activities and financial audit, 
and (iv) outcome evaluation.  Moni
toring and evaluation would be separate and distinct 
processes.  
Monitoring of school grant activities would be carried out by School Management Committees/ 
Parent Teacher Associations with District Education Department supervisors and Non
-
Governmental O
rganizations (where they work as facilitation agencies). The progress of the 
school improvement plan and use of grant would be publicly posted at schools and/or location 
for community gathering.  
Where present, Community Development Councils of the Nationa
l 
Solidarity Program would play an important role of social audit.  All project data and 
information in the prescribed formats would be transmitted to the Planning Officer in Provincial 
Education Department. The Planning Officer would work closely with Dis
trict Officers for 
processing and preparation of statistical and monthly reports to be submitted to the GMU and 
other related departments of the Ministry of Education.   
A baseline survey will be conducted at the start of the project on the basis of whic
h progress 
would be monitored and assessed according to agreed targets.  The data from the survey will 
assist in setting realistic targets to be achieved.  Follow
-
up surveys at the end of year two and 
annual surveys would be conducted to monitor the cost, 
impact, and implementation of the 
school
-
based funding scheme, plus annual updating of the school mapping database and 
evaluation of construction progress.   
Evaluation of the interventions and achievement of project objectives would be carried out by a 
third
-
party organization which would prepare an annual evaluation report to be submitted to the 
Grant Management Unit. The evaluation report would be based on special evaluative thematic 
studies as well as statistical and other reports prepared by project 
entities.
Assessment of Learning Achievement:  The program would finance and support development of 
a core team, skilled in student assessment strategies which would be imparted to teachers and 
Page  6
principals as part of their training programs.  The focus wil
l be on formative assessment paying 
special attention to strategies which promote understanding and focus on the development of the 
individual students.  Additionally, the core team would also be trained in summative assessment 
strategies using standardize
d testing.  Appropriate student assessment would be developed  
through a pilot activity.   
D.
Project Location 
Development of teachers and principals is expected to cover a large portion (if not all) of the 
country.  Provinces to be supported by school gr
ants for quality enhancement and infrastructure 
development are Badakshan, Bamiyan, Kapisa, Logar, Parwan and additional five southern 
provinces.  Priorities will be given to districts which received comparatively less support in the 
past, and lower enroll
ment especially for girls. 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
As a result of more than two decades of conflict, exodus of trained personnel, low salaries, and 
the lack of exposure to new approaches, the Borrower’s institutional
 capacity is generally weak, 
especially in such specialized areas as safeguard policies. To address this issue, IDA is preparing 
a Technical Assistance project on safeguard issues for key ministries including the Ministry of 
Education.
II.  SAFEGUARD POLI
CIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy
If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
X
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01)
[ ]
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04)
[ ]
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
)
[ ]
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12)
[ ]
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
)
[ ]
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36)
[ ]
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37)
[ ]
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 
-
OPN 11.03
)
[ ]
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
[ 
]
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50)
OP/BP 4.01 is triggered because of school rehabilitation construction activities although no new 
land acquisition is envisaged.
The project will apply the principals of the Environmental and 
So
cial Safeguards Framework for emergency projects in Afghanistan.
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not int
end to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
Page  7
The relevant elements of the Codes of Practice contained in the Environmental and Social 
Safeguards Framework will be reviewed, and any proposed enhancements will be incorporated 
in the Envi
ronmental and Social Safeguards Framework. 
An Environmental Specialist will be working with the government and IDA teams to help 
facilitate the application of the environmental framework for Afghanistan. A Social Specialist 
will also be working with the 
team to help on issues related to community involvement in new 
schools.  
The voluntary contribution of land by the community, where necessary, will follow the 
procedures established in other ongoing/planned projects in Afghanistan and will ensure that th
e 
proceedings are conducted in a transparent manner and are appropriately documented.
Environmental Assessment Category
:
[ ] A   [ X] B   [] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined)
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A.
Date of the Quality Enhancement Re
view, at which time the PAD
-
stage ISDS would be 
prepared.
April 20, 2004
B.
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard
-
related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD
-
stage ISDS.
Not appli
cable
IV.  APPROVALS
Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leader:
Keiko Miwa
06/15/2004
Approved by:
Sector Manager:
Michelle Riboud
07/13/2004
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard
-
related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in
-
country, at publicly acce
ssible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
Page  8
