Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No: AC195 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: January 15, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Albania 
Project ID: P082375 
Project Name: NATURAL RESOURCE 
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Gerhard Dieterle 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 7 [to be confirmed] 
Estimated Board Date: March 2005 
 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Other rural development 
(P);Biodiversity (S);Civic engagement, 
participation and community driven 
development (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
o
John Fraser Stewart (Biodiversity Specialist) 
o
Shahridan Faiez (Social Specialist) 
o
Serguei Milenin (Environmental Specialist) 
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
GEF 4 
ITALY: DEV. COOP. DEPARTMENT (MOFA) 
4 
ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK 
5 
NETERLANDS: MIN. OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS / MIN. OF DEV. COOP 
2 
BIOCARBON FUND 
1 
INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT 
1 
BORROWER 3 
 
 
B.  Project Objective
 
 
Page  2
 
 
The project will focus on micro-catchments in mountain and hilly areas. Its objective will be for 
participating communities and community members to adopt sustainable natural resource 
management practices, leading to enhanced productivity and incomes, reduced soil degradation, 
improved water quality and conservation of critical ecosystems. 
 
 
Page  3
 
 
C.  Project Description
 
 
The project would cost about US$ 27 million, including an estimated US$ 7 to US$ 12 million 
from IDA (to be discussed), US$ 4 million from the GEF, US$ 4 million from the Italian 
Government, US$ 5 million from the Islamic Development Bank, and US$ 1 million from the 
Biocarbon fund. Additional cofinancing is being sought from IFAD and the Netherlands. 
Proposed components include: 
 
1. Rehabilitation of Degraded Natural Resources  
[US$m 9.5]
. 
This component will finance a 
menu of activities to be implemented by participating communas in Micro-Catchments (MC) to 
rehabilitate degraded areas. Investments will broadly focus on: (a) Building and strengthening 
forest regeneration and pasture rehabilitation
 (e.g. afforestation, cleaning and thinning, 
coppicing, fencing and protection of forests, construction of water points and other small 
infrastructures, fertilization and sowing of pastures, erosion control measures); (b) 
Rehabilitation 
of degraded agricultural land and river-banks 
(e.g. awareness raising campaigns, support to soil 
conservation practices and riverbank strengthening interventions). Links will be developed with 
the Water Resources Management Project to ensure slope protection to sites adjacent to 
investments in irrigation and flood control. As a basis for successful rehabilitation, activities will 
be based on participatory planning and decision-making with the development of a participatory 
MC Natural Resources Development Plan. This component will also help establish and build the 
capacities of FPUAs which will be assisted to re-orient themselves toward income generation 
activities reinforcing their sustainability prospects. The project will also support the 
strengthening of tenure security (eg. through participatory MC-based rights assignments, 
demarcation and record of rights on 1:10,000 scale maps, addressing the bottlenecks in legal, 
survey and mapping preparations): continued transfer of in-use rights to communas, upgrading to 
full communa ownership and phased-in registration of sub-communa in-use rights to families 
and villages.   
 
2. Productivity improvement and income generation 
[US$m 3.3]
. 
To complement Component 
1, and conditionally linked to the communities adopting improved forest and pasture 
management practices (through the MC planning), villagers will be offered a menu of activities 
to enhance short-term and demonstrable benefits i.e. to raise household incomes and improve 
their welfare. They may focus on: a) raising farm productivity including small scale irrigation 
and small farm ponds, water harvesting for agricultural production, agricultural production on 
terraces, farm enterprise diversification and improved agricultural technology, beekeeping and 
simple agro-processing (linking with the AASP); b) support for development and marketing of 
non-farm products and services (e.g. non-wood forest products); c) short-term employment 
opportunities; and d) facilitation of access to existing micro-credits (building on the Micro-credit 
Project). 
 
3. Mainstreaming of Biodiversity Conservation in Natural Resource Management 
[US$m 5 
including GEF grant]
. 
Activities will address (i) improved planning for forest and pasture 
management at national, regional, and local levels; (ii) strengthening the national system of 
protected areas; and (iii) targeted site-specific conservation interventions.  The development of 
environmentally sustainable income opportunities for the local population (related to tourism, 
Page  4
 
 
protected area management, etc) and community-driven conservation initiatives will be essential 
elements of the project.  It will also support conservation and sustainable management of the 
Karavasta lagoon, a wetland ecosystem complex of global conservation importance.  These 
activities would foster implementation of the National Biodiversity Conservation Strategy and 
Action Plan (the outcome of the GEF-funded Enabling Activity – Phase 1) and would address 
recommendations of the Assessment of the Capacity Building Needs and Country Specific 
Priorities in Biodiversity Conservation (GEF-funded Enabling Activity – Phase 2,  under 
preparation). 
 
4. Carbon Stock Enhancement 
[US$m 3]
. 
This component aims at rewarding rural populations 
for public good services provided through carbon sequestration. The project will provide to 
communities carbon credits for setting aside and protecting land (e.g. of degraded “refused” 
lands) which would lead after 3-4 years to a massive growth of carbon. The project will finance 
the definition of a carbon baseline and stock development plan, capacity building activities, an 
awareness campaign and initial start-up activities like fencing. 
 
5. Strengthen Public Natural Resources Management 
[US$m 6.2]
. 
This component will 
consolidate the reforms supported by the AFP through: (i) harmonization of laws for 
decentralization and integrated watershed management, (ii) institutional strengthening of line 
agencies involved in integrated watershed management including basin councils and district 
drainage boards, (iii) completion of the General Directorate of Forest and Pastures (DGFP) 
restructuring (including separation of regulatory and management functions and creation of 
regional extension services), (iv) support for improved forest fire management and forest 
protection, (v) competitive research small-grant to promote adaptive and policy-focused 
research, (vi) project administration and (vii) support services (surveys, limited technical 
assistance, local and regional exchanges for project staff and farmers and M&E). 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project will be nation-wide. However, erosion control issues in the coastal region would 
require a different set of interventions than in the upland region. Therefore, project Components 
1 and 2 will focus mainly on the country’s mountain and hilly areas. Participating micro-
catchments (MCs) within this area will be selected on a competitive basis and with a set of 
criteria which will be developed during preparation and shared with stakeholders. This process 
involves 3 levels of selection: i) watershed, ii) district, and iii) MCs.  
• 
Watersheds
: selection would be on the basis of severity of natural resource degradation and 
the government’s priorities. 
• 
Districts
: the main criterion is the critical clustering of project sites in relation to untreated 
pockets of degradation within a watershed.  The overall objective would be to avoid 
rehabilitation works being too widely scattered over the country leading to excessive unit 
costs and reduced impact. In addition, the capacity of the implementation agencies at the 
field level need to be taken into account in selecting the districts. All agencies including the 
communa (s) should be sufficiently staffed to carry out the planning and implementation. 
• 
MCs
: the criteria used for the selection of MCs are as follows: 
o
Severity or magnitude of natural resource degradation
-has to be rated as 
severe, a cause for poverty and already subject to flooding and land slides, high 
Page  5
 
 
levels of sedimentation effecting downstream investments for irrigation and 
drainage,   
o
Size of MC
- should be in the range of 5.000-10.000 ha,  
o
Location
- the overall objective would be to identify a critical cluster of MCs to 
avoid rehabilitation works being too widely scattered over the district leading to 
excessive unit costs and reduced impact, 
o
Accessibility of MC
-adequate degree of access for contractors/transporters;  
o
Level of rural poverty
-as measured through various poverty indices,  
o
Risk of natural disasters
 through flood and/or land slides-risk to be rated high,  
o
Possibility of reversing
 the natural resource degradation in a sustainable and 
economic way; the sustainable rehabilitation of degraded natural resources-should 
be rated as high,  
o
Willingness
 of MC community and associations to participate in the project-
prepared to make in kind and/or cash contributions and take responsibility for 
specific activities (e.g. small infrastructure investments, pasture management, 
conservation of new plantation and use of irrigation water), and level of potential 
for introducing income raising activities-sufficient agricultural resource base to be 
used as leverage for better natural resource management 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
 
 
Project management
. The Ministry of Agriculture and Food (MoAF) is successfully overseeing 
the implementation of the on-going Albania Forestry Project (AFP). It is envisioned that a bridge 
can be built to transfer the knowledge and capacity of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) 
currently implementing the AFP to the preparation and implementation team of the new project. 
Opportunities to streamline procurement and financial management services shall be sought e.g. 
through a central unit serving several or all WB Projects under the responsibility of the Ministry 
of Agriculture. The project will develop the capacity in the participating ministries and units to 
coordinate their activities to deliver more effective service. The implementation capacity of field 
level agencies will be taken into account in selecting participating districts: all district-level 
agencies and communas should be sufficiently staffed and possess sufficient capacity to carry 
out the planning and implementation. 
 
Impact assessment and monitoring
. The overall monitoring and impact assessment of the project, 
including environmental, poverty and social development impact of project interventions, will be 
the purview of the MoAF. This will be conducted in partnership with the Ministry of 
Environment (MoE) which will be responsible for overseeing the implementation of the MC 
Environmental Management Plans. A Monitoring and Evaluation sub-unit will be established 
within the PIU. This sub-unit will develop and implement a M&E system which will include 
both routine monitoring and evaluation and special-purpose M&E focused on impact assessment. 
The project will provide resources to train the project staff in the development and 
implementation of environmentally-sound MC management methods and approaches, including 
screening and mitigation of possible negative environmental impacts.    
 
Page  6
 
 
Protected Areas Management
. The new Law on Protected Areas Management transferred 
effective control of these important areas to the MoE. The existing capacities and regional 
structures of the Directorate General of Forestry and Pasture (within the MoAF) could be used 
on a contractual basis with both ministries.. This modality will be clarified in the institutional 
reform strategy and action plan. 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[Y ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
See below (Environmental Category) 
[Y] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
The project is likely to enhance conservation of natural habitats (through rehabilitation 
activities). The EA will determine the impacts the project will have on natural habitats 
and propose mitigating measures or measures to enhance the project’s positive impacts.
 
[Y ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
Improving agriculture and pasture land productivity and sylvicultural works may involve 
pest management. The EA will assess the capacity of the country's regulatory framework 
and institutions to promote and support safe, effective, and environmentally sound pest 
management. As necessary, such capacity strengthening will be incorporated in the 
project. An 
Integrated Pest Management Plan
 will be designed as part of the EA, 
including criteria for pesticide selection and use. The procurement of any abiotic 
pesticides, will follow the requirements of the OP.  
[Y] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
The project design adopts a CDD approach to ensure that communities fully participate in 
natural resource management issues. MCs with low participation will not meet the 
selection criteria. In addition the project has built-in incentives to encourage or 
compensate for resource use changes among particular stakeholders. However, there may 
be a small possibility that there will be some restrictions to existing traditional livelihood 
strategies (in particular grazing) resulting from the implementation of: (a) natural 
resources protection measures, and (b) the expansion and strengthening of protected areas 
management. No land acquisition is involved in the project.  A 
Process Framework 
will 
be developed during preparation and agreed with the Government of Albania. The 
Process Framework will describe the participatory process by which project affected 
people will be consulted with in order to agree on the limits and scope of activities, the 
criteria for eligibility, mitigatory measures to assist the affected population, potential 
conflict resolution mechanisms etc.  It will also describe the arrangements for 
implementing and monitoring the process. Careful attention will be made to ensure that 
the compensation mechanisms does not provide a 
negative incentive
 and undermine the 
participatory approach built into the design of the project. 
 
[N] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[Y] Forests 
(
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
The project will contribute to the livelihood improvement of stakeholders depending 
upon or interacting with forests.  Specifically, and consistent with OP 4.36, the project 
Page  7
 
 
aims at harnessing the potential of forests to reduce poverty in a sustainable manner 
(giving preference to small-scale, community-level management approaches), integrating 
forests effectively into sustainable economic development, and protecting the vital local 
and global environmental services and values of forests. In addition: 
• 
The project does not involve conversion or degradation of natural forests or related 
natural habitats. 
• 
Plantations will only be financed on non-forest sites that do not contain critical 
habitats. In view of the potential for plantation projects to introduce invasive species 
and threaten biodiversity, prevention and measures will be adopted against these 
potential threats to natural habitats. 
• 
The project will not directly finance harvesting operations but community-based 
forest management, commercial and pre-commercial thinnings. 
• 
The project includes an evaluation of the prospects for the development of new 
markets (carbon market). 
• 
Also the project will try to ensure that women and children are not marginalized in 
the participatory MC planning process. Gender issues will be mainstreamed into the 
project implementation. 
[N] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[N] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
The project activities are not expected to negatively impact cultural property. On the 
contrary, it may protect and enhance cultural property in Protected Areas. 
[N] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[TBD] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
Given that this is a CDD project, there may be a possibility that some communities may 
request financing for small scale irrigation and river banks strengthening. It is not yet 
clear whether these activities will affect Albania’s international waterways (the rivers 
Drini and Vjorca). The team will investigate this issue during preparation and will seek 
guidance on this issue. 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD 
 
The environmental impacts of the project will be mostly positive. 
The reversal of environmental degradation would be undertaken 
through a series of measures to restore natural vegetative cover 
and replace the planting of wheat on steeply sloping land with 
pasture or forest. Additional benefits would include reduction of 
soil loss, and reduction of siltation of streams.  Limited 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  8
 
 
environmental safeguard issues are foreseen with regard to these 
soil conservation measures, including possible soil disturbance 
during reforestation. 
 
With regard to the biodiversity conservation and protected areas 
management component, the project envisages possible 
expansion of a national park in northern Albania.  Significant 
environmental impacts are not envisaged.  Major  construction in 
or through critical ecosystems are not anticipated. As is normal 
with protected area management planning,  an assessment of 
land use and vegetation would be carried out identifying critical 
ecosystems, and a management plan would be prepared (with 
local people) whose objective would be to ensure that critical 
ecosystems are protected while ensuring that peoples' livelihoods 
are also sustained.  Construction, if any, would be limited to very 
minor civil works, requiring normal mitigation measures. There 
would be no conversion of critical natural habitats. The purpose of 
the management plan would be to preserve these and to permit 
recovery of threatened ecosystems.  It is recognized that other 
donors will be funding portions of this component and any 
(currently unanticipated) significant construction for the 
implications on project rating and disclosure will be tracked. 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
(a) Microcatchment (MC) plans will be prepared by communities and individual subprojects will 
be identified within this planning framework  Most MC plans will not be prepared before 
appraisal. An environmental management framework (EMF) detailing the menu of interventions, 
potential environmental impacts and mitigating measures to be undertaken in preparing and 
implementing such MC plans will be prepared. Special attention will be paid to the cumulative 
impacts of the planned interventions. In addition, a Pest Management Plan to address any pest 
Page  9
 
 
management issues will be prepared. The EMF would be included as a chapter in the operational 
manual, publicly discussed and disclosed before appraisal. If pilot MC plans are prepared before 
appraisal environmental management plans following this approach would be prepared for these.  
 
 (b) If the project supports expansion of the national park, it would support an environmental 
assessment and management plan, which  would be prepared prior to appraisal.  The EA will be 
publicly discussed and disclosed prior to Appraisal. 
 
 (c) A Social Assessment and a Process Framework will also be prepared as part of the 
preparation. 
 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be 
addressed? 
 
Consultation during implementation
: The “Beneficiary Centered-Problem Census-Problem 
Solving “ (BCPCPS) approach is central to the planning of micro-catchment development 
activities. Once the priority problems are determined by the MC community, target groups will 
be identified and will start working with the corresponding implementing agencies. The project 
will develop an aggressive approach toward collaboration by mobilizing multi-sectoral teams to 
focus on demand-driven and beneficiary-centered service delivery in each MC. 
 
Consultation during preparation
. The environmental and social consulting teams will undertake 
their activities in a fully transparent manner and ensure adequate participation of project 
stakeholders, both national and in the regions, governmental and non-governmental. The 
assessments will be carried out in close collaboration with the team responsible for overall 
project preparation, and through a process that includes consultation with major stakeholders and 
which provides for comment and input from interested parties (including Government, private 
and state forest industries, the academic and environmental communities, NGOs, Forest and 
Pasture Users Associations, communas and local communities). The reports will include a record 
(agenda, time, place, participants and minutes) of the consultations.  
 
Disclosure
: Disclosure will be conducted according to the Bank’s disclosure policy. Relevant 
materials will be provided to counterparts in a timely manner prior to consultations.  These 
materials would be presented in the Albanian language and in a form understandable to the 
groups being consulted.  Thus, for the initial consultation, the consulting team will distribute a 
summary of the proposed project objectives, description, and potential impacts.  When the Draft 
reports are prepared, the consultants will provide for consultation a summary of the reports 
conclusions.   The reports will be disclosed in the country (in Albanian) at a public place 
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs and at the Bank's Infoshop (in English) 
prior to Appraisal. 
 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: 
proposed mid-August 2004 
 
Page  10
 
 
 
IV. APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Gerhard Dieterle 
 
 
 
Date 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ronald Hoffer 
 
 
 
Date 
Comments 
 
 
Sector Manager: 
Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
 
 
 
Date 
Comments 
 
 
 
