                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/08/2012                                     Report No.: AC6695
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Afghanistan                         Project ID: P118028
Project Name: AF: ARTF-2nd Judicial Reform Project
Task Team Leader: Lubomira Zimanova Beardsley
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 25, 2012     Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2012
Managing Unit: SASGP                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Law and justice (85%);General public administration sector (15%)
Theme: Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms (67%);Legal institutions for a
market economy (33%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
         Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                        85.00
                                                                      85.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [X]     No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to increase access to and use of
legal services. This objective will be achieved through: enhanced capacity of state JI;
strengthened capacities, incentives and accountabilities of service providers to increase
access to services; and easier access to legal information.

3. Project Description
1.     The project consists of four interrelated components: (a) Partnership for Justice;
(b) Legal Empowerment; (c) Organization and Capacity of Justice Institutions; and (d)
Implementation Capacity.

 Component 1: Partnership for Justice (US$ 13.05 million)
 2.     The objective of this component is to increase the scope and quality of legal
services (mainly, dispute resolution, legal aid, deeds registrations, and legal information)
in selected provinces and districts. The ultimate objective of this component is to support
business environment and investment climate. Therefore the project will concentrate on
geographical areas with promising economic activities such as Kabul, Herat, Bamyan and
Logar, and legal services demanded by small and medium enterprises (mainly land
disputes and registrations) or by the communities impacted by major developmental
projects.
  3.    The project will finance technical assistance (TA) and investment to develop, test
and possibly rollout a model of collaboration among all local institutions involved in the
provision of legal services while strengthening capacity of local state institutions to
deliver their legal service. The Hoqooqs, courts, legal aid providers will be the main
focus of the capacity building effort. The project activities will include: (a) assessing
peoples demands for legal services (this task will be financed by the Component 3 b
Organization and Capacity of Justice Institutions); (b) developing a new, more effective
and responsive, yet culturally acceptable model of dealing with disputes and problems;
this system should be based on shared record keeping, data exchange about cases,
streamlined and more transparent processes and predictable results supported by
improved management information and, if feasible, task automation; (c) building capacity
of state institutions to respond local needs; and (d) promoting users’ involvemen with
legal institutions through information centers and new practices (e.g. publishing court
decisions). The key beneficiaries of these reforms will be: the people of Afghanistan
who will receive more and better legal aid and will be better equipped to take advantage
of legal systems; and local service providers whose capacity will be better aligned to
peoples contemporary needs. At the end of the project the residents of these provinces
and/or districts will have access to higher volume and better quality of legal services; and
they will be better informed about service providers and prepared to monitor their
performance. The legal service providers will work in environment which is more
conducive to service delivery (cleared division of responsibilities and jurisdiction; access
to shared information; more collaborative and transparent procedures, better working
conditions, improved incentives).

 Component 2: Legal Empowerment (US$ 17.55 million)
 4.      This component has two subcomponents: (a) Legal Aid; and (b) Legal Awareness.
Overall objective of the component is to increase people’s ability to participate in public
(state) redress or dispute resolution system.

  a)    Legal Aid (US$13.8 million)
  5.    The component will continue the efforts of the JSRP (Phase 1) to strengthen and
expand a state legal aid system. The objective of this component is to enlarge the existing
state legal aid while enhancing its effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability. The
objective will be achieved through: consolidating existing legal aid sub-systems which
are composed of two distinct models based on in house lawyers and subcontracting an
NGO (International Legal Foundation -Afghanistan); and (b) building the critical base
(policies, procedures and capacities augmented by TA and automation) for an effective,
fiscally sustainable, nationally coordinated state system of legal aid.
  6.    The project will finance TA and investment to the MoJ (Legal Aid and Hoqooq
Department) and an Independent Legal Advisory Board (ILAB) to: (a) expand legal aid
offices; (b) develop and implement a Legal Aid Strategy, policies and regulations (for
both criminal and civil legal aid); (c) design detailed business plan for the consolidation
of the state legal aid system; (d) strengthen management capacity of the MoJ to plan,
finance and manage legal aid with enhanced automation and information systems; (e)
develop and implement models of cooperation with enforcement agencies; and (f) test
and roll our low cost culturally friendly ways of delivery legal aid. The key beneficiaries
of these reforms will be the people of Afghanistan who at the end of the project will
receive more and better legal aid. The MoJ, ILAB and legal aid providers will also
benefit from this component. The MoJ together with the ILAB board will have stronger
capacity to plan, finance and manage legal aid, and legal aid providers will work in better
working conditions (better offices, procedures, management and incentives) and hence
will provide higher volume and better advice and representation. The sustainability of the
system based on in house lawyers will be pursued through the creation of a legal aid
professional cadre, included in the tashkeel under the MoJ’s proposed Capacity Building
for Results Program (CBRP), which MoJ aims to undertake by 2016, but alternatives will
also be explored.

  b) Legal Awareness (US$3.75 million)
  7.     The Component seeks to help the Afghan people: (a) to acquire and incorporate
legal knowledge into their choices and interactions with the Government and private
actors; (b) to improve their ability to monitor and influence legal service providers; and
(c) to secure their support for the proposed reforms. This will be achieved through
strengthening capacities of the MoJ, SC and AGO to plan, finance and manage legal
awareness activities and through implementation of specific legal awareness activities.
The project will finance TA to the SC and AGO to strengthen their capacity to manage
their relationship with the public and to develop and implement legal awareness
programs. The project will also support a Legal Outreach Office of the MoJ, the GoA’s
focal point fo civil legal education and awareness. This support will include mainly: the
replication, dissemination and broadcasting of print-media materials and broadcast media
materials and radio such as TV shows developed under the JSRP; development and
dissemination of new materials and shows; and support for up to ten provincial awareness
units. The key beneficiaries of this project will be the people of Afghanistan, who at the
end of the project will have easier access to information about their rights and
obligations, and a greater ability to defend their rights and apply legal remedies. The JI
will benefit from the project by building a stronger system for state organized legal
awareness activities.

 Component 3: Organization and Capacity of Justice Institutions (US$ 47.4 million)
 8.    The objective of this component is to improve the capacity of the state JI to
manage and deliver legal services. The Component has two subcomponents: (a) Effective
Organizational Design; (b) Strengthening Capacity of State Justice Institutions.

 a)     Effective Organizational Design (US$ 4.5 million)
 9.     The Effective Organizational Design subcomponent aims to determine and
encourage the sector’s structural reforms. These reforms will help establish the balance
between development of services, delivery of those services, and the fiscal sustainability
of delivery over the short, medium and long term. This objective will be achieved
through policies which will: adjust courts’ and prosecutorial offices’ functions,
jurisdictions, size and territorial organization to current needs; incorporate the
independence and accountability safeguards into the organizational design, operations
and processes of courts and offices of public prosecution; and streamline procedural
designs. The project will finance TA related to analytical work, periodic surveys (in the
first, third and final year of the project) of users, consultations with stakeholders, and
policy and law development. The component will focus on courts and public
prosecutorial offices. If successful, this component will improve the organization of the
legal sector and, by making it more open and evidence based, it will improve the sector’s
policy and regulatory processes. The key beneficiaries of the reforms will be courts and
offices of prosecutors who, by the end of the project, will have road maps for the reforms
which will lead to more affordable, sustainable and effective institutions. Over time, the
people will benefit from these institutions as they become better organized, hence more
capable of delivering improved legal services.
  10. In the MoJ the subcomponent will support developing a Strategic Plan. Since a
valid strategic plan is also a pre-requisite for participation in Tier 2 of CBR, this will also
contribute to accessing CBR support. The Strategic Plan will clarify the mandate and
vision of the MoJ, and establish the strategy for achieving its goals over the next 5 years.

   (b) Strengthening Capacity of Justice Institutions (US$ 42.9 million)
  11. This subcomponent seeks to improve the capacity of the state JI to plan, finance,
and manage their resources in order to deliver better justice services. The subcomponent
is divided into the following clusters of activities for the three JI: (a) Human Capital; (b)
Case Management (c) Physical Infrastructure.
  •      Human Capital aims to further strengthen human capacity in the JI. This
component will: (a) finance TA for the completion of Pay and Grading reforms in SC and
AGO, (b) assist with preparation and implementation of human resource (HR) strategy
for prosecutors and judges, (c) finance critical HR reforms including process and
information management and performance management for all three JI, (d) finance
complimentary support to the HR department in MoJ to ensure it has adequate capacity to
implement the reforms and recruitments required by CBR participation. This
subcomponent will also support the development of legal libraries, training courses and
programs, and professional gatherings of judges, prosecutors, and their support staff. The
key beneficiaries of the activities to be implemented under this subcomponent will be
employees of JI who will, by the end of the project, benefit from merit based hiring; more
predictable career opportunities; possession of stronger professional backgrounds, and
transparent and competent HR services. The eventual beneficiaries of this component
will be the users of the legal system who will receive services of better quality.
  •      Case Management will finance the development of an automated court case
management system for the SC. The system will be also piloted in the primary and
appellate courts in Kabul under Component 1 Partnership for Justice. This activity will
build on the case filing reforms implemented nationwide by the SC with the support of
USAID.
  •      Physical Infrastructure Activities seek to strengthen JI’s infrastructure
management capacity and enhance the physical infrastructure used to deliver services.
This will be achieved through hiring additional staff; improving the skills of professionals
(mainly skills related to planning, financing and managing construction projects and
facilities) ; developing a Capital Investment Plan (CIP) and additional infrastructure
Design Standards (DS) for the MoJ and AGO offices; and constructing district and
provincial courts and offices. Equipment, implementation services, and technical and user
staff development will be included to improve information management systems in the JI.
JI and their employees will be the beneficiaries of these activities. The people of
Afghanistan will also benefit from buildings which are, by their design, more conducive
to the better performance of JI.

 Component 4: Implementation Capacity (US$ 7.5 million)
 12. The objective of this component is to further strengthen implementation capacity
within the JI so that they will, in time, be able to implement reforms and other activities
without significant additional assistance. The immediate objective of this component is to
facilitate implementation of the project. Under this component, the GoA will establish
and operate the project management infrastructure which will be responsible for the
management of the Project. The management functions will be shared among: a Project
Oversight Committee (POC), a Project Support Unit (PSU), a project unit (PU) in each of
the implementing agencies; a Provincial and District Project Oversight Committee
(PPOC, DPOC); and a Provincial Project Support Unit (PPSU) (See also Section E).

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will have activities in four provinces in Afghanistan; Kabul, Herat, Logar and
Bamyan, and may also undertake activities in other locations according to need. The
project activities will involve some construction activities. These could be both new
construction and rehabilitation of old and existing infrastructures which are not well
known in this stage. These activities will mainly be in urban areas and are not expected
to have adverse social and environmental impacts. Given the much localized nature of
these activities, the project is not expected to have a significant environmental footprint.
Anticipated environmental and social impacts are manageable and within the scope of
proposed project activities.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Asta Olesen (SASDS)
   Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDI)
   Mr Abdul Mohammad Durani (SASDS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

 1.      Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

  Activities under the project should not entail significant environmental and social
impacts, provided they are designed and implemented with due consideration of
environmental and social issues. Component 3b, Strengthening Capacity of State Justice
Institutions will finance the maintenance and construction of courts and offices facilities.
Construction activities may cause limited, temporary, and localized negative impacts due
to depletion or degradation of natural resources such as stone, earth, water etc. used for
Justice Institution (JI) construction if proper environmental management is not carried
out at design, construction and operation stages. This will be mitigated through the
implementation of an appropriate site specific Social and Environmental Management
Plan (ESMP), including environmental checklist to monitor and plan the work. Capacity
building of concerned departments of JIs, including physical and institutional
management, is likely to have a positive impact on social and physical environment.
  OP/BP 4.01 is triggered because of JI rehabilitation and construction activities. The
project will apply the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
developed for the project. The ESMF provides guidance on the approach to be taken
during implementation for the selection and design of subprojects/proposed investments
and the planning of mitigation measures, guidelines and codes of practice for an
environmental and social mitigation measures to be incorporated in the design,
contracting and monitoring of sub-projects. Guidelines for consultation and disclosure
requirements are also included, to ensure due diligence and facilitate consistent treatment
of environmental and social issues by all participating development partners.
  The adverse social impacts, as anticipated at appraisal, would largely result from land
which may be required in connection with the construction activities and OP 4.12 on
involuntary resettlement is therefore triggered. Wherever possible, the project will utilize
land that is already public property, and avoid or minimize land acquisition. However,
documentation is required that the land is free of encroachments, squatters or other
encumbrances, and that the land has been transferred to the relevant authorities. In the
rare cases that land acquisition is unavoidable, it will be undertaken in accordance with
the provisions of Afghanistan’s current Law on Land Expropriation, enacted in 2009 and
Law on Managing Land Affairs 2008 and according to WB OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary
Resettlement.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Following the environmental and social screening process outlined in the checklists of the
ESMF and preparation and implementation of site specific EMPs will address any
potential negative impacts of construction work and indirect or long-term impacts are not
anticipated.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Specific projects sites are not yet identified, but by applications of the ESMF and its
screening procedures, potential social and environmental impacts will be minimized.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The JSD project will undertake a number of construction, rehabilitation and renovation
activities over the 5 year period. Since the detailed designs of the multiple maintenance
and construction activities will be developed only at the beginning of the project
implementation period, a framework approach has been adopted for safeguards
management. The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) provides
general policies procedures for the management of environmental and social issues at
each site and as such constitutes a set of guidelines for the development of site-specific
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP). The JSDP maintenance,
rehabilitation and construction work does not anticipate significant and irreversible
adverse impacts on the environment or community. The identified potential adverse
impacts are localized in spatial extent and short in duration, and are manageable by
implementing mitigation measures that will be detailed in site specific the Environmental
and Social Management Plan (ESMP).
 The overall responsibility of project implementation rests with the Supreme Court,
Ministry of Justice and Attorney General’s Office. A designated Safeguards Nodal
Officer will be identified with specific responsibility for overseeing the implementation
of the Environmental and Social Management Framework and Site specific
Environmental and Social Management Plans within the Project Management Team of
the central PSU.
 The Safeguards Focal Officer and relevant staff of JIs and implementing
agencies/Consultants and contractor will undergo trainings in the application of the
ESMF. During supervision of the project, the World Bank will assess the implementation
of the Framework directly or through third party, and if required, will recommend
additional strengthening.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The stakeholders of the project include representatives from the State Justice Institutions
(JI) as well as the clients being served by these institutions. However, at this stage the
specific construction works and local stakeholders are not identified. The ESMF contains
specific guidelines for consultations with project affected people. The ESMF will be
translated into local languages and made available in the WB Infoshop and disclosed on
the website of MOJ, AGO and SC.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  03/13/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              04/28/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/25/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  03/13/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              04/28/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/27/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
NA


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?           Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)       Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the       Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process           Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector     Yes
Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Lubomira Zimanova Beardsley               04/19/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli                      04/19/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Asta Olesen                               04/19/2012
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Abdul Mohammad Durani                     04/19/2012
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Sanjay Srivastava                         04/24/2012
  Comments: Cleared.
Sector Manager:                     Mr Antonius Verheijen                        04/25/2012
  Comments: cleared
