                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/30/2013                                     Report No.: AC6949
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Afghanistan                         Project ID: P146015
Project Name: Non-formal Approach to Training Education and Jobs in Afghanistan
Project
Task Team Leader: Leopold Remi Sarr
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 29, 2013 Estimated Board Date: October 15, 2013
Managing Unit: SASED                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Vocational training (100%)
Theme: Education for all (100%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      3.00
         Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                       30.83
                                                                     33.83
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [X]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is "to increase the potential for employment and
higher earnings of targeted young Afghan women and men in rural and semi-urban areas
through non-formal skills training"

3. Project Description
The project consists of the following four (4) components:
 Component 1: Improving Access to Non-formal TVET training (US$9.2 million). The
premise of this component is that a significant share of young women and men aged 18 to
35 in Afghanistan is unskilled and illiterate. They enter the labor force totally unprepared
to compete in the labor market. Therefore, they are unable to find jobs and to earn a
decent living. As a result, many of them are easily susceptible to engaging in anti-social
activities which may breed insecurity and instability in the country. This component
proposes therefore to explore ways to address this serious concern by carrying out two
pilots which form the sub-components of this component. The pilots will mainly target
provinces with high incidence of poverty, illiteracy and unemployment/underemployment
in rural and semi-urban areas to help build skills and improve their potential for
employment and higher earnings.
  Sub Component 1.1: Improving Access to Skills Training for Illiterate and Unskilled
Afghans (US$ 7.7 million) This sub-component is designed on the assumption that, while
there is high illiteracy and lack of basic technical skills among young women and men
Afghans living in semi-urban and rural areas, there exist pockets of highly skilled people
in various trades operating in the bazaars across Afghanistan. This sub-component will
attempt to bring these two sets of actors together to match the supply of unskilled
workforce with the existing potential for training in non-formal skills in order to build a
large pool of semi-skilled workers with basic literacy and numeracy competence. This
will be achieved in two phases.
  Sub-component 1.2: Encouraging Rural Employment (US$1.5 million)- Under an
existing Bank project (Afghanistan Rural Enterprise Development Project, AREDP),
savings groups have been set up in villages in five provinces of the country. AREDP has
acknowledged that, while they participate in the savings groups, a large share of their
members cannot efficiently utilize the resources mobilized by the savings groups as they
lack the technical skills. It is therefore proposed to carry a basket of trainings to their
door step to help improve their livelihoods and labor market outcomes. The mode of
operation will be the same as in sub-component 1.1. AREDP will provide data on those
savings groups which are most in need of skills so that an appropriate basket of trainings
can be developed and tailored to their needs. Given that most members live in rural areas
and are illiterate, literacy classes will be mandatory to build their basic literacy and
numeracy competencies.
  Component 2: Improving the Quality of Non-formal Training and the Labor Market
Outcomes of Trainees (US$10.5 million). Under this component, incentives will be given
to non-formal training providers if the employment rate of their graduates meets a
stipulated benchmark. The rationale for this intervention is that incentives directly linked
to labor market outcomes are likely to encourage service providers to actively seek
employment for their graduates. Second, it is based on the premise that labor market
outcomes (e.g., earnings and employment) cannot improve unless the quality of non-
formal training itself improves. Therefore, non-formal training providers are incentivized
to ameliorate the quality of their training so that they can better respond to the demand
from employers seeking qualified semi-skilled labor who are productive enough to help
them raise their profitability.
  Component 3: Strengthen the Institutional Capacity of MOLSAMD in Key Areas (US$
4.7 million). Past engagement with NSDP/MOLSAMD has revealed the need to
strengthen capacity in certain key areas. These are (i) Procurement, (ii) Financial
Management, and (iii) Labor Market Information Systems and Monitoring. In addition,
the MOLSAMD would gain by engaging in promoting entrepreneurship in rural and
semi-urban areas so that the labor market outcomes of its constituency can substantially
improve nationwide. Such engagement could be in providing counseling and guidance to
those seeking to establish small scale businesses, and in linking them with programs that
provide access to finance (cf. Access to Finance Project), including financial support
from formal banks and other financial institutions. In this regard, the option of using the
existing placement cell of MOLSAMD to promote rural and semi-urban entrepreneurship
will be explored. The Labor Market Information Analysis Unit of MOLSAMD is also
proposed to be strengthened through capacity building and systems improvement.
 Component 4: Monitoring and Impact Evaluation and Project Management (US$ 4.1
million) Lessons learnt from ASDP implementation will guide the design of this
component. Despite significant progress made in training many people, an effective
monitoring system that systematically tracks graduates from non-formal training and
monitor their employment status and earnings, is still lacking. In addition, the limited
capacity of NSDP to conduct randomized experiments has impaired the ability to
measure the project impacts. Regular information on labor market outcomes will be
shared with training providers, trainees and enterprises operating in the non-formal sector
to foster better matching of supply and demand for skills. In addition, this component will
undertake a series of impact evaluation studies to rigorously establish the causal impacts
of project interventions and learn what works and what does not and how to scale up
successful interventions. Procurement and FM capacity will be strengthened through the
provision of TA to the NSDP, the project's main implementing agency.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project plans to carry out the training program in 9 provinces (5 AREDP provinces
and 4 provinces along the resource corridor). The project is likely to cause no adverse
environmental and social impacts, because the project primarily comprises provision of
non-formal skills trainings to target groups. The proposed is classified as an
environmental Category C and it does not require any environmental and social
safeguards documentation under the World Bank' OP 4.01. Further the project does not
require specific consultation/disclosure requirements.

  The implementing partner will have to contract a wide range of business (non-formal
training providers) to provide on-the-job training to young men and women in target
provinces. Keeping a safe and hygienic workplace by the non-training providers will be
a matter of concerns. . To address the safety issues as well as the health and hygiene of
the trainees in the workplace a Health and Safety Plan will be developed. .
  An Environmental Focal person is being recruited by the NATEJA to ensure
implementation of environmental health and safety plan during the project
implementation.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Mohammad Yasin Noori (SASDS)
   Mr Obaidullah Hidayat (SASDI)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                 Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                            X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                             X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                      X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Social (including Safeguards)
  No social safeguards policies are expected to be triggered by the NATEJA, which is
expected to substantial positive social impacts on the target population. The NATEJA is
planning to target illiterate and semi-literate, unskilled and/or unemployed adults (male
and female) with a wide range of vocational training options. During project preparation,
a Social Assessment (SA) will be undertaken with the following objectives: (i) establish a
baseline for the project; (ii) develop a social inclusion strategy, (iii) develop a strategy for
informal vocational training compatible with/strengthening existing traditional
apprenticeship systems across the relevant sectors The SA study need to be conducted by
a consultant firm in the early stage of the project.
  Environment (including Safeguards)
  The envisaged environmental risk associated with the NATEJA is minimal, while the
foreseeable health and safety is a compulsory factor to be considered during the project
implementation. A viable planning is very crucial to address the health and safety issues
and to comply with the WBG-EHS (Environmental Health and Safety) guidelines.
  The aim is to make skill trainings comprehensive by meeting industry/market prospect
through practical knowledge on occupational health and safety aspects that can be applied
in the workplaces. MOLSAMD need to hire a Safeguard Focal Point and extensive
trainings are required for both trainers and the trainees. A chapter on workplace EHS
need to be prepared and integrated in the trainee's curriculum, while a safety manual
should also be prepared for safety purposes and for trainees. The manual has to cover
safety related issues in areas which the project is looking to cover in the eleven provinces
and specific resource corridor areas.
  One of the potential risks associated with the informal skills development project is
related to Hygiene issues of the working environment e.g. ventilation, proper lighting,
access to safe drinking water and sanitation. The project may consider the mentioned
factors while contracting local trainers or may allocate an adequate budget to improve the
working conditions or workplace surrounding.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No potential indirect or long term impacts are envisaged while a number of physical
activities and prevailing working may cause adverse impacts on health and personal
safety of the trainees. The identified adverse impacts would be managed by implementing
proper mitigation measures. The Safety Plan will be used to identify such cases and
address related mitigation measures.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the MoLSAMD, ARDP/MRRD and institutes, donors involved
in Non Skill Development projects, provincial authorities (11 provinces) and local
community.

 In all subprojects which require consultations with relevant stakeholders, consultations
will be conducted to elicit the views of both the male and the female population.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 07/22/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             07/23/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              08/20/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Leopold Remi Sarr      07/23/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Obaidullah Hidayat     07/23/2013
Social Development Specialist       Mr Mohammad Yasin Noori   07/23/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Francis V. Fragano     08/19/2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Amit Dar               08/19/2013
  Comments:
