                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 12/14/2012                                      Report No.: AC6714
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Afghanistan                         Project ID: P129663
Project Name: Afghanistan: System Enhancement for Health Action in Transition
Project
Task Team Leader: Ghulam Dastagir Sayed
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 3,        Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2013
2012
Managing Unit: SASHN                         Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery
                                             Loan
Sector: Health (70%);Public administration- Health (30%)
Theme: Health system performance (40%);Nutrition and food security (20%);Population
and reproductive health (15%);Other communicable diseases (15%);Child health (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            100
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                          30.00
         Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                      270.00
         Health Results-based Financing                                8.00
                                                                    308.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [X]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objectives are to expand the scope, quality and coverage of
health services provided to the population, particularly for the poor, in the project area
and to enhance the stewardship functions of the Ministry of Public Health (MOPH).

3. Project Description
The proposed project has 3 components:

 Component 1: Sustaining and improving the Basic Package of Heatlh Services (BPHS)
and Essential Package of Hospital Services (EPHS): The project will support the
implementation of the BPHS and EPHS through Performance-based Partnership
Agreements (PPAs), i.e. contracts between the MOPH and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) which will deliver the health services of these packages. It will
also support the government's efforts in delivering the BPHS and EPHS through
contracting in management services in designated provinces, and the implementation of
an urban version of the BPHS in Kabul city and possibly to other cities.

  Component 2: Building the stewardship capacity of the MOPH and system development
including: a) provincial budgeting and decentralization; b) health care financing; c)
regulatory system development for pharmaceutical sub-sector; d) private sector; e) public
hospital reform; f) building/strengthening human resources management systems
including appropriate use of TA, and expanding/creating training capacity for community
midwifery and community nursing; g) governance and accountability; h) strengthening
fiduciary system; i) strengthening monitoring and evaluation including surveillance,
Health Information Management System, surveys, operational research, to improve
evidence-based decision making; j) building capacity for effective health promotion
especially regarding nutrition and healthy lifestyles; k) development and testing of
innovative financing models for the sector; and l) strengthening sub-national Planning
and Budgeting and operations and maintenance.

 Component 3: Strengthening program management: The project will support central and
provincial management, including incremental operating costs and technical assistance
for the MOPH.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will be implemented in two-thirds of the country over a five year period. The
focus of the program is on the public sector with health facilities located within both
urban and rural areas. Almost sixty percent of the population of the country lives in the
proposed project area. The provinces have geographical variations with mostly
mountainous hard to reach terrain and population density varies across the provinces.
Disposal of medical waste, which would be the prime focus from the environmental
safeguards perspective, could therefore have implications both from geographical
variation and population density.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Asta Olesen (SASDS)
   Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDI)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed project is designated as "Category B" and triggers OP/BP 4.01
(Environmental Assessment). The minor construction work under the project is not
expected to cause any significant negative environmental impact. Since the details and
location of construction work is not known at appraisal, a framework approach has been
applied to address environmental and social impacts. An Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared to provide guidelines for avoiding,
reducing or mitigating negative impacts. Likewise, the proposed project is not expected
to entail significant negative environmental impact if the proper management of health
care waste is undertaken to reduce risks associated with exposure to medical waste.

 The proposed project is not expected to cause significant adverse environmental and
social impacts. No land acquisition will be funded under the project and in the case of
new construction; these will either be built on existing health facility land or on other
government or public land, or in rare cases, on minor land plots donated voluntarily or
through community contribution. The ESMF includes guidelines for compensation in the
rare case that negative livelihood impact may be suffered by project affected people
(PAPs). The ESMF when properly implemented will take care of some of the minor
environmental impact issues.

 The Ministry of Public Health (MOPH) will update the present Health Care Waste
Management Plan (HCWMP) under the SHARP project for SEHAT. During the first year
of SEHAT implementation, the MOPH will conduct an in-depth review of the HCWMP
plan in order to incorporate lessons learned and further strengthen the plan.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The SEHAT project will finance minor civil works, such as modification or rehabilitation
of existing healthcare infrastructure over the 5 year period. The proposed work is not
anticipated to cause significant adverse social or environmental impacts. The identified
potential adverse impacts would be localized in spatial extent and short in duration, and
would be manageable by implementing proper mitigation measures.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The overall responsibility of the safeguards implementation with the MoPH and the
ministry has designated for the task the Environmental Health Department. The
Department will have an Environmental and Social Focal Officer at the Ministry level
and will be closely working with the Grants and Contracts Management Unit of MoPH
with responsibility for fulfilling the safeguard requirements of the proposed project
throughout the duration of the project The Safeguard Focal Officer will conduct trainings
for the relevant staff of MoPH and contractors on implementation of ESMF. Such
training will include capacity-building of the Environmental Health Department of
MOPH whose capacity remains limited. The implementation of the HCWMP is also the
responsibility of the Environmental Health Department and the department will have
Focal Officers with relevant ToRs in the Ministry as well as at the hospital levels.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the Ministry of MoPH, MoF, National Environmental
Protection Agency (NEPA) and the relevant provincial department of MoPH, and the
contracted NGOs and especially the local communities and their Shura-e Sehi/Health
Shuras.

 The HCWMP will be widely disseminated to all relevant stakeholder groups across
medical facilities in the format and languages that suit the stakeholders. The ESMF and
draft HCWMP will be disclosed in all the relevant locations and MoPH website in
English, Dari and Pashto as well as in WB Infoshop.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/28/2012
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                             11/28/2012
 Date of submission to InfoShop                              11/30/2012
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          N/A
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Ghulam Dastagir Sayed   11/26/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli    11/26/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr Mohammad Yasin Noori    11/26/2012
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms Asta Olesen             11/26/2012
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Sanjay Srivastava       12/10/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Julie McLaughlin        12/14/2012
  Comments: Approved
