                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/09/2011                                    Report No.: AC6445
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Afghanistan                         Project ID: P119047
Project Name: Financial Sector Rapid Response Project
Task Team Leader: Guillemette Sidonie Jaffrin
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 23, 2011      Estimated Board Date: August 23, 2011
Managing Unit: SASFP                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Payments, settlements, and remittance systems (50%);Banking (25%);General
finance sector (25%)
Theme: Other Financial Sector Development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             19.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                           0.00
                                                                      0.00
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [X]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to assist DAB to develop actions plans for
improved banking supervision and implement a modern national payment system for
efficient and transparent payment transactions.

3. Project Description
The Financial Sector Rapid Response Project will finance the following activities:
 Audits (financial, portfolio and institutional audit) of ten commercial banks operating in
Afghanistan (US$3.5 million);
 Modernization of the national payment system to facilitate payments within the country,
which will involve the establishment of a Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS),
Automated Clearing House (ACH) and Central Securities Depository (CSD), as one
system, at DAB and a national card / mobile payment switch at Afghan Payment System
(APS), a consortium of commercial banks (US$11 million);
 Support to the development of the Afghanistan Institute of Banking and Finance (US$1
million);
 Technical assistance and training for project implementation (US$3 million).
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Kabul - The project finances audits, information technology systems and technical
assistance.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Sanjay Srivastava (SARDE)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                     X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
No applicable, since there will be no civil works undertaken under the project or land
taking, therefore there will be no physical, environment or social foot prints of the
project; and
  If there is any change in the scope of the project that may require triggering any
safeguards policies during implementation, the team will bring it to the notice of the
safeguards secretariat.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Not applicable

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Not applicable
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Not applicable



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
08/08/2011


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       N/A
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Guillemette Sidonie Jaffrin               08/05/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli                      08/09/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Abdul Mohammad Durani                     08/09/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Sanjay Srivastava                         08/08/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                 Mr Ivan Rossignol                                08/05/2011
  Comments: ISDS approved on August 5th by TTL and Sector Manager
