                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/17/2012                                  Report No.: AC6687
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P079736                 Original Project Name: CEMAC -
                                             Transport-Transit Facilitation
Country: Africa                              Project ID: P130422
Project Name: CEMAC Transport and Transit Facilitation- Third Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 14, 2012       Estimated Board Date: July 26, 2012
Managing Unit: AFTTR                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (85%);Central government
administration (15%)
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (60%);Regional integration (40%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            125
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
                                                                         0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to facilitate regional trade among the CEMAC
member states and improve the Central African Republic, the Republic of Cameroon's
and the Republic of Chad's access to world markets.

3. Project Description
General initial project and program description

 The original credit amount of the CEMAC Transport and Transit Facilitation Project
was approved by the World Bank Board of Executive Directors on June 26, 2007,
became effective on December 5, 2007 with a closing date of January 31, 2013 for a total
amount of SDR132.9 million (US$201 million equivalent) of which SDR97.2 million
were to be spent in Cameroon (Credit 4337-CM), SDR16 million were to be spent in
Central African Republic (Grant H314-CA) and SDR 19.7 million were to be spent in
Chad (Grant H315-TD). AF1 was approved on November 5, 2009, became effective on
April 8, 2010 with a closing date of January 31, 2015, for an amount of SDR138.6
million (US$217 million equivalent) of which SDR95.8 million was for Cameroon
(Credit 4659-CM) and SDR42.8 million for Central African Republic (Grant H522-CF).
AF2 was approved by the World Bank Board of Directors on June 23, 2011 with a
closing date of January 31, 2016, for an amount of SDR 70.7 million (US$112 million
equivalent) for Cameroon (Credit 4987- CM).

  This comprehensive program tackles most of the transit facilitation dimensions along
the two targeted corridors: road rehabilitation, railway modernization, customs reform,
transport regulation, support to the Douala single window and - though to a more modest
scale, port modernization. A key project's objective is to reduce the dwell time in the
Douala port (around 20 days) and the transit time from Douala to N'Djamena (15 days)
and from Douala to Bangui (10 days). In addition to the IDA support, this program is also
supported by the AfDB and the European Union.

 The original project and its first additional financing have three components to be
implemented in Cameroon, CAR and Chad:

 (i)    First component: Roads and Railway Infrastructure Improvement. Activities
include: (a) periodic maintenance, rehabilitation and upgrading works on selected road
section along the corridors; (b) paving of existing gravel road sections; (c) harmonization
and enforcement of axle load control policies; (d) construction and improvement of rest
areas; (e) rehabilitation of critical rail infrastructure; and (f) implementation of HIV-
AIDS awareness and mitigation measures. This component finances in particular the
rehabilitation of the following road sections: in Cameroon: Mbéré - Ngaoundéré (86 km),
Ngaoundéré - Garoua (275 km) and Daban Kousseri (78 km); in Chad: Bongor - Eré -
Kelo (131 km); in CAR: Fambélé - Baboua (34 km), Fambélé - Bouar (33 km) and
Bossemb Yaloké (10 km). It also finances the rehabilitation of 175 km of railway tracks
in Cameroon (Batchenga - Ka'a).

 (ii) Second component: Transit and Transport Facilitation Investments. Activities
include: (a) communication between stakeholders, especially within the port community,
including Information and Communication Technology (ICT) interfacing; (b) transit
regime and border crossing improvements through cargo tracking, border posts
constructions and improvement; (c) port safety and security strengthening; and (d)
improvement in intermodal interfaces. This component finances in particular the
improvement of multimodal platforms in Ngaoundéré and Douala (Cameroon) and the
construction of a bus station in Bouar (CAR).

 (iii) Third component: Customs and Transport Sector Institutional Strengthening and
Capacity Building. Activities include: (a) CEMAC Customs Union and national customs
strengthening; (b) institutional support for transport facilitation institutions; and (c)
coordination and management of the project's activities. This component finances in
particular the improvement of local customs' offices in Garoua Boulai - Touboro and
Kousseri (Cameroon) and in Belabo (CAR), as well as the construction of a training
center for the Cameroonian customs and of new offices for the "cellule BAM-BAD", the
project implementing unit in the Cameroonian Ministry of Public Works.
 The proposed third additional financing includes the following additional activities to be
executed in CAR:


 •     Full rehabilitation of Bouar cross over road and of Bouar – Doaka road, including
reconstruction of bridge at the exit of Boua (full design study under way);

 •     Routine and basic maintenance to be performed on selected sections of the
corridor. The exact description of these activities will be refined during project
preparation but are likely to include: (i) periodic maintenance of most deteriorated
sections between Bossembélé and Bossentélé, with recycling of existing surface dressing
and application of a single asphalt layer; (ii) a 3-year performance-based maintenance
contract, including the operation of weight control stations, on the sections Garoua Boulai
– Bouar, about to be rehabilitated; as well as a (iii) basic maintenance of the road Doaka
– Baoro;

 •       Improvement of Bangui by-pass (urban traffic survey to be performed to
determine the optimal option; the objective is to divert some of the existing traffic of
heavy vehicles entering the city from the highly-congested “avenue de l’Indépendence?
road).
 •       Some transit facilitation activities consisting mostly in capacity building,
institutional strengthening and technical assistanc activities.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The initial project finances activities at several different sites in Cameroon, CAR and
Chad, including (a) several sections of the road corridors linking N'Djamena and Bangui
to Douala that need upgrading or long term maintenance; (b) rail sections in Cameroon
between Yaoundé and Belabo and near Douala that need to be rehabilitated; and (c) a
number of trade-related investment and technical assistance in the three countries.

 Safeguards issues concern relatively minimal environmental and social impacts
resulting from the road, railway and bridge investment components of the project in
Cameroon. In general, key social issues relevant to the project objectives are mostly in
relation to social impacts of the road improvements in Cameroon.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
   Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTEN)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project finances activities at several different sites in Cameroon, CAR and Chad,
including (a) several sections of the road corridors linking N'Djamena and Bangui to
Douala that need upgrading or long term maintenance; (b) rail sections in Cameroon
between Yaoundé and Belabo and near Douala that need to be rehabilitated; and (c) a
number of trade-related investment and technical assistance in the three countries.

  Safeguards issues concern relatively minimal environmental and social impact resulting
from the road, bridge and rail investment components of the project in Cameroon, CAR
and Chad, and to a more limited extent by some of the trade facilitation activities.
Specific safeguards instruments have been prepared in application of the activated
safeguards policies. In particular:

 -       When the original project was prepared, three separate environment and social
impact assessment studies (ESIAs) were prepared, one for Cameroon, one for Central
African Republic and one for Chad. Environmental and Social Management Plans
(ESMPs) were prepared, based on the ESIAs.
 -       Regarding the railway works, an Environmental and Safety Management Plan
(ESMP) has been updated in 2007, based on the ESMF prepared for the purpose of an
earlier IDA-financed project to support the railway concession.
 -       When the original project was prepared, three separate resettlement action plans
(RAP) were also prepared, one for each country.
 -       When the first additional financing was prepared, it was determined that the
Kousseri by-pass required a specific environmental and social management plan (ESMF).

 The Environmental Assessments of the road, bridge and rail track works has not
revealed any significant direct environmental impacts.

 The studies that have been prepared for the purpose of the original project have been
disclosed both in country and in the Bank's Infoshop on February 15, 2007. The Kousseri
by-pass study was disclosed in country on September 1st, 2009 and in the Bank's
Infoshop on September 2, 2009.

 For the second additional financing, the following safeguards were prepared:

 (a) Regarding the Magada - Maroua road: An Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) - including an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared
to mitigate the negative impacts caused by the rehabilitation of the Magada road. This
ESIA was submitted for disclosure to the World Bank Infoshop on March 18, 2011 and
published in country on March 23, 2011. A field mission of the Ministry of Public Works'
environmental and social unit confirmed that no involuntary resettlement were expected
prior to or during works' execution.

 (b) Regarding the Tilde Bridge: An abbreviated RAP (ARAP) was prepared by the
Ministry of Public Works in order to mitigate the negative impacts caused by the
displacement of 13 families as a result of the Tilde Bridge reconstruction works. This
ARAP was disclosed in country on March 23rd, 2011 and submitted for disclosure to the
World Bank Infoshop on March 18, 2011. The Tilde Bridge is located on the road section
Dabanga - Kousseri (78 km) which is being rehabilitated, together with the Kousseri by-
pass, as part of the 1st Additional Financing to the CEMAC Transport and Transit
Facilitation Project. The corresponding ESIA and ESMP were prepared and disclosed in
country on September 1st, 2009 and in the World Bank Infoshop on September 2nd,
2009.

 For the purpose of the third additional financing, the following safeguards have been
prepared:

 (a) Environmental Assessment: OP/BP 4.01 was triggered and an advanced draft of
the Environment and Social Impact Assessment study for the rehabilitation of the
corridor road section between Bouar and Baoro was already prepared by the Government.
The Environmental Assessment of the road works has not revealed any significant direct
environmental impacts in this section. OPs 4.04 (Natural Habitats) and 4.11 (Physical
Cultural Resources) have been triggered, as some of the road works may take place near
natural habitats and there may be some cultural artifacts; the ESIA/ESMP includes
mitigation measures. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was also prepared, consulted
upon, and disclosed for the same section.

 (b) For the Bangui By-pass and other road sections on which the exact locations are not
yet defined, an Environmental and Social Management Framework and a Resettlement
Policy Framework will be prepared prior to appraisal. All safeguards documents have
been prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed in country and at INFOSHOP prior to
appraisal.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
During the construction phase, negative environmental and social impacts may include
the destruction of physical habitat and the logging of fruit-trees along the road. However,
no new road section will be constructed and the widening of some sections will only
affect very partially the local agricultural activity and local habitat. As a side-effect of the
physical works, the agricultural workforce may be slightly reduced in the region. Air
quality in works areas will be somewhat degraded by intensive use of gas-powered
machines and repetitive truck movements, but this air pollution will be limited in time
and importance. Works can also affect rainwater streaming and the soils physical
properties. After pavement, the road will become a waterproof strip that can considerably
modify water streaming.

 The ESIAs/ESMPs and RAPs were prepared and disclosed in each country in order to
mitigate these negative risks. Proper environmental measures can avoid most of the
negative environmental impacts resulting from the physical works and these measures
will be included in all the procurement documents. For instance, strict water sanitation
and drainage precautions have to be taken to avoid important changes in rainfall runoff
causing erosion. A specific budget has also been allotted for the environmental mitigation
measures to be undertaken in the three countries. A RAP was prepared in each country to
address some small trader housing displacement issues. In particular, a RAP was
prepared to mitigate the negative impact of resettlements to proceed with the Kousseri
by-pass works at the border with Chad. As indicated above, an additional ESIA/EMP,
and Abbreviated RAP have been prepared for works financed under the second and third
Additional Financing.

 A major environmental benefit of the pavement of roads in this region lies in reduction
of dust generation, particularly important on dirt roads during the dry season.

  Impacts during the operational phase of these facilities include increased noise and
accident risks due to the increased traffic and HIV/AIDS propagation. High attention will
be paid to road safety improvement. A dedicated part of the financing from the
development partner community has been allotted to sensitize the local population to
fight against HIV and promote road safety and environmental conservation. The second
and third additional financing include specific resources to improve the road safety
condition along the targeted corridors. These actions will be closely coordinated with
other initiatives aiming at improving road safety, in particular with other activities
implemented by the EU and a new launched initiative between the World Bank and
TOTAL Corporation in Africa.

 Other possible long term adverse impacts identified by the ESIA in Cameroon and CAR
include the potential increase in pressure on natural resources, particularly through illegal
logging and the bush meat trade. Through this project, the relevant ministry in both
Cameroon and CAR has received assistance to acquire equipments (motorcycles and/or a
vehicle) to ensure a better control of such illegal activities. The various Governments
have also indicated their willingness to send more field staff in the project region.
Furthermore, during the civil works phase, the team will ensure that sensitive areas and
natural habitats like national park or protected areas will not be encroached by the project
activities.

 As the ESIA does not identify any sensitive cultural/archeological sites around the
project area, all mitigation measures will be taken in case of a fortuitous finding of any
archeological remains or high value cultural site.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
No alternative has been considered to minimize adverse impacts. As for road
investments, the operation consists mainly in a rehabilitation of existing roads so no
alternative plotting is therefore conceivable. The most sustainable technical option has
then been chosen with respect to the project's available resources. The project will ensure
that all mitigation measures are taken to reduce or avoid environmental and socials
impacts/ risks.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In each of the three countries, national institutions have been identified and strengthened
to ensure the proper implementation of the safeguards instruments that have been
prepared for the purpose for the original project and its three additional financing:

 - In Cameroon, the Ministry in charge of Environment is responsible for the approval of
the ESIA, the ESMP, the RAP and the ARAP. Since the beginning of the 1990s, the
government of Cameroon has significantly improved the legal framework for
environmental management. Law no. 96/12 of August 5, 1996 sets the framework for
environmental matters. The decree no. 2005/0577/PM of February 23, 2005 provides
guidance for the EIA. The creation of the Ministry of Environment and Nature Protection
in 2004 has reinforced the institutional capacity of the government to monitor
environmental matters. An Inter-ministerial commission exists through the 96
Environment Law and plays its role in term of approving EIA and EMP. The Ministry of
Public Works has a special unit for environmental and social issues - the Division de la
Protection du Patrimoine et de l'Environnement (DPPER). This Unit presents all
competencies able to ensure the implementation of the process with the monitoring of the
Ministry of Environment and Nature Protection and its creation was set up through IDA
funding under the Transport Sector Project. This unit closely coordinates with the
Ministry of Fauna and Forest (MINFOF) regarding the control of bush meat trade and
other environmental mitigation activities (tree planting in particular). The members of
this Unit receive training financed by the project in the area of Bank social safeguards to
allow them to properly monitor the implementation of the ESIAs and RAPs. The project
also provides capacity-building targeting the Ministry of Environment and Nature
Protection, and the Ministry of Forests and Wildlife. So far, the country has performed a
good follow up of environmental and social dimensions in the project, fact that is very
encouraging. Nevertheless, this performance has to be further continued and strengthened
through the present additional financing.
 - In CAR, implementation is supported by the Unité Environnementale et Sociale (UES)
within MED, in close coordination with the Ministry of Environment (MEFCPE). A
specific attention is brought to the issue of timber trade. For instance, the project supports
the internet publication of the timber trade data being provided by MEFCPE. The UES
has been also actively engaged in preparing and supervising the implementation of a
detailed action plan to address some social and environmental issues detected in the
execution of the Fambele - Baboua works.

 - In Chad, the project is building capacity in the Ministry of Infrastructure, in
coordination with the Ministry of Environment and Water.

 In the three countries, the project is providing targeted technical assistance and
institutional strengthening to the identified social and environmental institution.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders have been identified in the ESIA and RAP. However, these should also
include representatives from the following entities, State at different levels, private
sector, NGOs, local communities, elected authorities and development partners. The
Consultation Mechanisms will be as follows:

 All safeguards instruments were carried out on the basis of a participative approach.
Individual interviews, group discussions and several meetings were organized during the
execution of the study and will be planned during the approval process. The project
contents, in terms of economic, social, cultural, environmental stakes, as well as
mitigation impacts and compensations measures were developed and discussed with
diverse stakeholders.

 In Cameroon, a consultation was organized during the preparation of Magada-Maroua
road section and Tilde bridge design and the associated ESIA and ARAP. Regarding the
Tilde Bridge, a consultation was organized with community leaders from the Tilde
village. Translation in local language (Kotoko) was ensured. During the consultation,
local stakeholders raised the issue that many owners did not have official land titles and
that some affected people may be renting the land. Measures in line with the World Bank
policy on involuntary resettlements (OP 4.12) were included in the ARAP to address
these issues. Regarding the ESIA, a consultation of local stakeholders was performed by
the Social and Environmental Unit of the Ministry of Public Works during the period
February 7-14, 2011. Consultations highlighted the benefits that the proposed
rehabilitation of the Magada - Maroua road would bring to the local populations and the
strong support for the project expressed by the local authorities.

  In CAR, a consultation was organized during the preparation of the safeguards
documents for the proposed Bouar and Baoro road rehabilitation works with community
leaders from the project area. A similar exercise will be carried out for the Bangui By-
pass and other road sections on which the exact locations are not yet defined.
 The team will ensure that this participatory consultation process continues on a regular
basis during project implementation. Supervision missions will be the opportunity to
assess the whole process.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/14/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              05/04/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/20/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/14/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              05/16/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               05/14/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge        05/17/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna   05/17/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor            05/17/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi           05/17/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Supee Teravaninthorn            05/17/2012
  Comments:
