                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                         RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/16/2012                                  Report No.: AC5969
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Africa                              Project ID: P075994
Project Name: WAPP APL 1 (1st Phase - COASTAL TRANSMISSION BACKBONE)
Task Team Leader: Sunil W. Mathrani
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 4, 2005      Estimated Board Date: June 30, 2005
Managing Unit: AFTG1                         Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                             Loan
Sector: Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
Theme: Regional integration (67%);Infrastructure services for private sector
development (33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             40
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             13.50
         IDA Guarantee                                                   0.00
         EC: European Investment Bank                                   12.00
         KUWAIT: Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development              17.50
                                                                        43.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []            Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
There is no change in the project's development objective, which is to increase access of
West Africa Power Pool (WAPP) Zone A coastal states (Benin, Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana,
Nigeria, and Togo) to more stable and reliable electricity as a means to alleviate power
supply deficits and/or to reduce their collective vulnerability to drought-induced power
supply disruptions. The project responds to the 15-member Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) region wide demand for stable electricity since the
region is confronted with serious energy challenges with their countries' demand
expected to triple to 140,000 GWh (approximately 370 kWh per capita) between 2003
and 2020. Faced with this power system expansion challenge, ECOWAS member states
have acknowledged that past efforts to achieve national self-sufficiency in electricity
supply have been uneconomical due to the high cost of establishing power generation and
transmission infrastructure. Thus, WAPP is expected to meet some of the region's
projected electricity requirements.
3. Project Description
The WAPP APL1 Phase 1 finances the construction of the 330 kV transmission line (T-
Line) from Aboadze to Volta in Ghana in two investment tranches. The project
components include: (i) development (supply of conductors and insulators and supply
and installation of SCADA and communications systems) of the Aboadze-Volta segment
of the WAPP 330 kV Coastal Transmission Backbone; (ii) upgrade of the Volta River
Authority (VRA) system control center at Volta (Tema); (iii) upgrade of the switchyard
(circuit breakers and relays) of the Akosombo generation station; (iv) engineering
services in support of project implementation; and (v) technical assistance and consulting
services for implementation of an "operational mitigation and security plan" for the
coastal transmission backbone.

 A new component is to be included in the scope of the Project in response to GoG's
request for financing to cover compensation payments to some owners of bare lands
along the transmission line right-of-way. This is necessitated by the financial difficulties
of VRA that have prevented it from making these payments. The estimated amount of
the financing sought is about US$2 million. Consequently funding for the outstanding
compensation, as well as associated RAP activities (such as livelihood restoration) will
be provided by IDA. No other project components will be affected and the necessary
funding will be obtained from internal reallocation.

  The WAPP institutional building component consists of: (i) support to the WAPP Task
Force for development of an operational mitigation and security plan for the 330 kV
coastal transmission backbone; (ii) upgrade of the Volta system control center (Tema) of
VRA into a WAPP operational coordination center, fully equipped to coordinate the
operational mitigation and security plan for the 33 kV coastal transmission backbone; and
(iii) upgrade the ECOWAS energy observatory (Cotonou) into the WAPP secretariat and
information coordination center, fully equipped to perform monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) functions for the WAPP APL program.

  Each WAPP APL project combines generation and transmission infrastructure
development components with the introduction of common "rules of practice" covering
the institutional, regulatory, technical and operational, and commercial prerequisites for
promoting cross border electricity trade -- WAPP cooperation agreements. Although
tailored to specific sub-regional power system configurations, each WAPP component
agreement will reflect the core principles embodied in the ECOWAS Energy Protocol
(EEP). Over time, the expectation is that three sub-regional power pooling mechanisms
will converge into a unified, well functioning regional power pooling mechanism -- an
important pre-condition for the future evolution of cross-border trading arrangements into
a unified regional electricity market for West Africa.

 The first (FY05) IDA credit tranche for the WAPP APL 1 project finances the
construction of the 330 kV line segment from Aboadze to Volta in Ghana, in parallel with
the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development and the European Investment Bank.
Ghana has already met the policy trigger for the first tranche. This particular 330 kV line
segment became operational in September 2009.
  The second (FY06) IDA credit tranche of the WAPP APL 1 project is part of a co-
financing package for the remaining segments from the Volta substation in Tema, Ghana
first to Lomé and then on to the Benin-Nigeria border. The African Development Bank
and KfW are the financiers for the construction of these T- line segments.

 The first tranche financed the procurement by VRA of the full complement of
engineering services (engineering design, preparation of bidding documents, bid
evaluation, supervision of contractors, monitoring of environmental management, and
resettlement action plans, etc) required to implement all of VRA's contributions towards
completion of the Coastal Transmission Backbone. IDA financing for CEB's
requirements are being provided as part of the second tranche of the WAPP APL 1
project.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The APL1 Phase 1 project is a one-country project located in Ghana. The project is a 330
kV T-Line from Aboadze (Takoradi) to Volta (Tema) of about 215 km length with
appropriate terminations at Aboadze and Volta. The transmission system consists of the
T-Line (including about 430 towers of 40 m height, conductors, and their supports), its
associated right-of-way (RoW), and 2 switching stations to provide a connection to the
rest of the system. The total land area taken up by the RoW will be approximately 8.6 sq
km, corresponding to a 40 m wide strip running along the entire route. In all, about 35
communities are affected by the project.

  Rerouting of the T-Line's RoW is crossing over some sacred groves and shrines
(especially Guako Grove at Pokuase) and some environmentally sensitive sites like the
Yenku Block "B" forest reserve, and the Apra Hills forest reserve. The T-Line segment
overlaps with small sections of the forest grove at Pokuase forest reserve at Winneba
Junction, and Biogas Factory at Pomadze. Corresponding mitigation measures for these
forest reserves have already been incorporated into the Environment Management Plan
(EMP) and approved by the Forestry Department (FD) and Environment Protection
Agency (EPA). The 2009 Annual Environment Report (dated March 2010) recorded no
issues with forested areas.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz (AFTCS)
   Mr Moses Yao Duphey (AFTN1)
   Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
 Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

 The Environmental Assessment (EA) and Environment Management Plan (EMP) were
approved by the Ghanaian EPA which issued an Environmental Permit on February 27,
2004. The EA and EMP were disclosed in-country and at the Bank's InfoShop on
February 24, 2005, after completion of consultations by the EPA. The EA and EMP were
based on an assessment of the immediate environment and natural resources covered by
the right-of-way for the 330 kV T-Line from Aboadze to Volta of 215 km length with
appropriate terminations at Aboadze and Volta.

  The T-Line traverses two forest reserves (Yenku "B" and the proposed Apra Hills). The
Apra Hills forest reserve consists of natural trees in mixed stands while the Yenku "B"
(close to the Muni-Pomadze Ramsar Site) is a fuel wood reserve earmarked for
afforestation. The soil has an iron pan which is affecting the growth of trees. OP4.04 is
triggered because of the proximity of the T-Line to protected areas and because the EA
(2003, p. 3) states that 2 endangered species could be affected by downstream impact of
the T-Line if encroachment increases. A Memorandum was issued in 2007 between the
VRA and the Forestry Commission regarding conservation and sustainability issues of
the forests. To this end, VRA paid for destroyed seedlings at the Yenku B Reserve. This
memorandum is still in force and VRA is committed to this memorandum.

 A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), disclosed in 2005, identified 1,051 project affected
persons (PAPs). Of these, 80% were compensated for loss of structures, crops and land.
The remaining 20% had not come forward for compensation as these were bare lands.
However, provision has been made for payment to them, should they subsequently show
up and can establish ownership within a 12-year period from the start of project
implementation .

  In 2009, new PAPs were identified after the T-Line rerouting. The revised total number
of PAPs is therefore 2736, broken down as follows: 1,454 famers who lost crops and
trees, 577 households (representing 952 individual PAPs) whose buildings were
destroyed, 303 bare land owners ( as at the time of the assessment), 22 stone quarry
operators and one quarry land owner. These changes in PAPs numbers were reflected in
a RAP Update that was completed in July 2010 and disclosed in country on April 1, 2011
and in a recent status report on addendum RAP implementation submitted to the World
Bank in November 2011. This RAP Update included informal workers and so-called
"usufructs" (such as stone crackers), who became affected after the re-routing.
Verification and consultations, especially of the PAPs in the Kwabenya segments of the
T-Line explain the delays in getting the RAP Update cleared and disclosed by GoG and
the Bank.

 An initial 330 bareland owners have been paid by VRA. A further 200 bareland owners
with a claim value of GHC4.1 million still need to be paid compensation.This amount
and the basis of claims by PAPs have been vetted by VRA's Internal Audit Department
and found to be bona fide. Payment will be effected by IDA Cr. 4092, following
approval granted by the Bank's Land Committee to use such funds.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The total land take comprises the RoW covering about 8.6 sq km along the Aboadze-
Volta 330 kV T-Line. The impacts along the T-Line RoW are defined by the use and
access for construction of T-Line towers and a vertical clearance of 7.5 m for human
health and T-Line security purposes, as defined by the GoG/VRA. In addition, VRA
enforces a policy of controlled land use under the T-Line to ensure that no trees or
structures, for example, fall within this vertical clearance. VRA has proposed to allow
cultivation by farmers under the T-Line provided that they are crops not exceeding 1.5 m
in height. The original RAP was disclosed on February 28, 2005.

 Impacts on loss of land, assets, and livelihoods were estimated and defined in the 2005
RAP and 2010 RAP Update. Consultations with PAPs took place between 2004 and
2005 and documented in the annexes to the RAP and subsequently, more consultations
took place during the RAP Update between 2009 and 2010. Total payments effected so
far (for full compensation due for crops and buildings plus part payment for bare lands)
amounts to GHC 10.9million (US$6.2 million). These payments were made to PAPs in
the Greater Accra Region and partially in the Central and Western Regions. vAn amount
of GHC 4.1m (US$2.2m) is still due to 200 owners of bare lands. This is to be covered
by IDA as indicated above.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The T-Line rerouting, which was done in 2008 and 2009 took into consideration options
to avoid high density areas and minimized crossing into forest reserves, etc. As a result, it
crossed a planned landfill site in Kwabenya, affecting some disputed lands within the
RoW and potential impacts on stone crackers' livelihoods. An evaluation of the RAP for
this segment was done, including consultations with PAPs, and these were included in the
RAP Addendum, which was completed and disclosed in country in 2010.

  An EIA and socio-economic survey of PAPs were completed to ensure that baseline
information were established. The EMP included occupational and health and safety
procedures that are satisfactory in terms of noise, dust, air quality, turbidity, pH and O2
levels monitoring. The contractors also followed the EMP guidelines.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The safeguards documents -- EA, EMP and RAPs for the Aboadze-Volta T-Line were
reviewed and disclosed by the GoG agencies in charge of wastes, ruled for compliance
with Forestry Division guidelines, traffic management, environmental and safety hazards,
and environmental awareness and safety programs for workers. The environmental
permit issued by the Ghana EPA allowed VRA to commence civil works and
construction only until completion of these procedures.

  Within VRA, there are separate units for handling environmental issues. At least 2 full
time environmental specialists and 11 VRA on-site inspectors monitor the land use,
health, and safety conditions along the RoW. On resettlement, VRA has a separate real
estates and security department which prepared the RAPs. There is a corporate estates
unit that coordinates with the Ghanaian Land Valuation Board (LVB). Selection of the
RoW was done by an Inter-Ministerial Technical Committee composed of representatives
from the LVB, Lands Commission, Surveys Department, Country Planning, and all the
utilities such as water, highways, roads, electricity, public works, EPA and municipal and
city assemblies. This Technical Committee has a sub-committee specifically for
demarcating wayleaves for the T-Line RoW. The consulting group, EnviroSound, was
contracted to carry out independent monitoring of the RoW in terms of implementation of
the EMP and RAPs and submits progress reports to the Technical Committee.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders in the Aboadze-Volta 330 kV T-Line are those living in the immediate
vicinity of the network. VRA conducted consultations with these directly affected
communities. Among government agencies, VRA coordinated closely with LVB and
received from LVB the Property Impact Report which identified all the affected
structures and land and provided estimated and prevailing market values.

 The main beneficiaries of the project remain the same under the restructured project.
These include the households and businesses which will receive reliable and satisfactory
electricity. The 1993, 1998, and 2006 energy crises caused by the low water level of the
Volta Dam at Akosombo had serious consequences in the region, which were epitomized
by the closure of the largest off taker of electricity in Ghana in 2006, the Volta
Aluminum Company. Other beneficiaries include independent power producers in Cote
D'Ivoire and Ghana as they will be assured of more reliable transmission capacity to
transfer electricity to load centers in eastern Ghana and/or Benin or Togo.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/11/2004
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              02/24/2005
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               02/24/2005
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  12/09/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              01/04/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               06/23/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
NOTE:
 The Addendum RAP was disclosed at the infoshop on June 23, 2011 and this covered
the additional PAPs that were included when the T-Line was rerouted.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        Yes
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Sunil W. Mathrani          05/29/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Moses Yao Duphey           05/29/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah       05/29/2012
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz   12/13/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi      07/12/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Lucio Monari               07/12/2012
  Comments:
