                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: April 15, 2013

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Africa                               Project ID: P132448
                                              Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Engaging Civil Society for Social and Climate Resilience in the Nile
Basin
Task Team Leader: Margaret Arnold
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 12, 2013       Estimated Board Date: n/a
Managing Unit: AFTN2                          Lending Instrument: TA
Sector: General water (60%), sanitation and flood protection (40%
Theme: Participation and civic engagement (60%); Water resource management (20%);
Natural disaster management (20%).
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: Cooperation in International Waters in Africa: 1.5
Environmental Category: C
Simplified Processing                Simple [X]                Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project        Yes [X]                    No [ ]


B. Project Objectives:

The development objective for the project is to strengthen the capacity of the Nile Basin
Discourse (NBD) to engage civil society members and relevant stakeholders in Nile Basin
cooperation programs, processes and dialogue.

By creating a platform for citizen engagement in Nile Basin investment decisions and riparian
dialogue, learning on climate risk management and resilience building strategies, and promoting
awareness of the benefits of Nile Basin cooperation, the project will contribute to equitable,
sustainable, climate resilient growth in the region. Due to the technical assistance nature of this
project, however, these benefits will not accrue during the three year project life. As such, it will
not be possible to measure these impacts during the life of this project.

C. Project Description:
The project includes three components, which are focused on strengthening the capacity of the
NBD Secretariat to serve its membership; improving the multi-directional communications
throughout the NBD network; and connecting NBD membership to effective capacity
development resources and opportunities on priority topics.

   1. Strengthening the NBD Secretariat ($625,000)

This component will include a number of activities to develop the capacity of the NBD
Secretariat to deliver its core activities in a more cost-effective and impactful manner. It entails
stakeholder research to map actors throughout the Nile Basin, their interests, relationships,
capacities, communication modes, etc. The research will provide the foundation for the
Secretariat to develop the strategies and measures for strengthening their network, in addition to
activities laid out in the other project components below. Other activities will focus on building
capacity for media communications, monitoring and evaluation of both Secretariat activities and
key activities undertaken by NBD members such as the Regional and National Discourse forums,
engagement with Nile development projects, awareness campaigns and trainings. Finally, the
component will focus on the development and implementation of an action plan to place the
NBD on a more sustainable footing regarding funding.

   2. Improved communications and outreach ($525,000)

NBD is uniquely positioned to act as a communications conduit across a large, culturally and
politically diverse, and geographically dispersed region. Improvements under this component
will include a review and revision of the existing NBD web site (www.nilebasindiscourse.org),
an expansion of the scope of NBD’s internet based activities, and an expansion into mobile based
tools. These activities would focus on the NBD Secretariat’s communications and outreach
capacity, as well as the NBD membership’s ability to engage directly in dialogue on relevant
issues through, for example, member organization WebPages hosted on the NBD website,
member generated content, and the use of Web and mobile technologies for citizen feedback on
Nile investment projects. In addition, this component would explore other means for improving
bottom up and horizontal communication among civil society organizations within the network,
such as through closer partnerships with media, including the Nile Media Network.

   3. Capacity building for NBD members ($350,000)

Through this component, NBD will focus efforts on strengthening capacity of its members on
key topics that they identify as priorities. Preliminary topics identified in stakeholder
consultations include climate change adaptation, gender equity, empowerment of women and
young people as resilience champions, and general CSO organizational skills such as budgeting,
proposal preparation, monitoring and evaluation, and fundraising. This component will make use
of the communications tools developed in component (2) in addition to NBD’s main face-to-face
events such as Nile Day activities and internships/exchanges with networks stakeholders,
including the NBI. It will allow the network to better leverage the existing expertise within the
network through peer-to-peer learning and help build awareness among communities of a
regional Nile culture and the benefits of cooperation. Activities would aim to connect members
to existing resources related to capacity development and potential sources of fundraising for
their work. In addition to connecting members to online and other virtual resources, this
component would identify and support key face-to-face activities such as site visits, staff
exchanges and peer-to-peer learning on the priority topics identified. The ICT approaches will
support and complement these activities.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):
The project is technical assistance and will be implemented by the Nile Basin Discourse (NBD)
Secretariat located in Entebbe, Uganda.

The project is a Technical Assistance project which aims to support the NBD and its
stakeholders to more effectively share knowledge and expertise related to Nile Basin
cooperation. The overall purpose of the project can be viewed as supporting the creation of a
platform for citizen engagement in Nile Basin investment decisions and riparian dialogue,
learning on climate risk management and resilience building strategies, and promoting awareness
of the benefits of Nile Basin cooperation. Consequently no adverse environmental and social
impacts are expected from the project.

E. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
Paul F. Lytle (AFTCS)
John Bryant Collier (AFTN3)


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)               Yes         No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                       X

Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                X

Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                         X

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    X

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                     X

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                              X

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        X

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                  X

Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                             X

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                      X
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)         Yes           No           TBD
Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)


III. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Margaret Arnold                           11/29/2012
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Alexandra Bezeredi                        12/10/2012
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Jonathan Kamkwalala                       7/15/2013
   Comments:




                                                           (Template Version November 2007)
