                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 04/11/2012                                    Report No.: AC6676
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P069258                  Original Project Name: 3A-Southern Afr
                                              Power Mrkt APL 1 (FY04)
Country: Africa                               Project ID: P126421
Project Name: Second Additional Financing for Southern African Power Market Project
(APL1)
Task Team Leader: Manuel Berlengiero
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 10, 2012      Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2012
Managing Unit: AFTEG                          Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                              Loan
Sector: Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (38%);Regional
integration (37%);Export development and competitiveness (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            201.5
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                        0.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The development objectives for this project has slightly changed from the original project
which was to facilitate further development of an efficient power market in the Southern
African Development Community.

 Modification of the Project Development Objective is proposed to better reflect the
project area of influence and physical investments is proposed to be modified as follow
“To expand transmission capacity for better serving domestic and regional power demand
and to support regional power market integration and telecommunication development?.

3. Project Description
The SAPMP project consists of four main components: (i) Support to the SAPP Co-
ordination Center; (ii) Rehabilitation and reinforcement of the high voltage transmission
corridor from Inga to Kasumbalesa at the border with Zambia; (iii) Construction of a
double circuit 220 kV line by CEC from Luano substation in Zambia to link the DRC
transmission system at Kasumbalesa; and (iv) A feasibility and preliminary design study
of an interconnector between Zambia and Tanzania that would connect the SAPP to the
market that would be formed by interconnecting Tanzania, Uganda and Kenya.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
In the DRC, the transmission lines between the Inga hydropower station on the Congo
River and Kasumbalesa on the border with Zambia will be rehabilitated and transformers
and other equipment will be upgraded. In addition, transmission lines will be constructed
between Fungurume and Panda, Panda -Karavia and between Karavia and the border at
Kasumbalesa. This new construction in the DRC will take place in southern Katanga
province, southeast of Kolwezi.

 A number of urban centers in the province -Lubumbashi, Kolwezi, Likasi, and
Kasumbalesa, and several villages are located alongside the existing transmission lines.
The population living in the area depends on subsistence farming, hunting, and fishing,
although the copper mining industry was once the lifeblood of the economy.

 In Zambia, a transmission line will be constructed by the Copperbelt Energy
Corporation (CEC) and financed outside this project. The line, starting at the Zambia-
DRC border at Kasumbalesa and going 45 km to the Luano substation, involves clearing
a 45m width within the existing wayleave. The new line will be built alongside the
existing 220kV line for which CEC has wayleave rights.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN)
   Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is under Category A. Safeguards policies triggered include: (i) Environmental
Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); (ii) Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) and (iii) Involuntary
Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Safeguards instruments prepared to mitigate potential
adverse environmental or social impacts were: Environmental Impact Assessments
(EIAs), Resettlement Action Plan (RAPs) and Environmental and Social Management
Plans (ESMPs). An independent consultant prepared the instruments, which were cleared
by the client (SNEL) and the Bank, and disclosed in 2004, both in DRC and Zambia. In
2008, the two safeguards instruments were updated, cleared and re-disclosed, by the
client and by the Bank

 The major environmental issue in the DRC and Zambia is the management of natural
habitats and, for Zambia in particular, the management of critical natural habitats (two
forest reserves) (OP 4.04). In Zambia, the proposed power line traverses two National
Forest Reserves (Kamenza Forest reserve No. 19 and Luano Forest Reserve No. 12),
which are legally protected areas; classified as IUCN Category VI protected areas. The
two Forest Reserves are critical natural habitats. Conclusions from the ESIA, deemed
acceptable by the Bank, indicate that the conversion of the critical natural habitats for
power line construction is not significant, as it does not threaten the integrity of the
forests involved. The existing right-of-way will be used (land already converted) and the
damage to the forest (which appears to be degraded) is expected to be very limited in
extent.

  The major social impact will be limited land acquisition for power lines and associated
infrastructure (OP 4.12), mainly in DRC. The transmission lines generally have relatively
limited impacts--productive trees must be removed from the right-of-way (but farmers
can usually continue to grow crops under the lines) and some houses need to be relocated
a few meters beyond the reserve. However, transmission lines usually do not affect
people's livelihoods in a significant manner. Power substations, by contrast, require
reasonably sized parcels of land, and can displace residents and other users, particularly if
located near populated areas. For this reason, the sitting of power substations at
Fungurume and Karavia, and Luano, emphasizes minimization of impact, which means
the substations are located far enough from populated centers to significantly reduce the
extent of social impact.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
More efficient power distribution should induce local development, which would have
potential long-term environmental and social impacts, both beneficial and adverse. The
project monitoring program will track such changes so that major adverse long-term
impacts can be mitigated in a timely fashion. Long term environmental benefits will
result from the increased use of existing hydropower over non-renewable energy (fossil
fuels) in the SADC countries. Better exploitation of hydropower and increased efficiency
in the use of existing generation plants will reduce the airborne emissions produced by
coal-fired generation (NOx, S02, C02, and SPM), as well as local damage associated with
mining and transportation. Increased utilization of existing assets to defer the need for
new generation development makes sound commercial and environmental sense.

  An additional direct benefit to the population of the DRC will be that offered by the
integrated infrastructure inputs to communities along the route of the new transmission
lines built by the project. The concept is based on a possibility to use the shield wire of
the transmission line conductor for distribution of electricity along the transmission line
route. This technique overcomes the high cost of transformation that made such a scheme
impossible in the past. It has been used successfully in Ghana and in parts of Latin
America for the past 10 to 15 years.

 Experience has shown that communities along the route can develop and poverty can be
reduced if they are supplied with electricity, but they can benefit more if supplied
simultaneously with other complementary infrastructure and health services. Such inputs
will be modular and scalable. The consultations will seek to determine the day-to-day
needs of the community such as water supply and treatment, communication, electricity,
clinical care, etc. They will also identify the capability of the community to manage these
inputs and possibly to set up some of them, such as the communication, including
internet, as small businesses.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Given the advanced stage of project implementation, alternatives are not feasible. The
remaining alternative of not going ahead with the project is undesirable if power market
integration in Southern Africa is to be realized and also to support DRC economic
growth. Indeed, the project is necessary to allow the available energy generated from the
Inga hydropower stations to be transported to the existing markets in the Katanga
Province, including the mining and industrial complexes critical to the economy of DRC,
and the power exports into the Southern African Power Pool (SAPP).

  Furthermore, as already mentioned, the SAPMP and the PMEDE, for which the Board
approved an additional financing grant of US$283 million in June 2011, are
interdependent. Without the completion of the SAPMP, the benefits of the PMEDE
would not be fully realized, and vice-versa. Consequently, achievement of the objectives
of both projects (accounting together for a total IDA financing of over US$ 1 billion)
depends on the full rehabilitation of the long-distance high voltage transmission system
from Inga to the border with Zambia.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In the DRC, during the implementation of the original project, SNEL strengthened its
environmental management unit, Unité de Gestion Environmental unit (UGES). The staff
of the unit has been increased from three to 8 specialists, (5 environmentalists and 3
social scientists.) Staff has received short courses in environmental management and
hands on training from Bank’s safeguards specialists. UGES has progressively proved
itself within SNEL and is leading the work to ensure the implementation of safeguards
instruments prepared for the project: the environmental and social impact assessment
(ESIA) including an environmental and social management plan (ESMP), and the
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). In June 2003 SNEL prepared an environmental and
social impact assessment (ESIA) including an environmental and social management plan
(ESMP), and RAP for the population to be affected by the construction of the
transmission line from Fungurume to Kasumbalesa on the DRC side. Both instruments
were approved by the DRC ministry of environment and the Bank. In January 2009, the
2003 ESIA and its ESMP were revised and re-disclosed. Both instruments are being
implemented in conjunction with the civil works (which were delayed).

  While the implementation of the ESMPs moved forward with ease, shortcomings were
noted in the implementation of the RAP and a resettlement audit was triggered. The
findings of the audit suggest that: i) the original RAP from 2008 contained several
weaknesses; ii) the number of households adversely affected by the construction of the
transmission line was estimated at 435 in 2008 against 965 concluded by the audit in
2012; 864 households have been compensated; 60 eligible households remain to be
compensated and 101 households claimed to be eligible for compensation (for which the
project sponsor will follow up to determine if these latter households are eligible for
compensation); iii) compensation was negotiated following the principle of replacement
cost at market value.

 An Action Plan was completed by the auditor and endorsed by SNEL to address any
shortcomings in the process. Key actions include: i) hiring of an independent consultant
to carry out the remaining outstanding compensation; ii) the establishment of a
Compensation and Resettlement Committee; iii) strengthening UGES presence on the
ground; iv) ensuring that the institutional arrangements part of the RAP and a proper
grievance mechanism are in place. Those actions will be fully completed by October
2012. Close monitoring and progress on those actions will be monitored as part of the
Bank’s supervision.

 In Zambia, a similar safeguards process took place, but without the deficiencies
encountered in DRC. The Copperbelt Energy Corporation (CEC) took the direct
responsibility for the safeguards instruments. In June 2003 CEC prepared an
environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) including an environmental and
social management plan (ESMP), and RAP for the population to be affected by the
construction of the additional transmission line between Luano (Zambia) and
Kasumbalesa (DRC). Both instruments were approved by the Zambia Environmental
Council (ZEC) and in line with the Bank’s safeguard policies. In January 2009, the 2003
ESIA and its ESMP were revised and re-disclosed to take into account the results of the
public disclosures, and submitted to the ZEC for its review and approval. The Bank’s
review confirmed full compliance of the updated ESIA with the Bank’s safeguard
policies, and has been subsequently disclosed in the InfoShop in country in February
2009. The ESIA and the RAP assessed potential issues associated with the line routing.
The new line routing follows the right-of-way of the existing 220kV Zambia-DRC
interconnector and traverses two National Forest Reserves . The findings of the ESIA did
not identify any significant adverse impacts to the forests traversed; as the existing right-
of-way will be used (land already converted) and the damage to the forest (which appears
to be degraded) is expected to be very limited in extent.

 The ESMP of the ESIA has still to be fully implemented due to delays in the
implementation of the corresponding investment in DRC (civil works for the CEC line
have yet to start). The RAP, however, has been successfully implemented in line with the
requirements of the ESIA, the Bank and Zambia guidelines. CEC in Zambia completed
the implementation of the RAP in 2010, and submitted a completion report, to the
satisfaction of the Zambia Environmental Council (ZEC) and in line with the Bank
policies.

 Environmental Safeguard Issues: Each of the two agencies responsible for implementing
the respective environmental management plans, including specific environmental
safeguard issues related to natural habitat management, has implemented some of the
measures themselves and instructed contractors working on the transmission line to carry
out instructions as defined in the respective environmental assessments. Periodic reports
on the implementation of the ESMPs have been submitted to the World Bank.

  In addition, on the DRC side, to enhance the benefits of local communities, SAPMP
includes a component for community infrastructure development along the transmission
line from Fungurume to Kasumbalesa; seven selected villages are targeted. The objective
of the component was, and still is, to increase the social benefits of the project,
particularly, to electrify the selected villages. The combined effect of electrification and
community infrastructures, is, expected to trigger an induced development and transform
those villages to local growth pools.Criteria used for village selection included, proximity
to the transmission line (the closer to the line, the better), population size (the larger the
population, the better), and poor access to public services. Infrastructures to be built are:
schools, health clinics and centers, and water wells; in addition the provision of village
electrification.
  A review of the environmental social documentation of the community infrastructure
designs, ahead of the commencement of the civil works, revealed several shortcomings,
both in terms of design of the investments and environmental and social documentation.
Remedial actions were identified prior to commencement of civil works and they
included: i) consultations with provincial and local stakeholders; ii) the preparation of an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); iii) the preparation of a
Medical Waste Management Plan (MWMP); iv) an abbreviated social assessment
survey; v) the review of the designs of the community infrastructures and vi) the creation
of a local community infrastructure working group including: SNEL, relevant sector
representatives of the Katanga provincial administration, and the supervision consultant.
  The World Bank team is closely supervising this component. As part of the proposed
second additional financing, it is proposed to include financing for additional social
studies to better tailor the investments to the local context and a beneficiary assessment to
monitor and evaluate the outcomes of the component to ensure it fully achieves its
intended objectives.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The preparation of the SAPMP and additional financing has been participatory at several
levels. Key stakeholders, in addition to SNEL management and staff are the Ministry of
Energy, the Ministry of Environment, project affected persons (PAPs), people living in
the seven villages targeted by the community investment program and the European
Investment Bank (EIB).

 This group of stakeholders was extensively consulted in conjunction with the
preparation of the safeguards instruments, particularly, the ESIA, ESMF, and the RPF.
Safeguards documents prepared for the project were disclosed in country, and at the
Infoshop at the Bank. Copies and summaries of safeguards instruments were distributed
to relevant local government offices and made available to PAPs and local stakeholders
in project affected areas.

 Consultations with local communities will be continuously organized during the
implementation of all stages of the civil works, to minimize conflicts, enhance
cooperation, and improve social benefits and performance of the works contracts.

 Prior to appraisal, the Environmental Assessment, Environmental Management Plan,
and Resettlement Action Plan for each activity was disclosed publicly at the World Bank
InfoShop and made available at locales convenient to the affected population and NGOs,
with at least the executive summary translated into local language so that everyone may
be appraised of, and comment on, the proposed initiatives. Moreover, each RAP
contained provisions that stipulated the consultation of local populations throughout the
implementation.

  In addition, to enhance the benefits of local communities, SAPMP includes a component
for community infrastructure development along the transmission line from Fungurume
to Kasumbalesa; seven selected villages are targeted. The objective of the component
was, and still is, to increase the social benefits of the project, particularly, to electrify the
selected villages. The combined effect of electrification and community infrastructures,
is, expected to trigger an induced development and transform those villages to local
growth pools. Criteria used for village selection included, proximity to the transmission
line (the closer to the line, the better), population size (the larger the population, the
better), and poor access to public services. Infrastructures to be built are: schools, health
clinics and centers, and water wells; in addition the provision of village electrification.
  A review of the environmental social documentation of the community infrastructure
designs, ahead of the commencement of the civil works, revealed several shortcomings,
both in terms of design of the investments and environmental and social documentation.
Remedial actions were identified prior to commencement of civil works and they
included: i) consultations with provincial and local stakeholders; ii) the preparation of an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); iii) the preparation of a
Medical Waste Management Plan (MWMP); iv) an abbreviated social assessment
survey; v) the review of the designs of the community infrastructures and vi) the creation
of a local community infrastructure working group including: SNEL, relevant sector
representatives of the Katanga provincial administration, and the supervision consultant.

 The World Bank team is closely supervising this component. As part of the proposed
second additional financing, it is proposed to include financing for additional social
studies to better tailor the investments to the local context and a beneficiary assessment to
monitor and evaluate the outcomes of the component to ensure it fully achieves its
intended objectives.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  08/05/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              11/20/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/03/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  08/05/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              11/20/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/03/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
As per Additional Finance policy, the above documents will not be redisclosed.However,
the updated ISDS will be disclosed in Country and at Infoshop.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Manuel Berlengiero      04/10/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Paul Jonathan Martin    04/10/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr Antoine V. Lema         04/10/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   04/10/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Lucio Monari            04/10/2012
  Comments:
