                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/31/2011                                      Report No.: AC6338
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P106063                   Original Project Name: West Africa
                                               Regional Fisheries Program
Country: Africa                                Project ID: P124844
Project Name: West Africa Regional Fisheries Program APL A1 Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: John Virdin
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 9, 2011          Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTEN                           Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (96%);Public administration-
Agriculture, fishing and forestry (4%)
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (75%);Small and medium
enterprise support (18%);Environmental policies and institutions (3%);Trade facilitation
and market access (2%);Social safety nets (2%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              2.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
         Africa Catalytic Growth Fund (ACGF)                             10.00
                                                                         10.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                     Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The development objective of this 10-year APL is to sustainably increase the overall
wealth generated by the exploitation of the targeted marine fish resources in the
participating countries, and the proportion of that wealth captured by these countries.
The first phase of the Program would achieve this objective by: (i) strengthening the
countries capacity to sustainably govern and manage their fisheries, (ii) reducing illegal
fishing, and (iii) increasing the value and profitability generated by fish resources and the
proportion of that value captured by the countries.

3. Project Description
The Program will support the following components and sub-components.
 (A) Good Governance and Sustainable Management of the Fisheries. The objective of
this component is to build the capacity of Governments and stakeholders to implement a
shared approach that would ensure that the marine fish resources are used in a manner
that is environmentally sustainable, socially equitable and economically profitable. This
component will support the following sub-components: (1) Development of the Capacity,
Rules, Procedures and Practices for Good Governance of the Fisheries; (2) Introduction
of Fishing’ Rights; (3) Adjustment of Fishing Effort and Capacity to more Sustainable
Levels, Introduction of Alternative Livelihoods where Needed; and (4) Social Marketing
and Communication.

  (B) Reduction of Illegal Fishing. The objective of this component is to reduce the illegal
fishing activities threatening the sustainable management of the marine fish resources.
More specifically, this component improves the Monitoring, Control and Surveillance
(MCS) systems of participating countries and adapts them to the needs of fisheries
management, within the framework of a coordinated approach between the participating
countries. This component will support the following sub-components: (1) Enabling
Environment for Reducing Illegal Fishing; (2) Monitoring, Control and Surveillance
Systems; and (3) Strengthened Regional Collaboration for MCS.

 (C) Increasing the Contribution of the Marine Fish Resources to the Local Economies.
The objective of this component is to increase the benefits to West Africa from the
marine fish resources, by increasing the share of the value-added captured in the region.
This component will support the following sub-components: (1) Fish Landing Site
Clusters; (2) Fish Product Trade Infrastructure, Information and Systems and Regional
Minimum Integrated Trade Expansion Platform (MITEP).

 (D) Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation and Program Management. The objective
of this component is to support the countries to implement the Program in the context of
the CSRP Strategic Action Plan, and to monitor and evaluate results. This component
will support the following sub-components: (1) National Implementation and (2)
Regional Coordination.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
APL A1 of the West Africa Regional Fisheries Program includes Cape Verde, Liberia,
Senegal and Sierra Leone, in the first of a series of overlapping similar APLs, with each
APL involving different groupings of countries. Taken together, this series of APLs (i.e.
the West Africa Regional Fisheries Program) is expected to span 10 to 12 years, at the
end of which period it will have covered all seven member countries of the CSRP (Cape
Verde, the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mauritania, Senegal and Sierra Leone) plus
Liberia and Ghana. The West Africa Regional Fisheries Program has a shared objective
and approach, meaning that each APL in the series presented to the Board would have the
same framework, i.e. the same components and sub-components, but would be applied to
different countries (with some different specifics for each country). This overlapping
design addresses four key considerations: (i) encourage regional integration in the
management and development of the regions marine fish resources, (ii) allow countries to
leverage relatively small regular IDA allocations to access much larger regional funds
(including GEF grants) to boost their resources, (iii) offer long-term support (10 years) to
progressively implement actions aimed at strengthening collaborative efforts to manage
shared fisheries and fish resources, and (iv) give flexibility to groups of countries to
participate in the WARFP as they become eligible, rather than wait for the end of the first
phase of the initial APL to participate.

 In order to implement the shared objective and approach, each APL in the West Africa
Regional Fisheries Program would finance activities that would be implemented
nationally in each participating country, as well as some activities better implemented at
the regional level. Each APL would include investments for both physical goods, works
and services, as well as soft activities such as technical assistance. Most of the physical
investments would be made at the national level, while soft activities would be
implemented at both the national and regional level.

 The safeguards analysis therefore takes into account the current situation of
overexploitation of the resources and excess fishing effort by these communities in the
region as a whole, and in particular in the four targeted countries, and the possible social
ramifications of reducing fishing effort in certain cases to allow the fish stocks to rebuild.

 In terms of the additional financing, the safeguards analysis reviews the specific
investment in an additional fish landing site in Liberia, at the Mesurado pier in Monrovia,
and an additional fish landing site in Sierra Leone, at the Kissey dockyards in Freetown.
In addition, the site in Sierra Leone has settlers for which the appropriate actions are
being taken by the Government of Sierra Leone through the preparation and disclosure of
a Resettlement Action Plan.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Ellen J. Tynan (AFTEN)
   Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The key safeguard issue for the Program in APLl as well as subsequent APLs (and the
reason for which the involuntary resettlement safeguard applies), is the potential
restriction of traditional access to fish resources that may be introduced by the Program in
targeted fisheries. Currently, the region#s fish resources are utilized through a system of
open access that has allowed essentially more fishers and fishing pressure than the
resources can sustain. The Program addresses this by supporting the introduction of
fishing rights through a co-management process. It is from this transition away from open
access to more regulated fisheries, that the key risks are created. These risks are largely
social, because the implementation of rights-based systems implies that access to specific
areas or types of fisheries will be controlled or restricted.

  The Program-wide instrument to address this risk is the support for alternative
livelihoods to fishing in component 1.3, which will help fishers in overexploited fisheries
move out of the fishing sector to pursue alternative, potentially more profitable and
sustainable livelihoods. This instrument will address these risks wherever they may
emerge in local Program sites. From a safeguards standpoint, the Program will utilize a
resettlement process framework prepared during preparation, to ensure that decisions
concerning restriction of access to fish resources are decided on the basis of consensus of
stakeholders. The Progam will also utilize the Environmental Management Plan prepared
through the EA, in order to ensure that any potential impacts arising through the
construction of small-scale landing site infrastructure will be mitigated, in accordance
with the environmental assessment safeguard (OP/BP 4.01).

 In terms of the additional financing for a fish landing site at Mesurado Pier in Monrovia,
Liberia, and at Kissey dockyards in Freetown, Liberia, the Program has prepared an
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and Environmental Management
Plan (EMP), in accordance with OP/BP 4.01. While no significant social and
environmental impacts are projected, the assessment showed that a community residing
with no legal titles on the Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources property at Kissey,
would need to be physically resettled. In line with OP/BP 4.12, and according to the
regional Resettlement Policy Framework prepared for the Program, a Resettlement
Action Plan was prepared and agreed with the community, including identification of an
alternative site on Government land. The RAP includes grievance redress mechanisms
and institutional arrangements for implementing the RAP. It identifies the different types
of people affected and their entitlements which have been dully discussed with the
project affected people (PAPs) in Sierra Leone. The process for the alternative site
acquisition for the PAPs has started. These lands are Government lands identified as
convenient by the PAPs in the case of Sierra Leone. Lastly, the implementation of this
RAP will be financed from the IDA funds under the original credit.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Long-term impacts could include the reduction of fishers in targeted fisheries that are
currently overexploited, as a result of increased resource management and the
encouragement of alternative livelihoods to fishing. Environmentally, no permanent
indirect impacts are envisaged.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The program considered an approach based on greater command and control of the
fisheries resources by central Governments, focused on individual licenses as the key to
controlling access. However, this approach was rejected because of the prohibitive costs
in trying to control large and diffuse fisheries throughout the region from a few central
Government locations. Rather, the approach adopted aims to build on fishing
communities and user groups to enter into partnerships for the sustainable management of
the fish resources.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The program considered an approach based on greater command and control of the
fisheries resources by central Governments, focused on individual licenses as the key to
controlling access. However, this approach was rejected because of the prohibitive costs
in trying to control large and diffuse fisheries throughout the region from a few central
Government locations. Rather, the approach adopted aims to build on fishing
communities and user groups to enter into partnerships for the sustainable management of
the fish resources.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders in the project are the fishers and fishing communities in the four
countries, as well as local processors and persons involved in fish marketing. The Sub-
Regional Fisheries Commission conducted consultations on the draft EA and EMP on
behalf of the Governments in each of the four countries. The key issues raised were social
rather than environmental, and concentrated on the potential restrictions to access to the
fisheries as a result of the introduction of resource management measures. The Program
was designed to address these concerns, by the inclusion of a sub-component focused on
support for alternative livelihoods to fishing, where resource management measures
result in adverse impacts on fishing livelihoods. Consultations were also conducted at
Kissey, Sierra Leone, on the RAP, where the key issues raised centered around
confirmation of adequate compensation for impacts on livelihoods as well as relocation to
land with legal status. The RAP includes provisions for compensation and relocation,
and the costs will be funded by the IDA credit under the original project. Community
facilitators working in targeted communities will work together with the national
Program Implementation Unit in each country to ensure that compliance with safeguards
issues are monitored throughout the program.
 Original safeguards documents have been distributed on the following dates: Cape
Verde: July 3, 2009; Liberia: July 2, 2009; Senegal: July 6, 2009; and Sierra Leone: July
2, 2009. Safeguards documents for the additional financing have been distributed on the
following dates: ESIA and EMP in Liberia: April 18, 2011; ESIA and EMP in Sierra
Leone: April 16, 2011; and RAP in Sierra Leone: May 11, 2011.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 01/14/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             04/16/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/27/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 04/29/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/11/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/11/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
  credit/loan?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr John Virdin                               05/18/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Ellen J. Tynan                            05/18/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah                      05/18/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                     05/19/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough               05/18/2011
  Comments:
