                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 01/17/2012                                    Report No.: AC6505
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Africa                              Project ID: P116323
Project Name: Abidjan-Lagos Trade and Transport Facilitation Program - APL-2
Task Team Leader: Anca Cristina Dumitrescu
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 24,        Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: AFTTR                         Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                             Loan
Sector: Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (87%);Other domestic and
international trade (11%);Health (2%)
Theme: Regional integration (67%);Trade facilitation and market access (33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             90
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                           58.00
         Financing Gap                                                 0.00
                                                                      58.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the program is to reduce trade and transport barriers in the ports and on
the roads along the Abidjan-Lagos coastal corridor. The total cost of the program (APL 1
and APL2) is estimated at about US$405.5 million and it is expected to cover four
countries: Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Togo and Benin. APL1 was approved by the Board in
March, 2010 and is under implementation. The present ISDS covers the second phase
(APL2) of the program that includes the project in Cote d'Ivoire.

3. Project Description
The project objective will be achieved through the following components which are
consistent with the ones of APL1 countries:

 (A) Trade Facilitation (US$6.8 million, IDA financed) will include the sub-
components listed below:
  (a) Facilitation of collection and sharing of relevant information and data
(interconnectivity) between the customs agencies in Cote d’Ivoire and Ghana;
  (b) Acquisition of equipment, materials, communication tools and technical advisory
services required to: (i) implement a trade facilitation single window within the
Recipient’s port of Abidjan, aimed at facilitating the handling of all transactions at the
Recipient’s port in an efficient and speedy manner; (ii) and strengthen the capacity of the
Recipients’ port community and borde agencies to perform their duties and
responsibilities efficiently;
  (c) Development and carrying out of training programs and activities aimed at
enhancing the expertise and the abilities of relevant stakeholders involved in the
implementation of the Project to perform their responsibilities for the Project efficiently;
  (d) Streamlining of customs procedures, formulation of customs procedures manuals
and dissemination of the same among the relevant stakeholders; and
  (e) Strengthening of the operational capacity of the Recipient’s National Facilitation
Committee (NFC).

 (B) Improvement of the Road Corridor’s Infrastructure in Côte d’Ivoire (US$138.3
million, of which IDA US$81.3 million) will include the sub-components listed below:

 (a) Carrying out of technical design and detailed engineering studies for the road
improvement and rehabilitation works to be carried out under the project;
 (b) Improvement of: (a) about 130.3 km of road on the Moossou-Nzikro-Aboisso-
Noé section along the corridor , including widening of the Noé Bridge; and (b)
supervision of the related civil works;
 (c) Construction of two rest stop areas at Noé and Aboisso;
 (d) Rehabilitation of about 8.9 km access roads to the freight terminal of Vridi;
 (e) Study on traffic management on the access roads to the Port of Abidjan; and
 (f)   Implementation of social and environmental mitigation measures required for the
civil works.

 (C) Project Management and Coordination (US$2.9 million, of which IDA US$1.9
million) will include provision of technical advisory services, training and logistical
support (including office equipment, materials, supplies and vehicles) required to sustain
management and coordination of implementation activities including monitoring and
evaluation of progress achieved in the execution of the project.

 (D) HIV/AIDS Programs and Corridor Performance Monitoring (financed under
APL1 at a cost of US$6 million) will include the sub-components listed below:

 (a) Formulation and execution of programs of activities aimed at reducing the impact
of HIV/AIDS and preventing the spread of HIV infection among communities
established and/or operating along the portion of the corridor located within the
Recipient’s territory; and
 (b) (i) Collection and treatment of data required to measure and monitor performance
in the areas of trade, transport and HIV/AIDS along the Corridor; and (ii) wide
dissemination of such data across the Recipients territories and beyond.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project locations consist of the road section between Grand-Bassam and Noe (54
km), the bridge at Noe border with Ghana, and the freight terminal and access to Vridi
(Abidjan). In addition the project will finance the construction of the rest stops. The
focus of the roads civil works will be to rehabilitate the above road section along the
corridor.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz (AFTCS)
   Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project (under APL2) will cover Côte d’Ivoire. Following preliminary field
assessments, revealed the planned civil works will (i) improve and rehabilitate the Grand
Bassam-Aboisso-Noe road corridor; (ii) widen the Noe bridge; (iii) construct rest stops at
Noe and Aboisso; and (iv) rehabilitate access roads and a freight terminal at
Abidjan/Vridi. It is anticipated that the civil works will not have significant negative
environmental and social impacts.

 The safeguards policies triggered are OP4.01 (environmental assessment), OP4.11
(physical cultural resources), and OP4.12 (involuntary resettlement) due to environmental
and social impacts of the planned road construction operations, including the potential
spread of HIV/AIDS. The Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) was triggered, given
the possibility that there may be cultural assets and/or sites in the project area. This is
addressed in the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), per the
requirements of OP 4.01.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Road rehabilitation/improvements, in general, have a positive overall impact, particularly
on the natural resources, social and economic environments. The potential environmental
and social impacts of sub-projects in the proposed project were initially identified to
possibly include: soil erosion, noise and dust presumed to induce adverse physical
environmental impacts during road construction works, possible destruction of vegetation
(grass, trees); soil destruction (loss of arable lands, erosion, pollution by hydrocarbons,
lubricants, organic wastes and other cut wastes); on water (increase in water sediments;
pollution with the cleaning of machineries in water points and erosion of wastes at cut
areas); construction milieu ( sound, dust, perturbation of traffic, uncontrolled wasting );
and health (risks for accidents, cloud of dust). These impacts are well addressed in the
mitigation measures in the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), which
is part of the ESIA. These works focus mainly on the existing road alignments, with no
realignment or incursions into the wider right of way. There will be no alterations to the
road geometry.

 The project involves land acquisition, and involuntary resettlement and restriction of
access to resources or livelihoods due to construction of civil works for the project that
would include some acquisition of land and relocation. To this end, a Resettlement
Action Plan (RAP) for the highway section and the freight terminal in Cote d’Ivoire has
also been prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed in-country on October 5, 2011and at
the Bank’s InfoShop on November 1, 2011.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), including a detailed and well
costed Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and a RAP for the highway
section and the freight terminal in Abidjan - Côte D’Ivoire have been developed. The
ESMP specifies mitigation measures for various potential adverse impacts in the pre-
construction, construction and operation phases of the project. Funds for implementing
the ESMP are also included in the project cost estimates. The disclosed RAP contains
details about compensation and resettlement assistance measures, as well as provisions
for continuing consultations and grievance redress mechanisms.

 The capacity of the borrower to address safeguard issues is considered adequate.
Safeguards are well mainstreamed into the project implementation. All contracts and
bidding documents will have the environmental and social management clauses inserted.
The essence of this is to enable contractors to follow up on environmental and social due
diligence during civil works. The institutional arrangements will see the AGEROUTE,
the Enterprises and supervising consultants having environment and social specialists in
their team following up on safeguards issues. The Project Coordination Unit will also
recruit a part time environmental and social consultant that will liaise with AGEROUTE,
the enterprises, the supervising consultants and ANDE to ensure that safeguards
implementation of the project is satisfactory. Additionally, during implementation, the
Bank will provide, as needed, some guidance including: (i) strengthening the capacity of
the various stakeholder groups in environmental and social assessment and monitoring
and reporting procedures, through training and sensitization programs; (ii) ensuring that
proposed mitigations measures are effectively implemented; and (iii) ensuring that local
communities are involved and consulted during the application of the various mitigation
measures.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
All key stakeholders (government, agencies and ministries, non-governmental
organizations, private sector, communities, development partners, etc.) have and will be
consulted regularly. During the preparation of the safeguards instruments, public
consultations including focus group discussions with local governments and local
communities were held in Bonoua, Grand Bassam, and Aboisso. Meetings held were
documented in the ESIA and the RAP with photographs and minutes of meetings.

 The RAP was prepared and disclosed in-country on October 5, 2011 and at the Bank’s
Infoshop on November 1, 2011. The safeguards instruments address site specific adverse
impacts of the project and enhance its social benefits. The number of Project Affected
Persons (PAPs) is 695 and the cost of implementing the RAP is about US$3.3 million, to
be financed by the government. Adequate consultations, including focus group
discussions, individual consultations, and public forums were carried out by the clients
during the preparation of the RAP.

  Likewise, the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) study on the
planned civil works (road and bridge improvement/rehabilitation, rehabilitation of Vridi
trucks parking area) in Côte d’Ivoire has been prepared, reviewed, approved a disclosed
both in-country (October 5, 2011) and at the Bank’s InfoShop on November 1, 2011.

  The project will continue the dialogue with key stakeholders and will rely on the
rigorous and satisfactory implementation of ESIA and RAP to ensure that the appropriate
mitigation measures are taken into account in accordance with the Cote D’Ivoire and the
Bank's safeguards policies, and in active consultation with key stakeholders. This
participatory approach will be carried on throughout implementation, maintenance,
supervision and evaluation of the project activities.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?          Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                          10/05/2011
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                      10/05/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              11/01/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/05/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/05/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              11/01/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?           Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)       Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the       Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?         Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential       Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process           Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector     Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's    Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Anca Cristina Dumitrescu                  01/11/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba                    01/12/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz                  01/12/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                     01/13/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Supee Teravaninthorn                      01/13/2012
  Comments:
