                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 02/01/2012                                   Report No.: AC6574
1. Basic Project Data
Country: South Sudan                         Project ID: P127187
Project Name: South Sudan Health Rapid Results Project
Task Team Leader: Mohamed Ali Kamil
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 23,       Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: AFTHE                         Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery
                                             Loan
Sector: Health (100%)
Theme: Child health (25%);Health system performance (25%);Population and
reproductive health (25%);Other communicable diseases (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
         Special Financing                                             0.00
         South Sudan Transition Trust Fund                           28.00
                                                                     28.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [X]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objectives (PDOs) are (i) to improve service delivery of high
impact PHC services in Upper Nile and Jonglei states; and (ii) to strengthen coordination,
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) capacities of the MOH.

3. Project Description
Summary of Project Components: The Project will build on work carried out by the
MOH under the MDTF-supported supported Umbrella Program for Health System
Development Project (UPHSD) Phase II. The Project is organized around two
components as follows:
 Component 1: Delivery of high impact PHC services (US$ 23 million):
 The MOH will enter into a performance-based contract with a Coordination and Service
Delivery Organization (CSDO) to improve the delivery, throughout their assigned state,
of high impact PHC services, including maternal and child health services such as
vaccination, prenatal care, skilled birth attendance etc. The terms of reference of the
CSDOs will involve: (i) direct service provision by the CSDO using its own staff and
government civil servants in existing health facilities and other facilities that it will take
over from exiting NGOs; (ii) coordinating the work of existing NGOs and other
development partners; (iii) strengthening the management capacity of County Health
Departments (CHDs) and the State Ministry of Health (SMOH); and (iv) introducing
innovations that address some of the challenges facing the health care system.

 CSDOs will have sufficient managerial autonomy so they can flexibly respond to local
conditions. It will monitor and supervise service delivery, mobilize human resources,
procure and distribute pharmaceuticals and other inputs, and help to determine the need
for additional health facilities. It will also play an overall coordination function to ensure
that there are no gaps in service delivery and that duplication of effort is minimized. The
CSDO will be held accountable for improving the quantity and quality of PHC services
based on specific set of measurable indicators. It can earn a performance bonus (or face
sanctions) based on the results achieved. The MOH will carry out careful monitoring and
evaluation, including third party verification to track the implementation progress.

 The CSDO will have to strengthen outreach activities, particularly during the dry
season. Such “dry season campaigns? are aimed improving the coverage of basic services
such as immunization. The CSDO will also be responsible for capacity development of
the SMOH and CHDs around: (i) systematic supervision; (ii) coordination of the various
service providers in the states; and (iii) improved monitoring of health service delivery.

 The CSDO will also implement a pilot of performance-based financing (PBF) in a few
counties. PBF is an approach in which individual health facilities are provided funds
based on the quantity and quality of services they produce as independently verified. The
facility management committee determines how the funds will be used and up to 50% can
be used as performance bonus for health workers.

 Component 2: Capacity development of MOH at the national level (US$ 5 million)

  Subcomponent 1: The project will support the strengthening of the MOH’s capacity to
plan, manage, and monitor grants and contracts. This is intended NOT to be limited to
Bank-financed contracts but also to include oversight of grants and contracts financed by
the Government and other DPs. The grant and contract management function will be
housed in the Directorate of Planning and Coordination at the MOH which will be
strengthened by: (i) competitively recruiting qualified South Sudanese staff to work with
the MOH (“brain gain?); (ii) providing the logistical and office support for the unit; and
(iii) strengthening the technical ski of the unit through training and south-south visits.
  Subcomponent 2- The Project will ensure that there is a steady stream of independent
and credible data on health sector performance. This will involve building on recent
experience and financing a health facility survey (HFS) and a household survey using lot
quality assurance sampling (LQAS) every year. These surveys will be nation-wide in
scope but provide estimates that are robust at state level. The MOH is in the process of
recruiting an M&E firm that will conduct the HFS and the LQAS surveys. The selected
firm will also be responsible for the counter verification of data coming from the CSDO,
SMOH, and CHDs. The firm will also build the capacity of the MOH’s Department of
Planning in M&E so that they can effectively analyze the data to track the progress made
towards health sector targets. The Department of Planning will also competitively recruit
local consultants to strengthen their human resources.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The component 1 of the project which focuses on the delivery of Basic Health Services
will be implemented in Jonglei and Upper Nile States. The component 2 of the project
which aims to support the strengthening the coordination and monitoring functions of the
MOH will be implemented across the 10 states of the country.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Yasmin Tayyab (AFTCS)
   Mr Bedilu Amare Reta (AFTEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The new Project is similar to phase II of the Umbrella Program for Health System
Development (UPHSD) and will comprises two components i) the delivery of high
impact PHC services through health facilities as well as extensive outreach activities (i.e.,
dry season campaigns); and (ii) strengthen the institutional and implementation capacity
of the MOH with a focus on coordination, contract management, monitoring and
evaluation and environmental, health and safety management. The implementation may
result in some environmental, health and safety impacts.

 This project triggers World Bank Safeguard Policy OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental
Assessment and is assigned an Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
classification. Environmental issues pertaining to safe water supply, sanitation and waste
disposal are expected to arise as minor renovation of existing health facilities and health
care activities continue. Howver, the main environmental issues pertian to health care
waste management, in view of the risks associated with the handling and disposal of
medical waste.

  A draft Environmental and social screening and assessment framework (ESSAF) has
been prepared for this operation and is included as Annex 9 to the project paper.
Additional material on potential impacts and mitigation measures will be include, as
necessary, during project implementation and appropriate safeguards documents prepared
(e.g. Environmental and Social Management Plans). The ESSAF explains the OP
triggered, safeguard screening and mitigation based on the possible types of sub-projects,
responsibilities for safeguards screening and mitigation, capacity-building and
monitoring of safeguards framework implementation, as well as details on public
consultation and disclosure. The draft ESSAF will also adopt the measures recommended
by the National Medical Waste Management Plan when that plan is finalized and the
ESSAF will be finalized within 3 months after effectiveness of the project.


 The Government of Republic of South Sudan is preparing a National Medical Waste
Management Plan which focuses on existing waste generation as well as segregation,
storage, collection, transport, and final disposal practices; technologies for waste
disposal; public awareness programs; and relevant national legislation. The MoH has
contracted the consulting firm to develop the Plan under Phase two UPHSD project. This
Plan will be used as a guideline in tandem with the ESSAF to help the Borrower avoid
and/or minimize any potential adverse impacts that may be generated due to the
implementation of the project, in particular the lack of proper hygiene and sanitation
facilities and mismanagement of medical waste. The adverse impacts will be addressed
through the already prepared draft Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment
Framework that will be refined and updated within 3 months after effectiveness of the
project and through adoption of the National Medical Waste Management Plan that is
under preparation.

 Social Issues: The proposed project will only do minor rehabilitation of existing health
facilities in all project areas and no new construction.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No long term risks or impacts are anticipated

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
No any project alternatives are required for this project

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
This project triggers World Bank Safeguard Policy OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental
Assessment and to offset the potential adverser impacts of the emergency project, the
Borrower will undertake the following actions: i) the MoH will refine the project ESSAF
(annex 9 of EPP) within 3 months after effectiveness and use it to guide management of
the environmental, social, health and safety issues that may arise during implementation;
ii) to mitigate the impacts that maybe generated due to the distribution and use of medical
supplies and to implement these activities in an environmentally sound manner, the
project will adopt the measures and recommendations presented in the forthcoming South
Sudan National Medical Waste Management Plan which is being finalized under phase
two of the UPHSD project and iii) when needs arise, the client will conduct an
environmental impact assessment for specific activities and develop appropriate ESMPs
when required.

  The Environmental Health Directorate (EHD) under the MoH is a safeguard
implementing body and has a very limited capacity to address environmental and social
issues. Therefore, to fill the gap under the capacity development component, the project
will strengthen the established Environmental Health Directorate (EHD) responsible for
the environmental and health issues. This Directorate will receive technical support
from the project that will enable it to update and implement the project ESSAF. This
capacity building for the Directorate will help the team to identify potential impacts,
monitor application of the recommended Environmental and Social mitigation measures
and carry out all health service activities in an environmentally sound manner.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
key stakeholders including the MOH, SMOHs, CHDs, health care workers and local
communities in target states, international/national NGOs/FBOs and DPs.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 04/30/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             04/30/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/30/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
The project is an emergency project and documents both the ESSAF and National
Medical Waste Management Plan will both be disclosed in country and at the InfoShop
no later than three months after effectiveness.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          N/A
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Mohamed Ali Kamil       10/20/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Bedilu Amare Reta       10/20/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Yasmin Tayyab           10/20/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms Cary Anne Cadman        11/16/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   11/22/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Jean J. De St Antoine   11/16/2011
  Comments:
