                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/25/2011                                  Report No.: AC6274
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Africa                              Project ID: P122402
Project Name: West Africa Regional Communications Infrastructure Project - APL-1B
Task Team Leader: Boutheina Guermazi
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 5, 2011        Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2011
Managing Unit: TWICT                         Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                             Loan
Sector: Telecommunications (50%);General information and communications sector
(50%)
Theme: Regional integration (40%);Infrastructure services for private sector
development (40%);Regulation and competition policy (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             92.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
                                                                         0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]    No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The program development objective for WARCIP 1-B is to contribute to increasing the
geographical reach of broadband networks and reducing costs of communications
services in The Gambia, Guinea and in Burkina Faso.

3. Project Description
Component 1: Supporting Connectivity
 The connectivity component will focus on (i) support to provide access to The Gambia
and Guinea to international submarine cable connectivity via coastal landing stations to
the Africa Coast to Europe (ACE) submarine cable, and (ii) support Burkina Faso to have
access to submarine capacity through virtual landing point (VLP). In addition to
international connectivity, this component will include financing additional links to
national infrastructure and landing points, and the establishment of national Internet
Exchange Points (IXPs).

 Component 2 - Creating an enabling environment for connectivity: This component will
focus on (i) the transaction design and operating model for ownership and management
of international, regional and national infrastructure, (ii) related open access principles to
create an enabling environment for improved connectivity and (iii) strengthening of
policymaking and regulatory functions in the three countries.

 Component 3: Project Implementation: This activity will provide support needed to
strengthen the capacity of the Governments to implement the connectivity project,
including setting up and strengthening very small Project Implementation Units (PIUs)
which will be mainstreamed into the respective Executing Agencies. The core PIUs
consist of a project coordinator, procurement specialist, finance specialist, accountant and
an office assistant as required. Technical specialists may also be hired if required for
implementation of the project. The component will also cover office equipment,
incremental operating costs, audits and communications. The component will also cover
M&E, environmental and social studies and related settlements, their implementation
and/or the monitoring of their implementation.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Burkina Faso, The Gambia, and Guinea

 Both Guinea and the Gambia will be part of the ACE submarine cable. The cable is
17,000 Km connecting 23 countries with a proposed landing station in Banjul and
Conakry.

 For Burkina Faso there will the 4 connectivity components of the project that will be
contracted out to different suppliers:
 (i)   supply of international bandwidth capacity;
 (ii) establishment of VLP;
 (iii) build out of the missing connectivity links from VLP to border; and
 (iv) equipment and installation of high speed government virtual private network.

 The project is a Category B

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Yves Andre Prevost (AFTEN)
   Mr Harvey D. Van Veldhuizen (MIGEP)
   Ms Lucienne M. M’Baipor (AFTCS)
   Mr Bienvenu Rajaonson (AFTEN)
   Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN)
   Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
In the cases of Guinea and the Gambia

  No major negative impact of the ACE cable is expected: The cable system is likely to
have a submerged or "wet plant" part, and a "dry plant" part which interfaces at proposed
Landing Stations. The Landing Station is the location where a submarine or other
underwater cable makes landfall. The landing (or termination) station can also be the
point at which the submarine cable connects into the land-based infrastructure or
network. Sections of the cable (particularly both wet and dry plants of each country#s
lateral connection to the main cable) lie within the territorial waters of the landing
partieswhile remaining sections lie in international waters, normally in deep seas. Deep
ocean fiber optic cables are no larger than 17-21 mm diameter - about the size of a
domestic garden hose and are laid mainly upon the surface of the ocean floor. The
general experience is that the section of the cable that lies in the deep sea has minimal
impact on marine mammals and fish. Throughout the entire length of the deep sea
submarine cable and all lateral connections to shore, a detailed Cable Route Survey will
be conducted to avoid laying the cable on sensitive or high risk benthic features such as
deep water coral gardens and rocky or coral reefs.

  As the cable gets closer to the shores in water depths shallower than 1,500m, the cable#s
diameter may increase to about 40-50 mm due to the need to add protective wire
armouring. The small environmental disturbances caused by laying connecting cable
from the shore in The Gambia and Guinea to a deep sea submarine fiber optic cable are
not expected to have any perceptible effect on the quality of the coastal waters of the
Atlantic Ocean or on marine species or habitat. For the cable and associated equipment
onshore, there may be some temporary, low to moderate environmental and social
impacts including localized impacts to nearshore marine life and local fishermen access.

 In the case of Guinea where the project is prepared under OP 8.0, the Government
prepared an Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF).
During project implementation an Environmental and Social Impacts Assessment
(ESIA)/Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and/or Resettlement Action
Plan (RAP) will prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed. The results of the ESSAF
confirm that environmental and social impacts are minimal. The landing station will be
built on Government owned property and will not cause any permanent or temporary
structure to be demolished. It will only create temporary inconveniences during the
construction phase and limited economic disadvantages to business concerns. The
landing station is approximately 700 meters from the beach man hole at the beach.

  In the Case of The Gambia, the site selected for cable landing or Terminal Station is at
Brusubi Phase III Institutional Area and currently lies fallow. It is approximately 3km
from the Beach Man hole at the beach. The land currently has no permanent structures
and borders the Brufut-Sukuta Coastal road. The site is about 2,800m2 (40m x 70m) and
has the following coordinates N13o24.785# and W16o43.126#. The major
facilities/infrastructure to be installed at the beach and the Brusubi sites include the
Landing Station building, Zero manhole, BMH, connections conduits and ducts,
generators, fuel tanks, transformer, switch board and cable drums. The cable station is
expected to take about 45m x 25m land space with approximately half of this space for
equipment and the balance for maintenance, training, and office spaces.

 The Gambia has prepared and disclosed an Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) and Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (consistent
with national laws, any applicable treaty concerning international waters, and a
Resettlement and Rehabilitation Plan (RRP) for the lateral cables and any associated
equipment that will be laid from the junction with the main cable through territorial
waters and onto the national shores, and also for the fiber on transmission lines, as
required. The reports clearly show that the cable system is not expected to have a large
environmental nor social impact. The project will affect 27 persons and will not cause
any permanent or temporary structure to be demolished. It will only create temporary
inconveniences during the construction phase and limited economic disadvantages to
business concerns. There is no land acquisition issue as the site for the Landing Station is
vacant state property which has been allocated to the project for the purpose.


 In the case of Burkina

 The terrestrial connectivity is expected to follow the major roads already in place
between Ouagadougou and neighboring countries. As the precise route and civil works
are still to be determined, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared, consulted upon and
disclosed before appraisal in Burkina Faso. The environmental and social impact of
laying the additional fiber optic cable along these routes will be very minimal, as the
cable is expected to follow Rights of Way for existing roads and/or transmission lines.
Involuntary resettlement is also expected to be minimal, though temporary displacement
in urban areas may involve larger numbers of Project-affected People (PAPs). In addition
to OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement), the
Project triggers OP 4.04 (Natural Habitats) and OP 4.11 (Cultural Heritage). The ESMF
addresses both impacts and proposed mitigation measures for critical natural habitats and
physical cultural resources, as the cable is being laid along a road that goes through a
national park and other areas, and there is a possibility that the cable may be laid in areas
where cultural assets exist. An ESMP and/or RAP will be prepared as and when
necessary during project implementation. It should be noted that the project connection at
the border with Ghana will not lead to social conflicts because the borders between the
two countries have been clearly delineated and materialized.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
There are no perceived long term impacts. An indirect impact may be lack of access
during the construction time for tourism or local fishermen, and potential disruption in
some shipping activities during the marine survey and cable construction.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
n/a

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The implementing units in the three countries are committed to ensuring that
environmentally conscious practices are carried out during construction and operation of
the submarine and landing stations in Guinea and The Gambia and the VLP in Burkina
Faso. Measures that will be taken during implementation include: (a)incorporating
environmental considerations into its planning, management and operational activities;
(b) having an Environmental and Safety Coordinator/consultant to be directly responsible
for environmental and safety issues during construction and operation; (c) allocating and
maintain resources for the effective implementation of the ESIA/ ESMP; and, d)
including relevant safeguard mitigation measures in the tender documents for the
connectivity components.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders for consultation will include current inhabitants (where applicable) of
landing sites, the Environmental Protection Agencies of the client countries, businesses
and civil society. Issues raised in the consultations to date have focused on local
involvement in the environmental and social management of the project and ensuring
there is adequate capacity to supervise safeguards implementation.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           No
 Date of receipt by the Bank                          05/11/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/13/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/12/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/11/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/13/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/13/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   No
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             No
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           No
adverse impacts on cultural property?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Boutheina Guermazi                        05/25/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Yves Andre Prevost                        05/25/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Lucienne M. M’Baipor                      05/25/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Harvey D. Van Veldhuizen                  05/25/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):   Mr Bienvenu Rajaonson                        05/25/2011
                                    Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah                      05/25/2011
                                    Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni                        05/25/2011

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Philippe Dongier                          05/25/2011
  Comments:
