                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/27/2011                                   Report No.: AC6263
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Africa                                Project ID: P125815
Project Name: Child Trust Fund Project under the TerrAfrica Leveraging Fund
Task Team Leader: Stephen Danyo
Estimated Appraisal Date:                      Estimated Board Date: October 31, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTEN                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme: Land administration and management (50%);Environmental policies and
institutions (20%);Climate change (20%);Water resource management (10%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                        0.00
         Trust Funds                                                     1.50
                                                                         1.50
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of this child trust fund project is to strengthen capacity at NEPAD Planning
and Coordinating Agency (NPCA) to support country demand for sustainable land and
water management.

 This is expected to contribute to the overall objectives of NPCAs TerrAfrica program,
and its Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program - reinforcing
performance of existing and future projects across sectors and countries to tackle land
degradation, climate change and natural resource overreach.

3. Project Description
The proposed project will contribute to above objective by strengthening capacity at
NPCA to maintain and strengthen the regional coalition on sustainable land management,
manage knowledge and information, carry out communications and outreach, monitor
progress, and facilitate the development of participating countries sustainable land
management investment frameworks. The Project has three components with a total
investment cost of $1.5 million to be financed by the TerrAfrica Leveraging Fund.
 Component 1. Support for NPCA#s TerrAfrica Secretariat and regional coalition
building (US$600,000 CTF support). The objective of this component is to support
NPCA to reinforce the regional coalition that aligns assistance on SLM, climate, and
NRM related issues to countries across sectors. A key part of NPCA#s mandate is
communications that reinforces policy advocacy and technical outreach. The component
outcome is: TerrAfrica Secretariat in place and functioning at NPCA.

 Component 2. Support for mutual learning among countries (US$600,000 CTF
support). The objective of this component is to support NPCA in its mandate to meet
country demand for knowledge and tools to improve land management and climate
resilience while maintaining natural capital. The component outcome is: Knowledge
management and M&E tools and support services on natural resources and climate
change in place and functioning at NPCA.

 Component 3. Support for countries on SLM investment planning (US$300,000 CTF
support). The component objective is to strengthen NPCAs role in meeting country
demand for expertise and tools to develop and implement SLM work programs and
national SLM investment frameworks. The component outcome is: Increased quality of
SLM planning at country level.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Child Trust Fund Project will fund activities to be carried out at NPCA headquarters
at Midrand, South Africa, and at regional and national levels region-wide. No on-the-
ground investments are included in the grant.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Caroline Mary Sage (AFTCS)
   Mr Taoufiq Bennouna (AFTEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                            Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                          X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                   X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                              X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                               X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                        X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                  X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                            X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                       X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The activities to be funded by the CTF are limited to the mandate and functional
responsibilities of the recipient, NPCA, in supporting the TerrAfrica processes as
described in the PID. The CTF will therefore not fund any civil works whatsoever, either
at NPCA or in member countries, or their engineering design (detailed or even schematic)
or even their feasibility study. In addition, the knowledge and information services to be
provided by NPCA are essentially to promote environmental sustainability among sectors
and themes including agriculture, forest, and water resources. Moreover, NPCA through
this project may provide consultant services to participating countries to strengthen their
environmental and natural resource planning and project management systems.
Participating countries will therefore be in a better position to improve their respective
systems. In conclusion, there will therefore be no adverse environmental and social
impacts associated with this CTF; indirect environmental and social impacts of the grant
should be overwhelmingly positive.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
N/A

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The recipient does not have experience in using and applying Bank safeguard policies
given the nature of their work to date. However, this is not a concern as, as previously
mentioned, this project will not finance directly or indirectly, any civil works,
engineering designs (either detailed or schematic) or feasibility studies for such works.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
 Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
This small child trust fund project is only funding capacity building work of a regional
institution with no works on the ground in any country.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name              Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Stephen Danyo                 09/26/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Taoufiq Bennouna              04/21/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Caroline Mary Sage            04/21/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough   09/26/2011
  Comments:
