                                                                                                     80176

                         ffiTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                  APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:
Date prepared: 06/11/2013
Date updated: 07/22/2013

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data

Country: Africa                                   Project ID: P l30640
Project Name: CAADP MDTF: SADC Secretariat Child Trust Fund
Task Team Leader: Melissa Brown
Estimated Appraisal Date: 5/31/2013               Estimated AFCRI Approval: 8115/2013
Managing Unit: AFT A2                             Lending Instrument: Small Grant
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (20%); Crops (20%); Animal production (20%);
Forestry (20%); General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%)
Theme: Rural .markets (20%); Climate change (20%); Environmental policies and institutions
(20%); Ruralpolicies and institutions (20%); Analysis of economic growth (20%)
SPF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BoiTower                                                       0.00
         CAADP Multi Donor Trust Fund                                   3.90
         Financing GaQ                                                  0.00
                                                                        3.90
Environmental Category: C
Is this a transferred project                     Yes [X]                No []
Simplified Processing                             Simple [X]             Repeater ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises       Yes []      No [X]
and Emergencies)


2. Project Objectives:

In line with the project development objective (PDO) of CAADP MDTF, the proposed PDO for
the SADC CAADP CTF is an improved enabling environment for African agricultural programs
and policies at national and regional level. An improved enabling environment is defined as
systems, structures and institutions that are inclusive; evidence based; scaled up and more
effective in leveraging technical, financial and political support; and more robust in identifYing
and delivering on regional integration priorities. The objective will be achieved by building the
SADC-FANR' s capacity to provide support forT A, capacity building, analytical work,
consultation, and policy dialogue through CAADP-related processes at both national and
regional level.
 . Project Description:

   A. Proj ect Components

  he CTF will be implemented over a two and half year period (2013-2015) and will finance two
 fmponents : (i) Key SADC-FANR program activities in suppmt of CAADP; and (ii) Support to
   stitutional capacity building ofSADC-FANR. The first component will finance SADC-FANR
[ ctivities (TA, capacity building, policy analysis and dialogue, regional planning and
  rogramming) that will enable the Secretariat to advance the CAADP agenda at the country and
 egionallevel. The second cornponent.will support institutional capacity building in the areas of
  uman resources and training to enable SADC-FANR to carry out its functions.

 omponent 1: Key SADC -FANR program activities in support of CAADP (US$2. 7 Million)

 upport for CAADP Country P r ocesses: The CTF will enable SADC-FANR to scale up its
 upport to the planning, policy analysis and policy harmonization, development and monjtoring
 f national programs for agricultural reforms and investment. As part of its CAADP
  ainstreaming efforts, SADC-FANR will increase its support to Member States both at the pre-
 nd post-Compact stages and provide leadership in coordinating and facilitating support for the
 ational CAADP implementation processes in line with its role as a REC. Specific activities will
 e undertaken in the following areas:

echnical assistance and capacity building. Within the CAADP framework, RECs play an
mportant role in mobilizing political and technical commitment to engage in CAADP processes.
he CTF will assist SADC-FANR to provide financial and technical support for countries to
ngage in various aspects ofthe national CAADP process. While most of this support will be
rovided to SADC-only countries, it may include cmmtries that are both COMESA and SADC
 embers. SADC will closely consult with COMES A to avoid any duplication of support during
mplementation of the CTF and the CAADP Partnership Platform Business Meeting and joirit
 UC/NPCA and REC planlling meeting will be used to facilitate coordination.

~akeholder mobilization and consultation for strategic planning and policy dialogue. SADC-
~ANR, together with AUC/NPCA, will engage with the appropriate government authorities to
upport consultations around planning, programming and policy dialogue. These activities will
lso include providmg support to wider stakeholder consultations around CAADP-related issues
 ·th parliamentarians, government depattments and agencies, the private sector, including
armer organizations, and the civil society.

 rovision ofTA and technical back<>topping. CTF resources will allow SADC to provide T A
ither by utilizing its own in-house and SADC-wide expettise, or by enlisting AUC/NPCA,
echnical institutions or external experts. T A will be provided to support Member States
  plement different phases of the CAADP process including strategic planning, program
ormulation and analytical work. Such support will be provided on a demand driven basis.
 esources will allow SADC-FANR to mobilize think-tanks and specialized institutions, such as
he Regional Strategic Analysis and Knowledge Support Systems (ReSAKSS), AU's technical
gencies, CGIAR centers, FAO, universities, etc., as appropriate to undertake diagnostic and
analytical studies, and provide necessary technical backstopping on emerging issues such as foo
safety, nutrition, market access and trade, environment and natural resource management issues.

Support to capacity building. SADC-FANR will support country teams in building capacity in
strategic planning, partnership management, communications, and technical analysis in themati
areas. Capacity building for technical thematic areas is expected to take place in partnership wi
other technical institutions with SADC-FANR providing some co-financing and convening
resources. ln supporting management of the CAADP process at national level, SADC-FANR
will ensure that country teams are aware of and have access to useful CAADP-related tools and
resource products such as Pillar Framework doctm1ents, analytical and best practice documents
from AUC/NPCA, RECs and other knowledge institutions. Recognizing that some Member
States, which are also members of COMES A, have advanced in their CAADP processes, SADC
FANR will facilitate exchange visits and interaction between country teams from the more
advanced countries and those at initial stages.

Knowledge sharing and M&E. CAADP advocates more efficient M&E systems, successful pee
reviews and knowledge sharing to improve implementation processes and enable better
outcomes in agricultural investment programs. In addition to measming its own perfonnance,
SADC-F ANR has a central role in ensuring well-functioning and reliable M&E both at the
national and regional level. SADC-FANR will support Member States to strengthen the capacit
of institutions and systems and improve the collection, processing, and analysis of data. SADC-
FANR will work closely with NPCA in the development of a continent-wide CAADP M&E
system to provide data and input as part of ongoing CAADP efforts. SADC-FANR is expected t
support peer review exercises which will provide technical input to the design and
implementation of agricultural programs in Member States.

A key aspect of the CAADP process is knowledge-sharing of progress and constraints, lessons
learned, and best practices among all stakeholders, including CAADP support institutions,
decision makers, private sector, farmer associations, and DPs. As a part of its communication
and outreach efforts, SADC-FANR will support knowledge-sharing among stakeholders in the
region by developing web-based and traditional communication tools for both internal and
external use, provide flnancial assistance and facilitate technical support to Member States for
their own knowledge-sharing efforts, and conduct training and workshops to strengthen the
capacities and knowledge of commUllication :professionals and jQumalists working on
agricultural and rural development-related issues.

Support to Regional Integration. CAADP is a framework for aligning policies, strategies and
programs at the regional as well as country level. The proposed CTF will support SADC's
regional policy, planning and programming activities. SADC is currently in the process of
developing a comprehensive framework for regional integration programs under the RAP
initiative which was launched in 2008.

The RAP is an extensive regional policy, planning, and programming initiative that will provide
a framework for formulating a comprehensive set of regional programs to advance sustainable
agticultural development and food security in the region. RAP is framed around three inter-
related and mutually re-enforcing pillars:
        •   Pillar I - Production, Productivity and Competitiveness, which prioritizes addressing
            areas such as land tenure policy, SADC protocols on shared water resources, forestry,
            and fisheries, hannonized seed policy, plant genetic resomccs, hannonized
            biotechnology fi·amework.s, harmonized SPS regulations, regional R&D approaches,
            and regional data and statistical systems
        •   Pillar II - Trade and Markets, which prioritizes addressing areas such as to reduction
            in tariff and non-tariff barriers, harmonized grades and standards. regional market
            information and trade systems, reporting systems, and strengthening trade policies
       •    Pillar Ill - Financing and Investments, which prioritizes addressing areas such as
            cross border investment promotion, developing guarantee and insurance mechanisms,
            and supporting rural finance.

SADC-FANR has developed a RAP ' Policy Statement' that articulates and prioritizes the various
policy issues, intervention areas and measures, including possible institutional options for their
implementation. The ·'Policy Statement" will be used to formalize the key policy directions,
priority areas for intervention, potential forms of intervention, and general planning,
implementation, and financing mechanisms under RAP. Once the 'Policy Statement' has been
formally adopted by Member States, it will constitute the foundation for developing detailed
policy measures and programs and institutional arrangements for the RAP. The CTF will support
some of the technical analysis, stakeholder consultation and detailed programming that will be
necessary to further define the operational rules and regulations that will govern the RAP, its
institutional structure and tinancing mechru1isms. Tins framework together with the Policy
Statement will form the RAP 'Policy Document' which is expected to be completed by late
2013.

The CTF will also enable Member States to identify how national investment programs link to
the regional level or pool their resources for activities that will enhance trade and food security.
This could include identifying national programs with possible spill-over effects and regionally
focused agricultural investment programs that cm1 generate and sustain regional trade and
contribute to regional integration.

Coordination with COMESA. Because a number of countries have initiated CAADP planning
activities with the support ofCOMESA there will be ajoint work planning exercise to determine
country support activities. There remains a need to support the remaining SADC-only countries
in their CAADP national processes and SADC will continue to have a mandate for regional
policy dialogue and harmonization·, and the development and implementation of regional
programs in all their Member States.

Component 2: Support to institutional capacity ·building of SADC -FANR

Human resources s/7-engthening. SADC-FANR·s present staff resources are insufficient to meet
the increasing demand from Member States for support to national and regional CAADP
processes and development of the RAP. The CTF will supplement SADC-FANR current
technical core staff with additional staff focused on policy, M&E and support to country
processes. In particular, the CTF will provide funding for the following six consulting positions
in the medium-tem1: a CAADP Implementation Specialist with a background in policy analysis;
a RAP Coordinator; a Communications Specialist, a Planning and M&E Specialist, a Finance
and Budget Assistant, and a part-time Administrative Assistant with procurement background.
Additional long term consu1tancies may be identified during the course of grant implementation
The technical staff would be responsible for undertaking some of the work identified above in
Component 1 as well as managing delivery with the assistance of external consultants.

Training and capacity building. Given the added responsibilities, staff training and skills
development will be critical to successfully meet the scaled up work program of activities. Short
term training for SADC-FANR staff is needed in the areas of policy analysis, particularly with
respect to issues related to agricultural trade and markets, emerging food security and nutrition
and value-chain development. The capacity ofSADC-FANR's core staff will be strengthened
through the provision of short courses, seminars held on site vyithin the Secretariat, and when
appropriate, participation in external training events. Staff from other SADC Directorates who
are involved in program planning and implementation will also benefit from this capacity
building supp01t.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

The CTF will fund activities described in Section C above, in SADC Secretariat Headquarters
(HQ) whjch is based in Gaborone, Botswana and in Member States.

5. E nvironmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                       Yes            No
E nvironmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                                    X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                  X
I ndi~enous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                      X
Safety ofDams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                 X
P•·o.iects on International Watenvays (OP/BP 7.50)                                         X
Pro.jects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                   X

ll. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A . Summary of Key St{{eguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues an.d impacts associated witlt the proposed project. Identify
and describe an.y potentia/large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

There are no major safeguards issues and impacts associated with CTF funded activities. Within
the CAADP framework, RECs generally facilitate:
        •   Stocktaking, analysis, and design of a regional program and policies for the
            agriculture sector
        •   Coordination and implementation of the CAADP agenda in Member States, ensuring
            that structures for management of regional and CAADP processes are in place at the
            country level;
        •   Technical backstopping of stocktaking and analytical work related to national
            agricultural activities, and policies so as to inform national investment options;
        •   Capacity building of in-country teams to manage and implement the regional and
            CAADP agendas;
        •   Assisting countries to identify DPs and mobilize resources for effective
            implementation of their agricultural programs and projects;
        •   Communication, experience sharing, and peer review of CAADP implementation;
        •   Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of regional agricultural initiatives and CAADP
            implementation.

The activities funded by the CTF will be limited the above areas and the CTF cannot and will not
fund any on the ground agricultural activities or civil works, their engineering design (either
detailed or schematic) or their feasibility study either at SADC HQ level or in Member States.
There will therefore be no adverse environmental impacts associated with the CTF
implementation.

Notwithstanding, as pru.t of the support SADC w ishes to provide in line with its mandate, the
CTF may support consultant services to evaluate the environmental and social project
management systems of member countries as pru.1 of the broader set of services being provided
which are detailed in the operational plan. Evaluating these systems will help Member States
identify actions to be taken by them to strengthen their respective systems.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:

       Not applicabJe (see above).

3. Descrihe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts:

       Not applicable (see above).

4. Describe measures takell by the borrower to llddress safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan am/ implement the measures described:

The recipient bas limited experience in using and applying Bank safeguard policies. However, as
the CTF will not directly or indirectly finance any agricultural activities or civil works and their
engineering design (ejther detailed or schematic) or feasibility study. Ilowever the task team
will continue to work with the recipient throughout implementation to ensure that the processes
the CTF supports include evaluating Member States environmental and social management
systems,
5. Jdelztify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

       Not applicable (see above).

B. Disclosw·e Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  N/A
  Date of "in-cow1try" disclosure                                              NIA
  Date of submission to Info Shop                                              NIA
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                               N/A
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  NIA
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              NIA
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                               NIA
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  NIA
  Date of "in-cow1try" disclosure                                              N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                               NIA
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               N/A
  Date ofreceipt by the Bank                                                   NIA
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              NIA
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                               NIA
*If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

 NIA. No safeguards documents are needed.


 C. Complian.ce Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Envir·onmcnt Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including       Yes [ ]      No [ ]      N/A [X]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
   Arc the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP
   incorporated in the credit/loan?
   OP/BP 4.04- Natural Habitats
   Would the project result in any significant conversion or   Yes [ ]     No []    NIA [X]
   degradation of critical natural habitats?
   If the project would result in significant conversion or
 !degradation of other (non-ctitica1) natural habitats, does
   tbe project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
   Bank?
   OP 4.09 -Pest Management
   Does the EA adequately address the pest management          Yes [ ]     No []    N/A [X]
   issues?
   Is a separate PMP required?                                 Yes [   1   No []    N/A [X]
   lf yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
   safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
   requirements included in project design? If yes, docs the
   project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
   OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
   Does the EA include adequate measures related to            Yes [ ]     No []    N/A [X]
   cultural property?
II Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
il the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
   resources?
   OP/BP 4.10- Indigenous Peoples
   Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning             Yes [ ]     No []    N/A [X]
   Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
.I consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
   If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
   safeguards or Sector Manager review theplan?
   If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
   design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
   Social Development Unit?
   OP/BP 4.12- Involuntary Resettlement
   Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/pohcy              Yes [ ]     No []    N/A [X]
   framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
  .prepared?
II If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
   safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
1
   plan/policy framework/process framework?
   OP/BP 4.36- Forests
   Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional    Yes [ ]     No [ ]   NIA [X]
   issues and constraints been carried out?
   Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
   overcome these constraints?
   Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
   so, docs it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans beenprepared?                          Yes [ ]       No []    N/A [X)
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Expelis (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and aiTangements been made for public
awareness and training?                                            .
OPIBP 7.50- Projects on International Waten vays
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?       Yes [ ]       No []    N/A [X]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OPIBP 7.60 - Pro.iects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the      Yes [ ]       No []    N/A [X]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedw-es to be followed, and the recommendations fGr
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [ ]       No [ ]   N/A [X]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a
                                                                       .
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [ ]       No []    NIA [X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measw·es been
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system ofthe
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation anangements been
agreed with the bmTower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?
D. Approvals

    Signed ami submitted by:                               Name          l?   f.       ··'\--" Date
    Task Team Leader:                              Melissa Brown (~1·          .r::J        -+/Jv I I 3
    Environmental Special ist:                                                q              I    f
l   Social Development Specialist
    Additional Environmental and/or
    Social Development Specialist(s):

    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:        Ms. Alexandra C. Bezeredi
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:
      Comments:
                                        /
                                             ....---=:;7    _.,--;::;'
                                            Mr. M~a1ll'J i euwkoop       -'             (
                                                                                         7( 5..-( I )
