                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/01/2011                                   Report No.: AC6572
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P110481                 Original Project Name: Energy Community
                                             of South East Europe APL Program - APL
                                             5 for Albania DAM SAFETY
Country: Albania                             Project ID: P125856
Project Name: DAM SAFETY - ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Task Team Leader: Arturo S. Rivera
Estimated Appraisal Date:                    Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2011
Managing Unit: ECSS2                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: General energy sector (100%)
Theme: Water resource management (50%);Infrastructure services for private sector
development (50%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            22.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Original Project's development objectives were to (i) contribute to safeguarding the
major hydroelectric dams of Albania; and (ii) improve their operational efficiency and
enhance the stability of power supply for the regional electricity market. The Additional
Financing does not propose any changes to the Project Development Objectives.

3. Project Description
The amount of the Original IDA-financed Credit (ECSEE APL5 Dam Safety, Project ID
P110481, Credit No 4480) was SDR 21.7 million (Euro 21.7 million, or US$35.3 million
equivalent); it was approved by the Board on June 30 2008, and became effective on
December 16, 2008. The Original Project consisted of two main components: Component
1: physical infrastructure investments; and Component 2: Technical Assistance. Physical
infrastructure investments included (i) rehabilitation of spillways on Fierza, Komani and
Vau Dejes dams on Drin river; (ii) rehabilitation of electromechanical equipment in the
Komani HPP; and (iii) implementation of Load Frequency Control in Vau Dejes and
Fierza dams. The technical assistance component was to finance: (i) hydrology analysis
and water management study; (ii) project implementation consultants; (iii) institutional
strengthening for dam safety and emergency preparedness; (iv) studies for new
hydropower development; (v) financial management systems capacity building; and (vi)
international panel of experts on safety of dams.

  There will be no changes in the design of the Original Project. The only change in scope
is dropping of sub-component (iii) under physical infrastructure investment components,
load frequency control implementation. This sub-component was to facilitate the
integration of Albania's electricity system with UCTE. However, after the unbundling of
the power sector, the Transmission System Operator assumed responsibility for Load
Frequency Control (LFC). This component is now a part of new SCADA system which is
financed by an Italian Cooperation Credit. The project is in implementation phase. The
project financing allocated to this subcomponent has been allocated to rehabilitation of
electromechanical equipment in the Komani hydro power plant (HPP).

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project activities will be located on, or inside, the facilities of the hydropower dams
in the Drin and Mat Rivers. The project is not expected to cause any changes in water
management beyond the normal operational characteristics of the dams.

 All civil works financed under the project are limited to areas on the dams owned by
KESh, therefore none of these activities require land acquisition. The locations of the
dams and the project works are not associated with any of the sometimes illegal and
uncontrolled construction activities that sometimes take place elsewhere in Albania.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Esma Kreso (ECSS3)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                    X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is rated category B. The program's environmental impact is overall positive
as it aims to prevent a dam failure and any accompanying environmental disaster. Its
focus on improving hydrological analysis and monitoring and better water management
will result in further positive environmental impacts, such as increased power generation
from hydro resources. No works have yet begun, therefore there is no basis for evaluating
implementation of safeguards to date.

 Some of the Technical Assistance studies to be provided on water resources
management will yield knowledge to make better predictions about downstream flooding
following heavy rains. While such studies do not trigger OP 4.12, they would provide
knowledge on whether any future displacement/resettlement may be likely to be called
for, and if so, the technical assistance should indicate the actions that would be needed
for this to be carried out in compliance with the requirements of OP 4.12. No Tehcnical
Assistance has been initiated as of yet. TORs for Technical Assistance for potential new
hydropower development have not yet been prepared.

 The project's physical infrastructure investments are of limited scope and will not
change the existing levels of the dams. Potential environmental impacts concern mainly
the management and disposal of limited waste during rehabilitation works. An
Environmental Impact Assessment for each of the three Hydro-Power Plants have been
prepared for the purposes of the original project. No implementation of physical
infrastructure investments has started as of yet. There have been no changes or
amendments made to these documents, nor are they required for the AF.

 Changes in reservoir levels during plant shutdowns for rehabilitation works would be
within normal operating levels. As a result of staying within normal operating levels,
there will be no release of water in amounts that would require displacement of any
people or structures.

 All civil works financed under the project are limited to areas on the dams owned by
KESh, therefore none of these activities require land acquisition. The locations of the
dams and the project works are not associated with any of the sometimes illegal and
uncontrolled construction activities that sometimes take place elsewhere in Albania. The
project team has ascertained that there are no structures (residential or commercial, legal
or illegal) which would need to be removed for purposes of the project.

 The project will support Technical Assistance for potential new hydropower
development. The Bank team will ensure that the Terms of Reference for these studies
include analysis of potential environmental and social impacts, and that outputs and
recommendations are consistent with the Bank's Safeguard policies and will not
recommend developments which would result in substantial and irreversible
environmental damage. The studies will also incorporate costs of mitigating potential
environmental and social impacts into analysis of "least cost" development scenarios.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
There are no expected potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated
future activities in the project area of dam safety investments.

 For the studies on potential new hydropower development, as mentioned above, the
project team will ensure --through supervision activities during project implementation--
that outputs and recommendations are consistent with the Bank's Safeguards policies.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
There are no relevant project alternatives as the main project activities are related with
enhancing the safety of the hydropower dams.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower has prepared three separate Environmental Impact Assessment reports
including EMPs specifying how the impacts during works will be managed. The PMU
has appointed a staff memeber responsible for overseeing the implementation of
safeguards policies.

  Moreover, the project includes several activities aimed at strengthening capacity of dam
operators and technical staff of KESh in general. Appointment of a specialized consultant
is foreseen for that purpose. The best form of achieving capacity building, in dam safety
operations, is to do it largely on the job. A useful tool for on-the-job training of dam
operators is the Potential Failure Mode Assessment (PFMA) Workshop developed by the
US-FERC (Federal Energy Regulatory Commission). The method is described in chapter
14 of the FERC Dam Safety Guidelines. PFMA is aimed at identifying issues, and
adopting measures to counteract them, following a process which involves dam
operators. In addition to providing an effective way for the identification of needed safety
measures, the PFMA approach represents a powerful training instrument which is
designed to address the staff directly involved with day to day surveillance, and O&M of
the dams. The implementation consultant#s scope of work include the organization and
execution of the PFMA workshops which will be required to propose appropriate
adaptation of the PFMA method to the case of Albania. PFMA workshops will be held at
the 5 dam sites of Fierze, Koman and Vau Dejes for Drin River and Ulza and Shkopeti
for the Mat River.

 One of the outputs of the process should be matrixes describing, in quantitative terms,
the appropriate Response Level in case of Emergency situation. Preparation of such
matrixes is highly recommended for all those dams which have an Emergency
Preparedness Plan (EPP). The emergency response level matrix is a way of translating the
somehow complex content of the EPP into clear and precise instructions for the
operators. That is essential in emergency conditions.

 Training is also part of the packages to be procured under SECO grant, which shall
encompass from the calibration and testing to instrument operation and maintenance of
sensor and devices of dam monitoring, geological, seismic and geodetic monitoring.
 On site training consisting of basic theory and intensive hands-on course will be
performed.

 The PMU also will have a study tour of dams in Canada and the US to familiarize itself
with the best practices in emergency preparedness. The tour is planned for Spring
Summer 2012.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The hydropower dams of the project are located in generally remote and isolated areas of
Albania, which are sparsely populated. The community of Ulza on the Mat River is by
the Ulza lake created by the dam, while the communities of Vau Dejes and Fierza are
near the dams with the same names on the Drin River. In Komani there is a small
number of persons living near the dam. KESh disclosed by on May 15, 2008 the
environmental documents prepared in the above mentioned communities. The public
consultations on disclusire of Environmental Impact Assessment for the Rehabilitation
works were held on May 26 2008 in Ulza; on May 27, 2008, in Vau Dejes; on May 29,
2008, in Komani; and on May 30, 2008, in Fierza.

 For the purposes of Additional Financing, the EIAs will be disclosed both in country
and through the World Bank's Infoshop.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 04/21/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             04/25/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/15/2008
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                           N/A
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts      Yes
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements        N/A
been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         N/A
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           Yes
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        Yes
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Arturo S. Rivera                          10/31/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Esma Kreso                                10/28/2011
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Agnes I. Kiss                             10/31/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Ranjit J. Lamech                          10/31/2011
  Comments:
