                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                         APPRAISAL STAGE


                                                                           Report No.: 77700
Date ISDS
                            May13, 2013
Prepared/Updated:
I. BASIC INFORMATION
  A. Basic Project Data
  Country:                     Albania                  Project ID: TF014761   GRANT

  Project Name:                PREPARATION OF THE RESULTS-BASED ROAD MAINTENANCE
                               AND SAFETY PROJECT
  Task Team Leader:            Artan Guxho
  Appraisal Dates:             May 15, 2013         Estimated Board Date:       N/A
  Managing Unit:               ECSS5                Lending Instrument:        Grant
  Sector:                      Rural and Interurban Roads and Highways (70%);
                               Public Administration-transport (30%)
  Theme:                       Regional Integration (30%); Infrastructure Services for private Sector
                               Development (25%); injuries and Non- Communicable deceases (25%);
                               Administrative and civil service reform (20%)
  Financing (in USD Million)
      Financing Source                                                                       Amount
     ECA Region Capacity Development MDTF                                                       0.700
     Total                                                                                      0.700
  Environmental Category       B - Partial Assessment
  Is this a Repeater project? No


  B. Project Objectives
  The Development Objective of the Grant is to support the Government of Albania in preparing a
  Results-Based Road Maintenance and Safety Project (RRMSP) and to enhance the capacity of the
  Albanian Road Authority in road asset management and road safety. The sound preparation of RRMSP
  will contribute to better and effective use of the limited government funding in improving road
  maintenance.


  C. Project Description
  The achievement of the GDO will be evaluated through the following indicators:

            Indicator 1: Prioritization of the National Road Network repair/maintenance works; and
            preparation of the RRMSP first year repair/maintenance program.
        Indicator 2: Introduction of Road Safety Audit practices in the design of road works.
        Indicator 3: Definition of the RRMSP development objectives and disbursement-linked
        indicators (DLIs), including for maintenance, road safety, institutional reforms; and
        establishment of the respective baseline and target values.
The proposed grant will finance the preparation of the following activities for the Results-based Road
Maintenance and Safety Project:
Component 1 will finance prioritization of the National Road Network repair/maintenance; and
preparation of the RRMSP first year repair/maintenance program. This will also include capacity
enhancements in these activities:
        (a)      Assessment of the existing National Road Network inventory and improving the
        usability of existing Road Asset Management System in ARA; identifying deficiencies that
        would be addressed through the project. On-the-job-training of ARA staff to populate, maintain
        and administer the computer-based Road Asset Management System (RAMS);

        (b)     Planning and prioritization of the National Road Network repair/maintenance needs
        based on actual physical conditions (accessibility, viability, safety), socio-economic criteria and
        balanced geographical distribution; and preparation of the RRMSP first year design and bidding
        documents (bidding documents will incorporate the recommendations of the independent road
        safety audit). Following the successful piloting of performance-based maintenance contracts
        in Albania, the planning and prioritization will consider a balanced approach between
        performance-based maintenance contracting and traditional competitively-tendered
        input/output based maintenance contracting. This component will include capacity support to
        ARA in planning and prioritization and in the expansion of performance-based maintenance
        contracting.

Component 2 will finance capacity enhancement of the Albanian Road Authority and the Secretariat of
the Inter-ministerial Road Safety Council in road safety:

        (a)     Introduction of Road Safety Audit Practices as part of operationalization of the Road
        Safety Action Plans, including conducting independent road safety audits for priority sections at
        design stage and incorporation of road safety standards in the bidding documents;

        (b)     Road Safety capacity enhancement and training for the Secretariat of the
        Inter-ministerial Road Safety Council in the area of Inter-Ministerial coordination, public
        outreach, and monitoring of action plan implementation.

Component 3 will finance Environmental and Social due diligence activities:

        (a)     Preparation of Environmental and Social Safeguards documents, including:
        Environmental Management Framework (EMF), Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for
        the RRMSP first year repair/maintenance program, Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and
        Resettlement Action Plans for the RRMSP first year repair/maintenance program (if
        applicable);

        (b)     Review and identification of gaps / inconsistencies between regulations governing

                                                   2
          environmental and social safeguard policies of the government and guidelines of the World
          Bank and the European Union; provision of the on-the-job training of ARA staff to prepare and
          implement environmental and social safeguard documents.


  Component 4 will finance Implementation Support Activities:

          (a)     Definition of the RRMSP PDO and DLIs related to the implementation of the road
          repair/maintenance, and establishing baseline values and annual targets;

          (b)     Preparation of RRMSP project operation manual;

          (c)     Grant management and implementation support to ARA, including audit and training.


  D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
  known)
  Technical Assistance for the preparation for undertaking maintenance of already existing roads
  (sections) throughout Albania.


  E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
  The Grant will be implemented through the Implementation Team (previous - PIT), which is now a
  department within the Albanian Road Authority. This team has been successfully implementing
  Bank-funded projects since 1998. The most recent project was the Albania Transport Project, Category
  A construction of a section of the motor-way to the North of the country. During implementation of the
  Transport Project, the implementation team fully and satisfactorily implemented requirements of the
  Environmental Assessment and EMPs, with no significant issues or deviations with excellent staff
  support from the in-house Environmental department and adequate reporting.

  F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
  Bekim Ymeri, Social Scientist (ECSSO)
  Esma Kreso, Environmental Specialist (ECSEN)


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
  Safeguard Policies                      Triggered ?    Explanation (Optional)
  Environmental Assessment OP/BP          Yes            OP 4.01 is triggered because the grant will
  4.01                                                   support preparation of the design and bidding
                                                         documents for the road maintenance/repair
                                                         activities to be undertaken in the first year of
                                                         the RRMSP (Component 1). As the RRMSP
                                                         will be prepared under the project, the sections
                                                         to be covered in the first year have not yet been
                                                         identified. Under Component 3 the Grant will
                                                         finance preparation of environmental and
                                                         social due diligence documents for the

                                                   3
                                        RRMSP. This will include:(i) an
                                        Environmental Management Framework
                                        document (EMF), which will set forth the
                                        guidelines for preparation of site-specific
                                        EMPs; (ii) site-specific EMPs to be prepared
                                        during project implementation in parallel with
                                        the preparation of design and bidding
                                        documents for the first-year target road
                                        sections as they are identified. The EMF will
                                        include sample EMPs for the road sections and
                                        priority actions identified beyond the first year
                                        activities for which EMPs will have been
                                        prepared within the EMF.

                                        The EMF will also set out measures to help
                                        formulate sound environmental performance
                                        into the planning and design stages of the
                                        activity. This will include integration of
                                        environmental aspects into the results-based
                                        approach for the issued maintenance contracts.

                                        Anticipated environmental issues which the
                                        EMF and then EMPs are expected to address
                                        include dust and noise generation from
                                        machinery, adequate site organization, storage
                                        of paints, equipment and machines, waste
                                        separation and management, chance findings,
                                        use of salt and/or materials in winter
                                        maintenance, and possible small construction
                                        interventions in order to improve road safety.

                                        The Terms of Reference for consultancy
                                        services to prepare the RRMSP first year
                                        repair/maintenance program include an
                                        environmental section, which is considered as
                                        due diligence environmental management
                                        document for this preparation Grant, while the
                                        actual EMF and sample EMPs to be prepared
                                        under the Grant will be used as due diligence
                                        documentation for the actual future investment
                                        Project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes       The policy is triggered because of the
                                        possibility that the RRMSP will include
                                        sections of road which lie within Protected
                                        Areas or other sensitive natural habitats. The
                                        EMF will address this by setting out
                                        precautionary measures for the road
                                        maintenance activities in such areas.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes       As above: the policy is triggered because of

                                    4
                                                the possibility that the RRMSP may include
                                                road sections in forested areas or forest
                                                plantations. The EMF will set out appropriate
                                                measures
Pest Management OP 4.09               No        It is not anticipated that the road
                                                rehabilitation/maintenance will involve or
                                                result in any use of pesticides, including
                                                for clearing of roadside vegetation.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP     Yes       The EMF and site-specific EMPs will have
4.11                                            provisions in case of chance findings on site,
                                                while precautionary section in the EMF will be
                                                included for works that may deal with
                                                maintenance of specific bridges, which may,
                                                due to their historical value or age be a cultural
                                                monument.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes       No land acquisition will be financed under the
                                                Grant, and at present no land acquisition or
                                                resettlement is anticipated under the proposed
                                                future RRMS investment project.
                                                Nevertheless, as a precautionary measure
                                                under this Grant, a Resettlement Policy
                                                Framework (RPF) will be developed for the
                                                RRMSP to provide for the possibility that
                                                adjustments in the maintenance and
                                                rehabilitation program result in the necessity
                                                for some land acquisition. The RPF will serve
                                                as guidance for the entire program. Should it
                                                emerge that any of the work on road sections
                                                selected for the first year work program of
                                                RRMSP do require land acquisition or
                                                resettlement, RAPs will be prepared in parallel
                                                with the design of those works. The RAPs
                                                will follow the RPF and be subject to prior WB
                                                approval. The Terms of Reference for
                                                consultancy services to prepare the RRMSP
                                                first year repair/maintenance program include
                                                a social section, which is considered as due
                                                diligence document for this preparation Grant,
                                                while the actual RFP and RAP (if required) to
                                                be prepared under the Grant will be used as due
                                                diligence documentation for the actual future
                                                investment Project.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             No
Projects on International Waterways   No
OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No

                                            5
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN


    A. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
       The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
        For the purposes of preparation and approval of this Grant, detailed Terms of Reference have been
        prepared for the EMF, EMP for the first year sections and RPF that will be financed from the Grant.
        These TOR was disclosed in country 1 and in Infoshop on May 13, 2013, serving as the
        environmental and social “due diligence? documents for the Grant. The Client will ensure that the
        EMF, EMPs for the first year section, and RFP are done in accordance with the Terms of Reference.

        The EMF, the RPF, and site-specific EMPs and/or RAPs for the first year RRMS work program, all
        of which are to be prepared under this Grant, will serve as due diligence documents for the proposed
        Results-based Road Maintenance and Safety Project (RRMSP). In addition, any EMPs and RAPs
        prepared in the future for works to be financed by the RRMSP will adhere to the EMF and RPF.

        The Client will ensure, together with the support of the World Bank team that environmental and
        social issues are adequately addressed in the design and planning documents.
IV. APPROVALS
    Task Team Leader:                 Name: Artan Guxho
    Approved By:
    Regional Safeguards               Name: Agnes I. Kiss                               Date: April 17, 2013
    Coordinator:
    Sector Manager:                   Name: Juan Gaviria                                Date: April 15, 2013

    1
      Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal
    (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are
    accessible to potentially affected persons.




1
  The TOR was disclosed on the webpage of the Ministry of Public Works and Transport of Albania and can be
accessed here: http://www.mppt.gov.al/ or http://www.mppt.gov.al/previewdoc.php?file_id=1892


                                                          6
