                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/31/2012                                    Report No.: AC6637
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Angola                              Project ID: P096360
Project Name: Water Sector Institutional Development
Task Team Leader: Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2008     Estimated Board Date: July 31, 2008
Managing Unit: AFTUW                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Water supply (65%);Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood
protection (35%)
Theme: Urban services and housing for the poor (85%);Water resource management
(15%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            120
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
         Financing Gap                                                 0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective (PDO) of the combined Original Project (P096360)
and the Additional Financing (AF, P124511) is to "strengthen the institutional capacity
and efficiency of the Recipient's agencies in the water sector to expand access to water
service delivery".

3. Project Description
The Original Project includes four components as follows:

 Component 1 - Development of Institutions in the Water Supply and Sanitation Sub-
Sector. The objective of this component is to strengthen the institutional framework for
the water supply subsector at both the central and regional levels. The objective will be
achieved through the implementation of three related subcomponents: (1) development of
the Asset Management Unit; (2) creation of Provincial Water and Sanitation Utilities
(PWSUs); and, (3) development of a Regulatory Agency for the water supply and
sanitation subsector.
 Component 2 - Water Resources Management. The objective of this component is to
support the strengthening of the institutional framework for the water resources
management subsector. This objective will be achieved through three subcomponents
which are: (1) development of an institution for water resources management; (2)
development of systems for water resources management; and, (3) rehabilitation of water
resources management systems.

 Component 3 - Rehabilitation of Water Supply Systems. The objective of this
component is to support the physical rehabilitation of selected urban water supply
systems due to the critical need to reverse many years of inadequate investments and
maintenance. This objective will be achieved through two subcomponents: (1) the
construction of approximately 240 kilometers of water supply networks and about 72,000
domestic house connections; and, (2) the preparation of technical cadastre and
implementation of an information system.

  Component 4 - Capacity Building and Change Management. The overall objective of
this component is to strengthen the ability of government to improve efficiency of water
supply in Angola by engaging stakeholders, managing and communicating change, and
improving the abilities of individuals to play their parts, especially at management and
technical levels. Included in the support at the technical level is the implementation unit
that the Ministry of Energy and Water (MINEA) established (Financial and Contract
Management Unit) to manage the implementation of all projects in the sector regardless
of the source of financing. The objectives will be achieved through three subcomponents:
(1) capacity building at the national and provincial levels; (2) capacity building and
training at the utility level; and (3) technical assistance to facilitate change management
and good governance, largely through communications.

 The World Bank Board of Directors approved an additional credit in an amount of
US$120 million to Angola for the Water Sector Institutional Development Project
(WSIDP, CR.4501-AO) on June 30, 2011. Additional activities supported by the AF are:

 Components 1 and 4 - No changes were introduced by the AF.

 Component 2 - No changes were introduced by the AF other than the identification of
alternative river basins for piloting capacity building for river basin management. Both
the Original Project and the AF support studies carried out as part of capacity building by
the Borrower. There is no expectation that the Original Project or the AF will support
investments in the basins subject to pilot studies. Under the Original Project the Cuanza
and Cubango river basins were proposed as pilots whereas the AF substituted the
Cubango river basin by the Cubal da Hanha-Catumbela-Cavaco-Caporolo watersheds.

 Component 3 - The AF provides support to (i) scale-up the activities included in
Component 3 of the Original Project; and, (ii) rehabilitate the water production and
expand the distribution systems through investments in the nine cities included in the
Original Project. These investments include: the rehabilitation of production facilities,
new water distribution reservoirs, new facilities such as water quality laboratories and
related equipment, replacement of electro-mechanical equipment, installation of new
wells in existing well fields, installation of approximately 380 kilometers of water supply
networks and about 60,000 domestic connections, and technical assistance mainly for
supervision of construction contracts. The AF also provides support to prepare the
technical cadastre and information systems for the increased number of connections.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project support physical works associated with the water supply network in nine
cities: M'Banza Congo, Menongue, Lubango, Luena, Malange, Kuito, N’Dalatando,
Huambo, and Uige. The Project also support physical works at approximately 189
hydrometric stations nationwide along with the physical rehabilitation of up to ten
buildings in an existing research center located in the outskirts of Luanda. It is envisaged
that project activities under Subcomponent 2.3 (rehabilitation of the national hydrometric
network), Subcomponent 3.1 (installation of approximately 620 kilometers of piped water
supply networks and some 132,000 new domestic connections in urban and peri-urban
areas in the 9 target cities), Subcomponent 3.2 (purchase of chemicals for water
treatment), Subcomponents 4.1 (rehabilitation of the Onga Zanga Investigation and
Research Center near Luanda) and Subcomponent 4.2 (funding for small civil works
projects to serve peri-urban areas) may generate temporary adverse environmental and
social impacts limited primarily to construction activities. The nature of the civil works
and project activities associated with each of the aforementioned subcomponents are as
follows:

 Subcomponent 2.3 - Rehabilitation of the hydrometric network:
 Gauging Standard Stations:
 - Improve existing access to the station.
 - Removal and disposal of damaged components of the existing station.
 - Repair damaged or destroyed infrastructure (restore damaged concrete pillars, replace
metal pipe, replace and weld metal supports, replace cover sheets in the shelter, apply
anticorrosive paints, repair or replace damaged scales).
 - Install water meter devices on river banks inside shelter that use 12V batteries or
photovoltaic cells.

 Weirs:
 - Removal and disposal of damaged components of the existing weir.
 - Repair damaged or destroyed infrastructures (restore damaged concrete foundation
and wall, weld metal supports, apply anticorrosive paints, repair or replace damaged
scales).

 Subcomponent 3.1 - Installation of water supply networks and household connections in
urban and peri-urban areas in nine cities:
 - Prepare alternative accesses during construction.
 - Dig trenches (approximately 1 m deep), install HDPE tubing and cover with soil.
 - Connect selected households to distribution network and install water meters and back
yard taps.

 Subcomponent 3.2 - Purchase of chemicals for water treatment:
 - Supply of chlorine, aluminum sulfate and caustic soda
 - Construction of adequate storage for annual supply of chemicals.
 - Handling of chemicals and packaging.
 - Disposal of empty chemical packaging.

 Subcomponent 4.1 - Rehabilitation of the Onga Zanga investigation and Research
Center (CIPOZ):
 - Removal and disposal of debris of the existing buildings.
 - Rehabilitate existing buildings: concrete repairs, wall repairs, cover sheets
replacement, wood and glass repairs and replacement, plastering, painting, plumbing,
electrical works, etc.
 - Rehabilitate water supply, sewerage and electrical components of the buildings.

 Subcomponent 4.2 - Small water projects that will extend networks and standposts to
serve peri-urban areas:
 - Prepare alternative access.
 - Dig trenches (approximately 1 m deep), install plastic HDPE pipe and fittings,
connect pipe to existing network and cover trench with soil.
 - Construct water points (chafarizes/fontanarios) and connect to distribution system; dig
foundations, reinforce concrete works, plumbing works and drainage system.

  It is important to note that the project activities will complement water supply network
investments already being financed through the World Bank's Emergency Multi-Sector
Recovery Program and projects financed by the Government of China in a number of the
target cities. This project will build on these works and, as such, may contribute to the
generation of cumulative adverse environmental and social impacts. The Bank and the
Borrower are aware of the need to coordinate oversight and management of the various
projects to ensure compliance with national laws and Bank safeguard policies and to
minimize any cumulative impacts that the various projects may have on the environment
and local communities.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Harvey D. Van Veldhuizen (MIGEP)
   Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Original Project and the AF were designated as a Category B project consistent with
the provisions of OP/BP 4.01. Safeguard policies triggered by the Project include
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

 The Project provides support for the extension of water supply distribution networks in
select cities (construction and rehabilitation), construction and rehabilitation of the
deteriorated national hydrometric network, and rehabilitation of select learning and
research facilities located in the outskirts of Luanda. The potential adverse environmental
and social impacts related to this project were addressed during project preparation. At
appraisal, it was determined that no large scale, significant, or irreversible adverse
environmental or social impacts are expected. No major works are expected.

 The principal safeguard issue with respect to OP/BP 4.01 is construction site impacts
that are relatively small in scale, time bound, and manageable in terms of complying with
Bank Safeguard Policies. The contribution to any potential cumulative impacts associated
with other water supply network investments in select cities are expected to be minimal.
Nevertheless, the Bank team and the Borrower are making concerted efforts to coordinate
the other water sector Projects in the nine cities to ensure compatibility of investments
and avoid cumulative impacts.

  Since the original project approval, growing erosion of the land surrounding the
downtown sub-system in Luena has resulted in significant deterioration of the quality of
the water of the Luena River in that area. Under current conditions, the rehabilitation of
the downtown sub-system would involve the need for (i) involuntary resettlement due to
the requiring rerouting of the pipeline to avoid the erosion area; and, (ii) high level of
treatment due to the turbidity levels in the water. For these reasons, the Angolan
government is committed to closing the downtown sub-system once the rehabilitation of
the Sangolo sub-system is completed.
  The rehabilitation of the Sangolo sub-system involves minor civil works within a
tributary of the Zambezi River, an international waterway, and as such OP 7.50. "Projects
on International Waterways" is triggered. The rehabilitation of Sangolo sub-system will
involve the modification of the design of the water intake located at this system to
guarantee the original capacity of the Luena water supply system.

 Paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50 spells out one of the exception to the notification
requirement. No riparian notification is required for "any ongoing schemes, projects
involving additions or alterations that require rehabilitation, construction, or other
changes that in the judgment of the Bank (i) will not adversely change the quality or
quantity of water flows to the other riparians; and (ii) will not be adversely affected by
the other riparians’ possible water use".

 The rehabilitation of the water intake system at Sangolo in Luena falls into the
exception spelled out in Paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50. The proposed investment at Luena
qualifies as a rehabilitation of the existing water intake systems at Sangolo in Luena. The
amount of water to be abstracted for the rehabilitated Sangolo sub-system will be the
same as the total amount of water to be abstracted by both the downtown sub-system and
the Sangolo sub-system. The Angolan government is committed to closing the downtown
sub-system once the rehabilitation of the Sangolo sub-system is completed. Therefore,
the proposed restructuring will not change the quality or quantity of water flows to the
other riparian Countries. In addition, the rehabilitation of the water intake system at
Sangolo will not change the project’s environmental or social risk profile. On November
22, 2011, the Africa Region Vice President approved the determination made by the Task
Team that the WSIDP falls under the exception to the notification requirement under
Paragraph 7 (a) of OP 7.50 "Projects on International Waterways".

 Specific adverse environmental and social impacts that may occur during project
implementation as a result of certain types of activities are as follows:

 •     Purchase of bulk (annual) supplies of various water treatment plant chemicals:
 - Corrosion of building elements due to improper storage of chemicals
 - Health risks associated with improper handling and disposal of chemicals

  •      Rehabilitation of the national hydrometric network:
  - Loss of vegetation or sensitive habitats due to location of infrastructure
  - Nuisance to local residents during construction if station is located near a residential
center (restricted site access and noise pollution)
  - Erosion undermining access platform
  - Concrete manufacture, anti-corrosive paint and metal work may result in localized soil
and water pollution
  - Accumulation of solid waste due to construction activities creates health risks and
negative aesthetic impacts on local communities
  - Pollution from improper storage and handling of diesel fuel and used engine oil
  - Improper disposal of construction materials creating localized pollution and health
risks to the work force and local communities.
 •      Water supply networks and domestic connections in urban and peri-urban areas:
 - Loss of vegetation or sensitive habitats due to location of infrastructure
 - Loss of inhabited or productive land and damage to assets due to location of
infrastructure
 - Nuisance to local residents during construction especially with regards to access and
noise
 - Spillage around water standposts providing breeding ground for water borne diseases
 - Pollution from improper storage and handling of diesel fuel and used engine oil
 - Accumulation of solid waste during construction activities creating health risks and
negative aesthetics
 - Potential spread of HIV/AIDs due to presence of work force in local communities
 - Breakage of network and domestic connections through improper use causing
accidents among local residents and work force
 - Water connection surroundings becoming littered with debris (e.g., plastic bags)
resulting in impeded drainage and localized flooding
 - Impact on assets that have encroached onto existing pipeline right of way or along new
pipelines expiation routes.

 •      Rehabilitation of the Onga Zanga Research Center:
 - Loss of natural vegetation or sensitive habitats due to improper location of temporary
store yards, work areas, housing, etc.
 - Loss of productive land and assets due to location of infrastructure and vehicle
movement
 - Nuisance to local residents during construction (restricted access, noise, and dust and
vehicle movement)
 - Pollution from improper storage and handling of diesel fuel and used engine oil
 - Accumulation of solid waste due to construction activities creating health risks and
negative aesthetics
 - Potential spread of HIV/AIDs due to presence of work force in local communities

 •       Water Supply Projects in peri-urban areas as part of the Learning-by-Doing
initiative:
 - Destruction of vegetation or sensitive habitats during alignment of the pipe to the
water standpost
 - Inadequate drainage for residual water from standpost site and localized erosion
 - Debris, noise pollution and restricted site access in local communities during
construction
 - Increase in water borne diseases due to poor drainage at standpost site
 - Soil pollution due to improper storage, handling and disposal of fuels
 - Solid waste accumulation due to lack of proper and timely disposal
 - Spread of HIV/AIDs by workers among local residents
 - Flooding of depressions near the standpost
 - Improper use of standpost by users may cause accidents among local residents.
  Project activities that may require land acquisition or have an impact on assets are not
expected to occur. However, if they were to happen the most likely activities that would
produce such impacts include: construction of small buildings to house and protect
instruments near hydrometric stations, rehabilitation or construction of access tracks to
hydrometric stations, installation of buried pipes in peri-urban areas for water supply
systems, small pilot projects such as installation of community water fountains and
temporary worker camps, spoil dumps, and material lay down areas.

  To ensure project compliance with Bank safeguard policies and national laws, as part of
the original project the Borrower prepared a detailed Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). Since the
activities supported by the AF are essentially identical to those proposed under the
original project, the ESMF and RPF prepared for the original project remain relevant and
are applicable to the activities financed by the AF. The ESMF lists the potential impacts
of the project and establishes clear procedures for environmental screening along with
measures to mitigate and reduce the impact of each type of activity that may result in
adverse environmental and social impacts during the planning, construction and
operational phases of the project. The Environment and Social Unit (ESU) established by
MINEA holds the primary responsibility for implementing and monitoring the ESMF and
RPF to ensure that project activities are in compliance with World Bank safeguard
policies and national laws. Both Frameworks specify the roles and responsibilities of the
ESU and MINEA agents and outline necessary reporting procedures for managing and
monitoring environmental and social impacts related to project investments. The ESMF
specifies the training, capacity building and technical assistance needed to ensure that the
ESU can successfully implement both Frameworks. The Safeguards instruments to be
produced during project implementation are expected to be Environmental and Social
Management Plans for construction and Abbreviated Resettlement Plans in the event
there is acquisition of land, either permanent or temporary, or impact on assets or
livelihood because of the taking of land.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The civil works and other construction and rehabilitation activities proposed under the
project are relatively small in scale and the potential adverse environmental and social
impacts are expected to be minor, localized, and easily mitigated. Indirect and long-term
impacts are not expected at this time barring any major cumulative impacts caused by the
larger water sector investments in select target cities that are being implemented in
tandem with some of the activities of this project.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower prepared the ESMF and RPF to ensure that throughout project
implementation the project remains in full compliance with Bank Safeguard Policies as
well as national legislation. Both the ESMF and RPF include clear guidelines and
measures to mitigate any adverse environmental and social impacts of the project, almost
all of which are construction related. The ESMF provides a screening process for
establishing the level of environmental management required for each type of project
activity. With respect to implementation of the two Frameworks the ESU was created
within the Technical Support area established by MINEA, with the primary responsibility
for all environmental and social issues of the project including implementation of the
ESMF and RPF.

  However, the institutional and human capacity to effectively address and mitigate
environmental and social impacts of the project in accordance with Bank standards is
limited at the provincial level. Furthermore, the institutional capacity to implement
measures outlined in the ESMF and RPF are considered to be weak. To address this gap
the ESMF and project design identifies specific training and capacity building activities
for:

 1. Hydrometric technicians from the Department of Water Resources
 2. Technical staff of the ESU
 3. Managers of water points and other community water supply projects
 4. Construction personnel
 5. Personnel dealing with chemicals for the water treatment plants

 The project will finance all training and capacity building activities associated with
ensuring that the borrower has sufficient capacity to implement and supervise the ESMF
and RPF, subsequent Environmental and Social Management Plans for construction, and
Abbreviated RAPs (if required) throughout project implementation. Due to circumstances
outside the project, progress on effectiveness of the original project had been
significantly delayed; however, during preparation of the AF the team visited selected
cities among the nine in which similar investments were carried out under Bank funding
as part of the Emergency Multi-Sector Recovery Program (EMRP1 and 2).

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key project stakeholders are MINEA, provincial governments, and households in the
nine target cities. Public consultations were held as part of the original project during
project preparation to disseminate and review the objectives, scope and design of the
Project as well as the purpose and content of the ESMF and RPF. Project beneficiaries
were included in the project development consultation process and were consulted
directly with respect to the ESMF and RPF. The target audience for the public
consultations was national and provincial governments, civil society and local
communities in the nine cities where the bulk of the project activities will be
implemented. In addition, workshops were held in Luanda during project preparation to
engage and consult with members of national government, the private sector as well as
civil society on project design. Provincial governments disclosed the ESMF and RPF to
households in the nine target cities and requested feedback on the measures and processes
established to mitigate and reduce any adverse environmental and social impact of the
project. All project beneficiaries have access to the Portuguese version of the summaries
of the ESMF and RPF in their city. English versions of the ESMF and RPF were
disclosed prior to appraisal in the InfoShop. The issues, stakeholders, and nine target
cities remain unchanged from the original project; therefore, additional consultation as
part of the AF was not necessary.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  02/18/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              02/25/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               02/21/2008
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  02/18/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              02/25/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               02/21/2008
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          N/A
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         N/A
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           Yes
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        Yes
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name               Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares   05/05/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Harvey D. Van Veldhuizen       01/26/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Kristine Schwebach             04/25/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Alexander E. Bakalian          05/16/2012
  Comments:
