                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                              Report No.: AC6382


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/06/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Angola                             Project ID: P122700
Project Name: Angola Learning for All Project
Task Team Leader: Cristina Isabel Panasco Santos
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 16,       Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: AFTED                        Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                            Loan
Sector: Primary education (100%)
Theme: Education for all (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):           50.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
                                                                      0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed Project Development Objective is to improve the quality of service delivery for
primary education.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project is informed by the Angola Education Policy Note Quality of Education for
All. It is also informed by the results of the pilot on early grade reading and lessons learned from
quality development interventions used by Brazil. The lessons learned from Brazil are the result
of a recent study tour to Brazil, in which 21 Angola senior officers, from the Ministry of
Education and provinces, participated. Finally, the proposed choice of interventions is informed
by the results from impact evaluations carried out in several Sub-Saharan African countries as
well as by conclusions of the evidence-based analysis in Making Schools Work, New Evidence
on Accountability Reforms.

 In Angola, there is general consensus that new policies and practices are needed to ensure the
quality of education which go well beyond increased access to school for the Angolan children.
This project proposes a set of interventions aimed at improving the quality of the education
services delivered through enhanced teaching quality and school accountability. The project
takes into account the on-going decentralization process, which, over time, will transfer full
responsibility for primary education to municipalities. To support the decentralization process,
the proposed project will included hands-on capacity building activities on basic management
skills, monitoring, evaluation, and reporting for municipal officers, head teachers and other
actors at the local level involved in education. Finally, the project proposes to support the
development of an Angolan national assessment system, and to contribute to the policy
formulation for the implementation of national exams. To achieve this, the project will provide
capacity building to the Ministry of Education on assessment. The project will also support the
establishment of baseline data for end of primary school learning outcomes; and assist in an early
grade reading follow-up assessment to assess impacts on learning outcomes during project
implementation. An impact evaluation of project interventions will also be included. The
monitoring and evaluation arrangements for the project will be designed to strengthen the
capacity of local and central level education administrators in the area of monitoring and
evaluation, understanding the data constraints in Angola.

 Component 1. Improving Teaching and Accountability in Primary Schools.

 This component includes two sub-components focusing on: (a) improving teachers# academic
knowledge and pedagogical skills in order to improve the teaching and learning in the
classroom; and (b) improving school management and accountability, through the introduction of
school grants associated with pedagogical school projects and community participation.

 Subcomponent 1.1. Improving Teachers Knowledge and Skills.

  This subcomponent aims to improve the quality of the teaching processes in primary schools
through improved teachers knowledge and skills of primary school teachers. In-service training
will be offered as teacher upgrading (continuing education) through a teacher support system by
using the Zone of Pedagogical Influence (ZIP) network. This training includes two modules. The
first module focuses on upgrading teacher#s knowledge in Portuguese and mathematics. The
main objective of this module is to bring all teachers involved in the ZIPs to the same level of
content knowledge on Portuguese and mathematics. The second training module focuses on
improving teachers pedagogical skills. The introduction of teaching methodologies for
accelerated learning and use of methodologies for better management of the classroom will also
be included.

 Subcomponent 1.2. Improving Accountability of Primary Schools.

  This subcomponent seeks to assess the potential of devolving autonomy and responsibility in
managing the schools to the local level to increase school accountability and relevance to the
students# need. This would be achieved by: (a) supporting the preparation of School Education
Projects (EP), whereby schools diagnose their problems and outline strategies to address those
problems; (b) providing management training to school council of selected schools comprising
the school principal, teachers and representatives of parents; (c) transferring funds to schools to
finance school EPs. Alternative designs of the school-based approach will be discussed with the
Government. In particular, considerations will be given to limiting the scope of the school EPs to
a positive list of pedagogical interventions which will exclude infrastructure projects and
establishing a mechanism to maximize the likelihood of behavioral changes from school-level
actors as a results of the EPs and grants (e.g. disbursing grants conditional on value-added
created by the EP in previous year).

 Component 2. Improving the Management and Evaluation Capacity of the Education Sector.

 The two subcomponents are designed to: (i) improve the management capacity at the central,
provincial and municipal levels with emphasis on activities related to project implementation;
and (ii) improve the evaluation capacity of the Ministry of Education as a tool for improving
learning outcomes.

 Subcomponent 2.1. Strengthening Management Capacity at the Central, Provincial and
Municipal levels.

 This subcomponent will support activities aimed at strengthening the capacity of the Ministry
of Education and provincial and municipal education agencies in the targeted ZIPs to: (i) deliver
education services; (ii) implement Ministry policies and programs; and (iii) implement the
project. The project will support this goal by providing management training to central,
provincial and municipal officers to: (i) strengthen their ability to deliver quality education
services; and (ii) improve their managerial, financial, and administrative capacity to function in a
more effective and efficient manner.

 Subcomponent 2.2. Improving Evaluation Capacity of the Ministry of Education.

 This sub-component aims at supporting the Ministry of Education in their efforts to improve the
assessment system by providing capacity building and technical assistance for the education
authorities (including the National System of Assessment Technical Group # NSATG and
relevant provincial officers) in the implementation of two end-of-primary education assessment
exercises in Portuguese and mathematics. The project will also support the implementation of a
follow-up early grade reading assessment exercise as well as activities aimed at improving the
capacity of the NSATG to conceptualize, implement, and be informed consumers of rigorous
impact evaluations (IEs) through a learning-by-doing approach.

D. Project location (if known)
The project will be implemented in all 18 provinces in Angola with a majority of the project
activities focused on the municipal education departments and schools and local communities.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The borrower has weak institutional capacity for safeguard policies. However, the project will
focus on improvement in the quality of the delivery of education. Therefore, there will be no
project construction and thus, the project will not trigger land acquisition and/or any population
involuntary resettlement safeguards. The project will make use of a participatory approach so the
social impacts are expected to be positive. Thus, there is low likelihood and low impact
associated social issues.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS)
   Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                              Yes              No             TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                                                      X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                    X


Environmental Category: C - Not Required

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 10/04/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   N/A




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                       Ms Cristina Isabel Panasco Santos                    07/07/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:        Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                             08/03/2011
   Comments: No SG specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS. Later, should
   project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult
   ASPEN.
 Sector Manager:                         Mr Peter Nicolas Materu                              09/02/2011
   Comments:
