                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/06/2011                                       Report No.: 62409
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P096360                 Original Project Name: Water Sector
                                             Institutional Development
Country: Angola                              Project ID: P124511
Project Name: Water Sector Institutional Development AF (PDISA-AF)
Task Team Leader: Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 4, 2011        Estimated Board Date: July 5, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTUW                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Water supply (100%)
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (90%);Water resource management (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            120.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                        0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective (PDO) of the combined original project and the
Additional Financing is to strengthen the institutional capacity and efficiency of agencies
in the water sector to expand access to water service delivery.

3. Project Description
The original project includes four components which are summarized below:

 Component 1 - Development of Institutions in the Water Supply and Sanitation Sub-
Sector: The objective of this component is to strengthen the institutional framework for
the water supply subsector at both the central and regional levels. The objective will be
achieved through the implementation of three related subcomponents: (1) the
development of the Asset Management Unit; (2) the creation of Provincial Water Supply
and Sanitation Utilities (PWSUs); and (3) the development of a Regulatory Agency for
the water supply and sanitation subsector.
 Component 2 - Water Resources Management: The objective of this component is to
support the strengthening of the institutional framework for the water resources
management subsector. This objective will be achieved through three subcomponents
which are: (1) the development of an institution for water resources management; (2) the
development of systems for water resources management; and (3) the rehabilitation of
water resources management systems.

 Component 3 - Rehabilitation of Water Supply Systems: The objective of this
component is to support the physical rehabilitation of selected urban water supply
systems due to the critical need to reverse many years of inadequate investments and
maintenance. This objective will be achieved through two subcomponents: (1) the
construction of approximately 240 kilometers of water supply networks and about 72,000
domestic house connections; and (2) the preparation of technical cadastre and
implementation of an information system.

 Component 4 - Capacity Building and Change Management: The overall objective of
this component is to strengthen the ability of government to improve efficiency of water
supply in Angola by engaging stakeholders, managing and communicating change, and
improving the abilities of individuals to play their parts, especially at management but
also at technical levels. Included in the support at the technical level is the
implementation unit which MINEA has established (Financial and Contract Management
Unit) to manage the implementation of all projects in the sector regardless of the source
of financing. The objectives will be achieved through three subcomponents: (1) capacity
building at the national and provincial levels; (2) capacity building and training at the
utility level; and (3) technical assistance to facilitate change management and good
governance, largely through communications.

 Additional activities supported by the Additional Financing are:

 Components 1 and 4 - No changes are proposed.

 Component 2 - No changes are expected other than the identification of alternatives to
one of the basins originally proposed for piloting capacity building for river basin
management. The original Project proposed the Cuanza and Cubango river basins as
pilots; the AF proposes to substitute the Cubal da Hanha-Catumbela-Cavaco-Coporolo
watersheds as pilots in place of the Cubango.

 Component 3 - Specifically, the Additional Financing will scale-up the activities
included in component 3 and will rehabilitate the water production and expand the
distribution systems through investments in the nine cities included in the original
project. These investments include: (a) rehabilitation of production and treatment
facilities, (b) construction of new water distribution reservoirs, at existing water treatment
plants; (c) construction of new facilities such as water quality laboratories and related
equipment, at existing water treatment plants; (d) replacement of electro-mechanical
equipment; (e) construction of new wells; (f) construction of about 403 kilometers of
water supply networks; (g) construction of about 60,000 domestic connections; and (h)
provision of technical assistance, including for the supervision of construction contracts.
The AF will also prepare the technical cadastre for about 60,000 connections to enable:
(a) an information system for measuring water consumption; and (b) a system to process
bills to customers and to record customer payments.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will support physical works associated with the water supply network in nine
cities: M’Banza Congo, Menongue, Lubango, Luena, Malange, Kuito, N’Dalatando,
Huambo, and Uige. The additional financing will support expansion of water supply
networks and household connections in the nine cities that were originally included in the
design of the original project but needed to be deferred because of cuts in budget for the
original project, or entails expansion of activity in addition to what was considered in the
original project. It is envisaged that project activities under Subcomponent 2.3
(rehabilitation of the national hydrometric network), Subcomponent 3.1 (installation of
approximately 643 kilometers of piped water supply networks and some 132,000 new
domestic connections in urban and peri-urban areas in the 9 target cities), Subcomponent
3.2 (purchase of chemicals for water treatment), Subcomponents 4.1 (rehabilitation of the
Onga Zanga Investigation and Research Center near Luanda) and 4.2 (funding for small
civil works projects to serve peri-urban areas) may generate temporary adverse
environmental and social impacts limited primarily to small-scale, localized construction
activities.

  The nature of the civil works and project activities associated with the additional
financing are as follows:
  Subcomponent 3.1:
  - Prepare alternative accesses during construction.
  - Dig trenches (approximately 1 m deep), install HDPE tubing and cover with soil.
  - Connect selected households to distribution network and install water meters and back
yard taps.

 Subcomponent 3.2:
 - Purchase of chemicals for water treatment
 - Construction of adequate storage for annual supply of chemicals.
 - Handling of chemicals and packaging.
 - Disposal of empty chemical packaging.

 It is important to note that the project activities will complement water supply network
investments already being financed through the World Bank’s Emergency Multi-Sector
Recovery Program (EMRP) and projects financed by the Government of China in a
number of the target cities, but the PDISA original project and additional financing are
not dependent upon them, and these other projects have their own safeguards systems
approach. The Bank and the Borrower are aware of the need to coordinate oversight and
management of the various projects to ensure compliance with national laws and Bank
safeguard policies.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Harvey D. Van Veldhuizen (MIGEP)
   Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The additional financing will support more of the activities identified in the original
project, which was designated as a Category B project consistent with the provisions of
OP/BP 4.01. Safeguard policies triggered by the Project include: Environmental
Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The project will
finance extension of water supply distribution networks in select cities (construction and
rehabilitation) and construction and rehabilitation of the deteriorated national
hydrometric network along with rehabilitation of select learning and research facilities
located in the outskirts of Luanda. The potential adverse environmental and social
impacts related to this project were addressed during project preparation. At appraisal, it
was determined that no large scale, significant, or irreversible adverse environmental or
social impacts are expected. No major works are expected. The principal safeguard issue
with respect to OP/BP 4.01 is construction site impacts that are relatively small in scale,
time bound and manageable in terms of complying with Bank Safeguard Policies. The
contribution to any potential cumulative impacts associated with other water supply
network investments in select cities are expected to be minimal; nevertheless, the Bank
team and the Borrower are making concerted efforts to coordinate the other water sector
projects in the nine cities to ensure compatibility of investments and avoid cumulative
impacts.

 Specific adverse environmental and social impacts that may occur during project
implementation as a result of certain types of activities that will occur under the
additional financing are as follows:
 Purchase of bulk (annual) supplies of various water treatment plant chemicals:
 - Improper handling and storage of chemicals, and improper disposal of containers and
packaging materials
 Water supply networks and domestic connections in urban and peri-urban areas:
 - Temporary nuisance to local residents during construction especially with regards to
access and noise
 - Pollution from improper storage and handling of diesel fuel and used engine oil
 - Accumulation of solid waste during construction activities creating health risks and
negative aesthetics
 - Potential spread of infectious diseases due to presence of work force in local
communities

  As in any infrastructure project, there is some likelihood for land acquisition for project
activities which would include: construction of small buildings to house and protect
instruments near hydrometric stations, rehabilitation or construction of access tracks to
hydrometric stations, installation of buried pipes in peri-urban areas for water supply
systems, small pilot projects such as installation of community water fountains and
temporary worker camps, spoil dumps, and material laydown areas.

  To ensure project compliance with Bank safeguard policies and national laws, the
Borrower prepared a detailed Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) as part of the original project. Since
the activities supported by the additional financing are essentially identical to those
proposed under the original project, the ESMF and RPF prepared for the original project
remain relevant and are applicable to the current Additional Financing project. The
ESMF lists the potential impacts of the project and establishes clear procedures for
environmental screening along with measures to mitigate and reduce the impact of each
type of activity that may result in adverse environmental and social impacts during the
planning, construction and operational phases of the project. The Environment and
Social Unit (ESU) established by the Ministry of Energy and Water (MINEA) will hold
primary responsibility for implementing and monitoring the ESMF and RPF to ensure
that project activities are in compliance with World Bank safeguard policies and national
laws. Both Frameworks specify the roles and responsibilities of the ESU and MINEA
agents and outline necessary reporting procedures for managing and monitoring
environmental and social impacts related to project investments. The ESMF specifies the
training, capacity building and technical assistance needed to ensure that the ESU can
successfully implement both Frameworks. The Safeguards instruments to be produced
during project implementation are expected to be Environmental and Social Management
Plans for construction and Abbreviated Resettlement Plans in the event there is
acquisition of land, either permanent or temporary, or impact on assets or livelihood
because of the taking of land.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The civil works and other construction and rehabilitation activities proposed under the
project are relatively small in scale and the potential adverse environmental and social
impacts are expected to be minor and localized. Indirect and long-term impacts are not
expected.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower prepared the ESMF and RPF to ensure that the project remains in full
compliance with Bank Safeguard Policies as well as national legislation throughout
project implementation. Both the ESMF and RPF include clear guidelines and measures
to mitigate any adverse environmental and social impacts of the project, almost all of
which are construction related. The ESMF provides a screening process for establishing
the level of environmental management required for each type of project activity. With
respect to implementation of the two Frameworks, an Environmental Social Unit (ESU)
will be created within the Technical Support area, established by MINEA, that will hold
primary responsibility for all environmental and social issues of the project including
implementation of the ESMF and RPF.

 However, it remains clear that the institutional and human capacity to effectively
address and mitigate environmental and social impacts of the project in accordance with
Bank standards is limited at the Provincial level. Furthermore, the institutional capacity to
implement measures outlined in the ESMF and RPF were considered to be weak. To
address this gap, the ESMF and project design identify specific training and capacity
building for:
 1. Hydrometric technicians from the Department of Water Resources
 2. Technical staff of the ESU
 3. Managers of water points and other community water supply projects
 4. Construction personnel
 5. Personnel dealing with chemicals for the water treatment plants

  The project will finance all training and capacity building activities associated with
ensuring that the borrower has sufficient capacity to implement and supervise the ESMF
and RPF, and subsequent Environmental and Social Management Plans for construction
and Abbreviated RAPS (if required) throughout project implementation. Due to
circumstances outside the project, progress on effectiveness of the original project had
been significantly delayed; however, during preparation of the Additional Financing, the
team visited selected cities among the nine in which similar investments were carried out
under Bank funding as part of the Emergency Multi-Sector Recovery Program (EMRP1
and 2).

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key project stakeholders are the Ministry of Energy and Water, provincial
governments and households in the nine target cities. Public consultations were held as
part of the original project during project preparation to disseminate and review the
objectives, scope and design of the Project as well as the purpose and content of the
ESMF and RPF. Project beneficiaries were included in the project development
consultation process and were consulted directly with respect to the ESMF and RPF. The
target audience for the public consultations was national and provincial governments,
civil society and local communities in the nine cities where the bulk of the project
activities will be implemented. In addition, workshops were held in Luanda during
project preparation to engage and consult with members of national government, the
private sector as well as civil society on project design. Provincial governments
disclosed the ESMF and RPF to households in the nine target cities and requested
feedback on the measures and processes established to mitigate and reduce any adverse
environmental and social impact of the project. All project beneficiaries have access to
the Portuguese version of the summaries of the ESMF and RPF in their city. English
versions of the ESMF and RPF were disclosed prior to appraisal in the InfoShop. The
issues, stakeholders, and nine target cities remain unchanged from the original project;
therefore, additional consultation as part of the Additional Financing is not necessary.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02/18/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             02/25/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/02/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02/18/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             02/25/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/02/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
  ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

  OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          N/A
  review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          N/A
  credit/loan?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares              06/02/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Harvey D. Van Veldhuizen                  06/02/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Kristine Schwebach                        06/02/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad                        06/02/2011
  Comments:
