                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/26/2012                                      Report No.: AC6462
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Argentina                             Project ID: P106684
Project Name: Second Provincial Agricultural Development
Task Team Leader: Ayat Soliman
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 10, 2008 Estimated Board Date: September 25, 2008
Managing Unit: LCSAR                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (31%);Public administration-
Agriculture, fishing and forestry (23%);Irrigation and drainage (20%);Agro-industry,
marketing, and trade (16%);Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (10%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (50%);Rural non-farm income generation
(30%);Land administration and management (10%);Water resource management (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           300
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                       58.00
         Local Farmer Organizations                                     95.00
                                                                       153.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                          Simple []           Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to increase the productivity and sales volume of
small and medium-sized producers benefited under the Project.

3. Project Description
The Project is being implemented over a period of six years and has the following three
components: (1) Support to Pre-investment Activities; (2) Investment Subprojects for
Competitiveness; and (3) Program Management.

  -     Component 1: Support to Pre-investment Activities (US$5.6 million). This
component finances, at the central level, consultants and non-consultant services,
training, goods and equipment, and at the provincial level, operating costs for meetings,
workshops, capacity-building and technical assistance (TA) activities to facilitate: (i) the
meeting of eligibility requirements through the preparation of Provincial Agricultural
Development Strategy (PADS) and implementation of institutional development
activities; (ii) the identification and preparation of subproject profiles consistent with the
PADS, including Regional Development Initiatives (RDIs) and Innovation Transfer
Initiatives ITIs; and (iii) the preparation of full subproject proposals.

 -      Component 2: Investment Subprojects for Competitiveness (US$275.3 million).
This component finances works, goods, non-consultant and consultant services, training,
and operating costs for investment subprojects the profiles of which have been approved
by the Investment Programming Committee (Comité de Programación de Inversiones,
CPI) in the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MGAyP), based on their
agreement with subproject objectives and provincial priorities as expressed in the EPSAs,
and the detailed preparation reports of which have been cleared by the Technical
Evaluation Committee (Comité Técnico de Evaluación, CTE) within the Central Project
Implementation Unit (Unidad Ejecutora Central, UEC) located under MGAyP. Under this
component the Project finances provincial or national investment subprojects of two main
types: (i) agricultural competitiveness; and (ii) institutional development. Implementation
of provincial agricultural competitiveness subprojects is under the responsibility of the
provinces and combines public "hard" and/or "soft" investments, along with private on-
farm and off-farm investments as required to achieve the stated objectives.

  -      Component 3: Program Management (US$19.1 million). This component finances
50 percent of the UEC's costs (works, goods and equipment; consultant and non-
consultant services; training; and operating costs) related to overall project coordination
and management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and preparation of special studies
(i.e., policy development). This mainly includes long-term individual consultants, small
civil works for the rehabilitation of offices, computer and office equipment for project
staff, travel and subsistence for supervision activities of project staff, workshops and
training, and consulting firms for a variety of studies and assessments. The other 50
percent of program management costs is financed by IDB's Conditional Credit Like
Investment Project (CCLIP) since both operations are utilizing the same the UEC.

 Main Activities. Based on the experience from PROSAP I, diagnostic studies carried out
by the provinces, and the information captured from subproject profiles presented by the
provinces, the Project concentrates mainly on supporting the following types of
agricultural competitiveness investments:

  -      Public Infrastructure and Services Investments. Building on the experiences of
PROSAP I and the demands received during preparation, the investment focus for public
goods and services supports: (i) irrigation and drainage systems; (ii) basic public
infrastructure that has productive ends (including transport, communication, and energy);
(iii) sanitary and quality promotion and control systems; (iv) infrastructure and services
to improve commercial development; (v) land administration-related activities in support
of productive ends; and (vi) comprehensive, coordinated TA linked to the aforementioned
activities. It is estimated that approximately 35 public subprojects will be financed by the
Project.
  -     Private On-farm and Off-farm Investments. A co-financing line through Non-
Reimbursable Contribution (NRC) to support private on-farm and off-farm investments
has been established to complement the aforementioned public investments supported by
the Project. The objective is to co-finance investments incorporated in business plans
(including value chain integration activities), presented by small and medium-size
producers and small agribusinesses, which could benefit from externalities derived from
PROSAP II activities but which have limitations on internalizing such benefits or
impacts. The grants co-finance up to 40 percent of private individual or group
investments (a maximum of US$15,000 for individual producer on-farm investments and
US$190,000 for producer group off-farm investments). The remaining 60 percent of the
investment is financed by the beneficiaries (either solely or with the support of
commercial financing).

 Pilot Instruments. Based on lessons learned from PROSAP I and client demands, the
Project is putting in place pilot mechanisms to identify investment subprojects focused
on: (i) Regional Development Initiatives based on the integration of value chains in areas
that have the potential to sustainably develop agricultural production; and (ii) Innovation
Transfer Initiatives involving both public and private actors.

  Institutional Development. PROSAP II supports institutional capacity building to
consolidate progress achieved under the original operation and ensure appropriate
capacity to implement new activities. At the central level, related activities support: (i)
the development of MGAyPs long-term rural development policy framework; (ii) the
ongoing strengthening of the UEC's administrative and management capacities, with
emphasis on capacity-building measures that promote the adoption of the new conceptual
orientations of the Project; (iii) the development of the new institutional approach
through which to mainstream PROSAP II's contribution within MGAyP's structure; and
(iv) an institutional study to analyze different institutional development options for the
UEC. At the provincial level, PROSAP II finances institutional strengthening measures to
build the capacities needed for the efficient implementation of subprojects. Such
activities focus on managing the subproject cycle and are planned and organized by the
UEC on the basis of project-supported Institutional Development Plans. The Project also
finances demand-driven institutional development activities from the provinces to build
capacity and/or address specific needs over and above the minimum functional support
provided under Component 1.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
While the Project has a national geographic scope, subproject activities are concentrated
in non-Pampean agricultural areas (i.e., the Regional Economies). The Project focuses on
areas with larger concentrations of small and medium-size producers that have the
potential to fully participate in modern and competitive agribusiness systems. By
February 2012, the portfolio of subprojects to be financed under PROSAPII had been
identified with over 95% of the provincial resources committed: a total of 21 sub-
projects at different stages of development (14 under preparation and 7 under
implementation) in 9 provinces (Entre Rios, La Rioja, Neuquén, Catamarca, Jujuy, Salta,
Córdoba, Mendoza and San Juan). The target population of the project is small and
medium-size producers who have had limited access to value added markets and have not
benefited from the recent growth of the agricultural sector because of difficulties in
accessing production services. Specifically, 68,000 small and medium-size producers, or
approximately 34 percent of the total of small and medium-size producers in the Regional
Economies, are expected to benefit from PROSAP II activities.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Ruth Tiffer-Sotomayor (LCSEN)
   Ms Lilian Pedersen (LCSSO)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Environmental Assessment safeguards policy (OP/BP 4.01) was triggered at
appraisal because the interventions resulting from the implementation of Component 1
activities could have negative environmental and social impacts in the subproject areas.
In addition, four other safeguard policies (Forests, Pest Management, Indigenous People
and Involuntary Resettlement) were triggered at appraisal to address potential impacts of
subprojects and proper mitigation measures related to these policies. OP/BP 4.04, Natural
Habitats, and OP/BP 4.37, Safety of Dams, were not triggered at appraisal for the reasons
described below.

 Subproject investments: These include rehabilitation of existing roads; construction of
new small dams, rehabilitation of irrigation systems (some of them connected to large
dams); construction of gas pipelines; improvement of drainage systems; construction of
low and medium voltage transmission lines; land titling; and construction of wells for
water use purposes in agriculture or for human consumption.

 Environmental and social impacts: Specific subprojects were not identified before
appraisal and, accordingly, the specific location and environmental and social conditions
and impacts of the Project were also not known. During project implementation, as sub-
projects have been identified and proposed by PROSAP II, the Bank has determined that,
in some cases, the subprojects will have impacts in areas of sensitive natural habitats such
as wetlands or are located close to or within protected areas with different levels of
conservation and management status. Project implementation has demonstrated that these
impacts will vary depending on the specific site location and type of development (i.e.,
rehabilitation of irrigation systems, road works, electricity networks, etc). Some of the
impacts connected to the project might include: soil movements to build irrigation
channels; extraction of underground waters or diversion of superficial waters to supply
irrigation and drinking water systems; cutting of vegetation to allow construction of
irrigation channels; interventions in public or private lands; titling of land currently
without agricultural production; and production of residual waters from slaughterhouses,
noise, dust, etc. All subprojects are Category B and comply with the requirement of
preparing an Environmental Impact Assessment and a related Environmental
Management Plan to address potential adverse effects.

  Environmental Classification: For the purposes of the World Bank's environmental risk
rating, the Project is rated as a Category B project. It was agreed with project
counterparts at appraisal that PROSAP II would not finance any subproject that would
cause large scale negative impacts (Category A under the World Bank definition). To this
end, the Environmental and Social Manual prepared by the Project included a negative
list, approved by the Bank, of Category A subproject types that would not be financed.

  Environmental And Social Framework Instrument: As in the first operation, an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF also denominated as
Environmental and Social Manual) was developed as part of the EA process to set forth
the specific measures to mitigate all identified impacts, including screening criteria for
subprojects and sites. The ESMF describes the procedure and requirements to screen
subprojects and to determine which of them should prepare an EIA and an EMP. The
EMPs include measures for: waste management; labor and road safety; impacts on public
services and private land; environmental measures to protect soil, air, water, and
landscapes; and monitoring programs, communication plans, information disclosure, and
grievance mechanisms.

 Restructuring: The proposed project restructuring is for triggering Safety of Dams
(OP/BP 4.37) and Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04). This is required because the Borrower
has sought support for subprojects that (i) intervene in areas connected to natural and
critical habitats and (ii) entail irrigation systems connected to existing dams.

 Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)

 At appraisal, it was agreed that all project activities would be implemented in areas
already under agricultural production and subprojects within protected areas (national and
provincial) would not be eligible for funding. Thus this policy was not triggered. During
implementation, however, the Borrower has requested support from the Bank to include
subprojects connected to natural and/or critical habitats such as wetlands and Convention
on Wetlands of International Importance (Ramsar Convention) sites, where agricultural
activity already exists and the benefits of improving productivity have been evaluated as
strongly positive.The Bank considers that the subprojects would benefit from the
triggering of OP/BP 4.04 to support the strengthening of associated natural habitat
management instruments.

 One subproject, Livestock and Commercial Development (Province of Neuquén), would
affect highland wetlands, "mallines", which are the main source of pasture for cattle
ranching. The subproject has included specific measures to ensure mitigation of impacts,
including the use of only native species, water resources management, and fencing to
manage the grazing load. These measures have been included in the updated EIA and
EMP of the subproject.

 In addition, three subprojects have been identified in and around a critical habitat,
Lagunas de Huanacache, Desaguadero and Bebedero, which is a Ramsar site located in
the southern part of the San Juan Province. This Ramsar site includes an area of 900,000
hectares and its administration and protection are the responsibility of three provincial
governments (San Juan, San Luis and Mendoza). The subprojects around and within the
area of the Ramsar site are: (i) Development of Irrigation Area of the San Juan-Canal
Céspedes- Sarmiento Subproject (Province of San Juan), which has completed all
relevant technical and safeguard requirement and is under implementation upstream of
the wetland area; (ii) Rural Roads for Agricultural Development in San Juan (Province of
San Juan), for which the relevant technical and safeguard requirements have been
completed and approval for construction start up has not yet been awared, and (iii) Rural
Electrification for Livestock Development in Departamento 25 de Mayo Subproject
(Province of San Juan) for which the relevant technical and safeguard requirements have
been completed and approval for construction start up has not yet been awarded.

 For this group of subprojects, in addition to the individual subproject environmental
management plans elaborated by PROSAP and approved by the Bank, and in view of the
potential cumulative impacts, MAGyP and Province of San Juan have developed an
Action Plan to increase environmental conservation of the ecosystem surrounding the
wetland which is currently affected because of the agriculture infrastructure and land use
upstream of the lagoon. The Action Plan's main objective is to contribute to the
improvement of environmental and water conditions in the wetland and support
monitoring efforts of the Province to restore these ecosystems. The Province has agreed
to implement this plan, financing its implementation with support of the technical
assistance components under the three subprojects. The final version of the Action Plan
has been incorporated into the relevant EIAs and EMPs of the three above mentioned
subprojects.

 Four priority strategic areas have been identified for the Action Plan: (i) improve
management of water resources including monitoring of water quantity and quality; (ii)
strengthen conservation of biodiversity, inventories, and biological monitoring; (iii)
improve infrastructure and site management; and (iv) promote social development of
populations linked to wetland (e.g. lagoon communities, etc).
 Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)

  At appraisal, large scale water infrastructure such as construction of new dams was
considered ineligible for World Bank financing under the PROSAP II Project, thus
OP/BP 4.37 was not triggered. However during implementation, the Borrower proposed
two subprojects involving irrigation systems linked to existing dams, which are worthy of
financing based on their clear positive impacts on water availability and agricultural
productivity in the subproject target areas.

  The two subprojects connected to existing dams are: Modernization of the Irrigation
System of San Patricio de Chañar in the Province of Neuquén (El Chañar Dam) and
Reconstruction and Rehabilitation of the Irrigation System of Los Altos in the Province
of Catamarca (Sumampa Dam). The Bank considers that the subprojects would benefit
from the triggering of OP/BP 4.37 to support the strengthening of associated dam safety
management instruments.

 PROSAP II has initiated a cooperation mechanism with the Argentine Safety of Dams
Authority (Organismo Regulador de Seguridad de Represas, ORSEP), which is the
independent national regulatory agency responsible for supervising the safety of dams
and, as such, works in collaboration with the Ministry of Planning, Public Investments
and Services.

  El Chañar Dam: This dam is a "compensatory" dam the function of which is to help to
regulate the flow of two upstream dams in the Cerros Colorado complex. The dam is 14
m (maximum height) and 6285 m in length and holds a volume of 34.500.000 m3.
ORSEP works at the Provincial level under agreements of cooperation. In Neuquén
province, ORSEP has been supervising dams for many years, including the El Chañar
Dam. According to ORSEP's latest dam safety report on El Chañar, it has adequate dam
safety, maintenance, and emergency plans. These measures are consistent with the
requirements of OP/BP 4.37 as reviewed by the Bank and agreed by ORSEP in its
technical assessment. These measures have been incorporated into the revised EIA and
EMP of the subproject.

 Sumampa Dam: This dam was built in 1969 and has a height of 44 m and a length of
378 m and holds a volume of 16 300 000 m3. The reservoir is affected by increased
sedimentation. In October 2011, ORSEP performed a dam safety supervision of the
Sumampa dam and found that the operator needs to implement specific measures to
improve dam safety, maintenance, and environmental prevention procedures and actions.
The Borrower prepared an Action Plan to ensure the implementation of the ORSEP
recommendations before the start of such subproject. The EIA and EMP of the
subproject have been updated to reflect the dam safety and other relevant measures and
ensure compliance with the safeguards policies.

 An important output of the project is that ORSEP and PROSAP have signed an
agreement of cooperation which will ensure a proper dam safety supervision of any
future subproject connected to a dam under PROSAP.
 Borrower next steps:

 An updated ESMF to reflect the triggering of the OP/BP 4.37 and OP/BP 4.04 and
related management measures has been discussed, agreed and finalized with the client.
The revised and strengthened ESMF has been redisclosed to apply the triggering of the
new two policies on June 15, 2012.

 The revised ESMF includes additional procedures to evaluate subprojects involving
areas containing natural and critical habitats and irrigation systems connected to dams to
ensure dam safety and due diligence according to the safety of dams policies. It also
includes a revised negative list and checklist to ensure a better screening-out of
subprojects which are Category A and better identification and management of
subprojects involving critical or natural habitats. It also requires preparation of an
Environmental Accumulative Impact Assessment when more than two subprojects with
similar impacts are identified in the same geographical, hydrological or direct influence
area, along with a Mitigation Action Plan for Accumulative Impacts (MAPAI) to be
implemented by the involved province. The Environmental Unit of PROSAP will
continue to be responsible for reporting on the status of such subprojects and providing
detailed supervision for the implementation of the MAPAI.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The potential adverse indirect environmental and social impacts depend of the type of
subprojects and the sites. Some of these include: (i) a potential increase in the use
agrochemicals associated with increased agricultural production resulting from the
improved availability of water, electricity and market connectivity (roads); (ii) potential
overexploitation of aquifers due to increased pumping of water from new wells; (iii)
potential increase in the salinity of soil due to increased irrigation; and (iv) adverse land
use changes due to titling subprojects, especially near forested areas. Possible long term
impacts may arise from the construction of new small dams for irrigation systems which
may promote the construction of slaughter houses and increased use of pesticides,
thereby having downstream effects on river flow, aquatic ecosystems, and water quality.

  The EMPs prepared for each subproject includes mitigation and prevention measures to
decrease and manage these indirect or long term impacts. Agricultural best practices will
also be introduced to the subprojects. For instance, subprojects might include among the
financed activities: (i) integrated pest management plans with capacity building activities
to farmers and cooperatives; (ii) hydrogeological and hydrological studies to support
sustainable management water resources; and (iii) water quality monitoring systems in
irrigation subprojects to prevent contamination of superficial and subterranean waters.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Each subproject is prepared by PROSAP II and the participating provinces, which assess
the environmental and social impacts of potential alternatives. A first step in the
preparation of subprojects is an extensive 'interview process" with the beneficiaries which
contributes to the project design and consideration of alternatives. The Bank reviews each
subproject and its EIA and, if necessary, provides recommendations to improve design
and reduce, prevent, and avoid adverse environmental and social impacts.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is part of the
Operational Manual of the project. It guides the environmental procedures for the entire
PROSAP II program, not just those activities financed by the Bank. The screening
mechanism includes a three-tiered ranking procedure for determining the probable
impacts of proposed works. The ESMF includes a description of eligible subproject types
and provides a generic description of the types of impacts that could be expected from
each of the major subproject types. The ESMF also describes a subproject screening
procedure to identify subprojects with potential for adverse environmental impacts,
including Category A subprojects which are ineligible for Project finance. This screening
mechanism is tested and modified continuously throughout the project implementation
period. During implementation, the Bank has periodically reviewed the ESMF and its
screening procedures, the categorization criteria for subprojects, and the EIA
requirements in order to improve environmental management and prevent negative
impacts from the investments.

 The overall responsibility for ensuring compliance with the environmental framework
rests within the Environmental and Social Unit of PROSAP. The current unit is
comprised of four staff, in addition to short-term consultants who assist with aspects of
management oversight, review, and quality control functions. The PROSAP has also
strengthened its cadre of professionals with technical staff to lead the field supervision of
safeguards compliance. Additional capacity building activities of PROSAP departments
involved with project preparation and implementation and its participating provincial
entities is underway as part of the technical assistance activities at the provincial level.

 The main responsibility for implementing overall compliance of subprojects with the
safeguards policies rests in the Provincial Subproject Implementation Entities (UEP).
Each UEP must hire a full time Environmental Specialist (IASO) who is responsible to
supervise compliance of subprojects with their EMPs and the safeguards policies. A most
recent review indicates that all provinces that have initiated implementation of
subprojects have an IASO on board. At the national level, the Social-Environmental Unit
would oversee quality control and implement specific training in the use of the EMF.

 The capacity of the implementing agency was deemed satisfactory during the first
operation. Current safeguard compliance is deemed moderately satisfactory, with further
capacity building needed at the provincial level. This has been addressed as a priority in
the institutional strengthening program action plan and within the technical assistance
activities of the individual subprojects.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Project stakeholders include farmers, farming communities, agricultural business owners
and indigenous, urban and suburban communities of subproject targeted areas.

 The mechanism of consultation includes: (i) targeted surveys of the beneficiaries for
project design; (ii) provincial public hearings, "audiencias públicas", even in provinces
where this is not a requirement for project development; and (iii) more recent "focused
public hearings" held in communities, for instance where slaughterhouses will be built or
indigenous communities are found.

 Bidding documents of new subprojects include the requirement for contractors and the
UEP to disseminate information about the grievance mechanism available to potentially
affected people, including the telephone number and electronic address of the designated
contact person in the community.

 Safeguards documents such as the Project Environmental and Social Manual were
disclosed before appraisal in the Bank Infoshop and the client web site. As part of the
restructuring, the revised Project ESMF, including the requirements of the new
safeguards policies, has been re-disclosed in PROSAP web site and at the Bank Infoshop.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    06/15/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                07/11/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 07/11/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    03/03/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                04/10/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 04/10/2008
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    03/03/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                04/10/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 04/10/2008
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                     N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                 N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                  N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                 Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)             Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the             Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of          No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other     Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                        Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                       No
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or      N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                     Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed      N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   N/A
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           N/A
constraints?
  Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include     No
  provisions for certification system?
  OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
  Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                           Yes
  Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts      N/A
  (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
  Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements        N/A
  been made for public awareness and training?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Ayat Soliman                              09/10/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Ruth Tiffer-Sotomayor                     03/29/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Lilian Pedersen                           05/20/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan                           09/14/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Laurent Msellati                          09/14/2012
  Comments:
