                                  INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                 APPRAISAL STAGE
.
                                                                                      Report No.: ISDSA722
.
Date ISDS
                                  20-June-2013
Prepared/Updated:
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                         Argentina                Project ID:              P125804
    Project Name:                    Adaptation Fund: Increasing Climate Resilience and Enhancing Sustainable
                                     Land Management in the Southwest of the Buenos Aires Province Project
    Task Team Leader:                Marcelo Hector Acerbi
    Estimated Appraisal Date:        20-June-2013             Estimated Board Date:    N/A
    Managing Unit:                   LCSEN                    Lending Instrument:      Investment Project
                                                                                       Financing
    Sector:                          Agricultural extension and research (25%), Crops (25%), Irrigation and
                                     drainage (25%), Animal production (25%)
    Theme:                           Climate change (40%), Land administration and management (20%), Water
                                     resource management (20%), Vulnerability assessment and monitoring (10%),
                                     Environmental policies and institutions (10%)
    Financing (in USD Million)
        Financing Source                                                                                    Amount
       Recipient (in-kind)                                                                                    1.859
       Adaptation Fund                                                                                        3.960
        Total                                                                                                 5.819
    Environmental Category:          B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?      No
.
.
    2. Project Objectives
    The PDO is to contribute to reducing climate and man-made vulnerability of the agroecosystems in the
    Southwest of the Buenos Aires Province by increasing adaptive capacity of key local institutions and actors and
    piloting and disseminating climate resilient and sustainable land management practices.

    Participatory planning processes will be used to identify and pilot concrete adaptation measures focusing on
    water, crops and livestock management to promote climate resilience.
.
    3. Project Description
    The Project aims at promoting an enabling environment for climate adaptation as a continued, inter-sectoral and
    inter-institutional learning process, and to implement production-based adaptation measures in dry land
    agroecosystems, by introducing techniques for climate resilient and sustainable management of natural
resources, supported by cross-institutional work aimed at (1) creating an adequate political, social, and economic
framework to ensure adoption, sustainability, continuity, and further development of the adaptation efforts; and
(2) bolstering and fine-tuning adaptation measures identified and chosen through institutional and
community-level capacity building.

The Project consists of the following components:

Component 1: Reducing Institutional and Community-level Vulnerability

1.     Improvement of response and planning capacity of local institutions and communities by promoting
people’s engagement in data collection and analysis from inter-institutional to household level.

2.     Collection of data and transformation of such data into information through the establishment of an
Information and Early-Warning System on Climate Change and Desertification (IEWS).

3.       Creation of a Regional Consultative Observatory of Public Policies on Climate Change and
Desertification (Observatory) through institutional and sector-specific networking among related stakeholders to
utilize the created information in the relevant decision-making processes.

4.     Development of innovative and participatory capacity building and governance tools through specific
programs targeting institutions, agricultural producers and their families.

Component 2: Implementing Adaptation Measures in Productive Agroecosystems

1.       Selection and appraisal, through a participatory process, of the main interventions to be implemented on
each Specific Intervention Site covering small-scale
pilot interventions selected from a menu of options related to adaptive management of livestock, crops and water.

2.      Development and field application of the Sustainable Land Management (SLM) practices selected for the
Project’s area of influence, including management practices on water, livestock and crops. Other activities could
include programs to improve access to markets and options to promote productive alternatives

Component 3: Applying Participatory Approach to Knowledge Management and Local Capacity
Development for Adaptation to Climate Change

1.    Engagement of directly targeted farmers and partner organizations in Project monitoring, adaptive
management and dissemination of lessons learned.

2.     Provision of training and tools for the participation in the development of local and
farm/household-specific adaptation strategies.

3.    Capacity building with a focus on the development of knowledge systems that promote continuous
improvement and adaptive management.

4.     Development of a specific methodology to address the following topics: (i) climate change and
implications for agriculture and identification of potential response options; (ii) prioritization of response
options; and (iii) development of action plans.

5.     Promotion of training for local groups for carrying out KM tasks, and mutual knowledge sharing between
and beyond the key counties of Puán, Villarino and Patagones.

6.     Preparation of a specific communication and KM strategy to identify specific means to involve different
stakeholder groups and find effective ways for knowledge sharing.
7.     Organization of joint demonstrative field visits to promote hands-on dialogue.

8.      Dissemination of good practices and lessons learnt at different administrative levels, including relevant
international forums.

Component 4: Developing a Sustainability Strategy

1.      Generation of institutional and community level agreements for the measures to be sustained beyond the
Project’s closure.

2.      Search for continued financing for successful initiatives, through institutional arrangements that enable
linking measures with the Development Plan of the Southwest of Buenos Aires Province (PDSO)

3.     Promotion of linkages with other national-level plans, e.g. the Provincial Agricultural Services Program.

4.     Continuation of the IEWS and its adoption by the Observatory.

5.     Promotion of institutional arrangements targeting sustainability of the Observatory.

6.     Facilitation of the development of arrangements for local accountability and supervision by the federal
and provincial executing counterparts for an additional 5-year period after the Project’s closing date.

7.     Compilation and review of potential sources of financing, and development of a fundraising strategy
involving private and public sectors.

8.     Development of a participatory program to disseminate good practices, to trigger multiplication
processes through time.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
The area targeted by the project through a mixture of direct interventions and expected indirect impacts includes
the counties of Guaminí, Adolfo Alsina, Coronel Suárez, Coronel Pringles, Coronel Dorrego, Saavedra,
Tornquist, Puán, Coronel Rosales, Bahía Blanca, Villarino and Patagones. The proposed direct intervention area
involves three counties with a predominance of dry land farming located in zones below the 600 mm isohyetal
line (dry counties with frequent water deficit) namely: Puán, Villarino and Patagones. They were selected based
on the following two criteria: 1) a scattered rural population equal or greater than 10% of their overall population,
and 2) frequent occurrence of agricultural emergency in terms of yield and livestock losses.

In the southwest part of Buenos Aires Province (SWBA), the average annual precipitation varies between 840
mm in the East and 380 mm in the West, where the rainfall is usually not enough for livestock and crop
production. Typical rainfall patterns were studied and the annual variability of precipitations analyzed from 1970
to 2008, where important seasonal differences were found and related maps prepared. The results of the rainfall
studies found that overall, varying precipitation is a characteristic of the project area, and global phenomena
contribute to these variations.

With regard to precipitation, the current rainfall rates are expected to stay the same over the next decade. Coupled
with a temperature increase, however, net soil moisture is expected to decrease in the project area. Consequently,
the biophysical assets are projected to face disruptive and even “dangerous? impacts due to warming beyond the
commonly cited threshold of 2ºC above the pre-industrial temperature level.

In the project area, these climate change effects are expected to occur in addition to existing climate variability
and anthropogenic drivers of desertification, aggravating the following impacts on the current agroecosystems:
as an example, the currently available climate models project that the ENSO phenomena is a climate pattern that
will continue to appear in the future. However, there is no certainty on potential changes in the intensity of these
    phenomena. This is due to the nature of the ENSO, which occurrence and development depend on other regional
    variables that ought to be included in the climate models. In Argentina, rainfall and drought patterns are expected
    to remain connected with the variability of conditions in the equatorial Pacific associated with El Nino and La
    Nina. However, and as of today, in addition to the ENSO phenomena, there will be further variables that will
    impact the rainfall and drought patterns. Hence, adaptation involves building sustainability and thence resilience
    to a range of potential climate outcomes. The objective of this project is to assist in this endeavor.

    These changes in climate variables are projected to lead to severe impacts in terms of depletion of pastures
    critical to livestock survival. Also, the expected warming will increasingly threaten sustainability of crop
    production as drier conditions continue particularly in the winter and beginning of spring. Furthermore, these
    extreme temperatures have been known to lead to significant negative impacts from thermal stress (frost
    conditions), but there is not yet literature on this increasingly observed calamity.

    Given the extreme oscillations between relatively long wet and dry periods, the problems faced are not restricted
    to a lack of water, but rather to a vicious cycle between the following factors: drought -- wind erosion -- flooding
    -- water erosion -- soil compaction -- salinization – desertification.
.
    5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
    Lilian Pedersen (LCSSO)
    Tuuli Johanna Bernardini (LCSEN) and Marcelo Morandi (STC, LCSEN)
.
    6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes             The policy is triggered by the implementation of
                                                                   adaptation measures through interventions in
                                                                   productive agroecosystems which will be
                                                                   discussed, defined and put in practice jointly with
                                                                   local stakeholders and related technical institutions
                                                                   during the Grant implementation period. Given
                                                                   there is previous positive experience on the
                                                                   proposed base interventions from around the
                                                                   world, and the fact that no particularly sensitive
                                                                   environmental conditions are known to prevail in
                                                                   the target area, the project is classified as a
                                                                   Category B.

                                                                   The main project interventions will cover
                                                                   management of water resources, crops, and
                                                                   livestock and pasture management. For example,
                                                                   production oriented adaptation is expected to
                                                                   include decentralized measures to efficiently
                                                                   capture and storage rainwater and install
                                                                   microsystems for irrigation. To strengthen food
                                                                   and agroecological diversity and directly raise the
                                                                   standard of living of the local population, creation
                                                                   of organic vegetable gardens will provide multiple
                                                                   benefits beyond increased climate resilience at
                                                                   family level. Further adaptation measures
                                                                   proposed for transitioning from the current
                                                                   situation to more climate resilient and sustainable
                                                                   land management approach are crop rotation,
                                                                   organic pest control, adjusted sowing, cover crops,
                                    sustainable land tillage, adaptation of cattle
                                    ranching systems through use of forage banks,
                                    forest grazing, and sustainable management of
                                    pasture plots. The principal adaptation measures
                                    included in the project proposal are: (i) rainwater
                                    harvesting and improved irrigation technology, (ii)
                                    enhanced crop management, (iii) rangeland and
                                    forage management, (iv) silvopastoral livestock
                                    production, and (v) sustainable land management
                                    and erosion control.

                                    The proposed sustainable land management
                                    interventions will include training and capacity
                                    activities. As many of these interventions could be
                                    new to project beneficiaries there may be some
                                    initial resistance to adopting non-traditional
                                    measures. Therefore, a strong knowledge sharing
                                    and training program will be developed as an
                                    important aspect of this project.

                                    Given that the proposed investments are neither
                                    technically defined nor specifically located by
                                    appraisal, an Environmental and Social
                                    Management Framework (ESMF) has been
                                    prepared to guide and secure appropriate
                                    socio-environmental management of the project
                                    activities.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   While during preparation it has not been possible
                                    to determine the presence of natural habitats in the
                                    project's area of influence, the policy is triggered
                                    under a precautionary basis. The project will not
                                    result in any expansion of the agricultural frontier
                                    or conversion of natural habitats to agricultural
                                    land. The activities related to the SIS will be placed
                                    on already transformed areas.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   The policy is triggered because the project may
                                    finance small forest plantations to build shelter
                                    belts and wind backers. In addition, and in some
                                    cases, the project may finance management plans
                                    at farm level to ensure compliance with the native
                                    forest law at the provincial level. This law includes
                                    the identification of forests with critical
                                    conservation value. As per the requirements of OP
                                    4.36, small and restricted pilot forest plantations
                                    (shelter belts, forestall wind-breakers) supported
                                    under the project will not cause loss or degradation
                                    of these forests, but rather contribute to their
                                    reforestation and conservation, including planting
                                    of native tree species.

                                    The target area is situated in the Argentine Espinal
                                    ecoregion, which characteristic feature is thorny
                                    deciduous shrub land forest. This ecoregion has
                                               been heavily modified as most of it has been used
                                               for agriculture and its forests have been highly
                                               exploited and dismantled. Both the caldenal and
                                               the talares types of sparse xerophytic forests have
                                               been exploited by removal of firewood. The caldén
                                               trees have also been used to obtain fence posts,
                                               make wooden paving blocks for streets and to
                                               operate sawmills for making parquet floors.
                                               Furthermore, they have become seriously
                                               threatened by the expansion of the agricultural
                                               frontier that, thanks to modern irrigation systems,
                                               is now reaching areas that in the past were not
                                               suited for this type of land management.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  Yes   This project seeks to reduce use of and dependence
                                               on harmful agricultural chemicals and will not
                                               increase or promote use of pesticides, so a pest
                                               management plan will not be prepared. It should be
                                               noted, however, that small amounts of pesticides
                                               will probably continue to be used by a portion of
                                               pilot farmers. The project will provide training on
                                               the proper use of pesticides and the safe disposal of
                                               containers by communities to prevent any health
                                               and environmental risks associated with pesticide
                                               use. This disposal will follow the Bank OP 4.09
                                               guidelines as well as pertinent national laws and
                                               regulations. Furthermore, the project will support
                                               an Integrated Pest Management approach to
                                               dealing with pests.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes   While it has not been possible to determine the
                                               presence of physical cultural resources in the
                                               project's area of influence, the presence of physical
                                               cultural resources in SIS will be determined by the
                                               final design of pilot interventions during the
                                               project implementation. The project’s ESMF
                                               includes screening criteria to avoid any known
                                               areas of physical cultural resources and a process
                                               to address any chance finds which may occur
                                               during project implementation.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            Yes   Based on the Bank’s screening, the presence of
                                               indigenous people living in the area of indirect
                                               influence has been confirmed. A Social
                                               Assessment has determined that Indigenous
                                               Peoples are present in the project area and that they
                                               could be positively affected by the project, though
                                               not confirmed by appraisal stage. Given that the
                                               proposed investments are neither technically
                                               defined nor specifically located by appraisal, an
                                               IPPF has been prepared.

                                               During project preparation, the OPDS conducted
                                               several informal meetings with (i) key
                                               stakeholders, a local representative from “Consejo
                                               de Participación Indígena? (Indigenous People
                                                               Participatory Council), (ii) researchers from
                                                               several institutes of the academic sector, and (iii)
                                                               field trips. Additionally, local municipalities were
                                                               requested to confirm the presence of Indigenous
                                                               People living in rural areas involved.

                                                               Historical information refers to the Mapuches as
                                                               the native people for this region. Many of
                                                               Mapuches people were taken out from their lands
                                                               and obliged to migrate to urban areas. This was due
                                                               to civil war processes, involuntary take of land, or
                                                               poverty. According to the statistics; information
                                                               available from Indigenous People Complementary
                                                               Survey 2004-2005 (“Encuesta Complementaria de
                                                               Pueblos Indígenas del Instituto Nacional de
                                                               Estadísticas y Censos?), there are no registered
                                                               Mapuches communities living in rural areas. The
                                                               National Indigenous People Institute informed that
                                                               there are Mapuches communities in the city of
                                                               Carmen de Patagones, registered in the ReNaCi
                                                               (“Registro Nacional de Comunidades Indígenas?),
                                                               the national registry of Indigenous Peoples.
                                                               Further, though never taken into account in
                                                               different surveys, it might be possible that
                                                               Indigenous People were living in some of the
                                                               Specific Intervention Sites of the project.
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12          Yes           Although no involuntary resettlement is planned
                                                               under any of the components, activities under
                                                               component 2 could trigger the policy. In
                                                               compliance with the policy, in order to avoid,
                                                               minimize or compensate for any adverse impacts in
                                                               this regard, a Resettlement Policy Framework has
                                                               been developed and disclosed to ensure proper
                                                               consideration before and during execution of pilot
                                                               interventions. Additionally, all work toward pilot
                                                               interventions will include participatory planning
                                                               processes with stakeholders.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    Yes           Although construction of and/or dependency on a
                                                               planned/existing dam is not envisaged, the policy
                                                               is triggered in order to ensure compliance with
                                                               safety standards in case that small water reservoirs
                                                               or micro irrigation systems are constructed.
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No               The project does not involve international waters.
    7.50
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60        No            The project does not involve disputed areas.
.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The main project interventions will address water resources, crops, livestock, and pasture management. The
project also includes training and capacity activities, and positive impacts are expected in terms of land and crop
management, irrigation, silvopastoral livestock production, erosion control, access to information, etc.

The project aims at providing the affected rural population with an information and early warning system, better
systems for water capture and irrigation, technical inputs and materials to adapt their production to increasing
climate variability and change, training for an adequate planning of their activities and restoring recuperation
capacity of ecosystem services. Additionally, material and conceptual means will be provided to diversify family
subsistence agriculture and food security. Overall, it is expected that measures taken in terms of strengthening
sustainable production means and facilitating potential occupational changes through concrete pilots, and
improvement of value chains (production, distribution and access to alternative markets) will facilitate
beneficiaries’ climate resilience with a menu of options. Furthermore, the affected population will benefit from
better institutions and information, as well as greater predictability in terms of development of their livelihoods.

The interventions are planned at small scale, and no particularly sensitive environmental conditions are known in
the area and no potential, large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are expected.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
Based on the project’s environmental and social assessments, the project is expected to lead to mostly positive
development outcomes and impacts with small and medium farmers being the priority target group.

Respect to longer-term environmental impacts, adoption of more sustainable agricultural techniques and
practices in the local production systems is expected to decrease or even divert certain environmental
deterioration processes that the environment is currently suffering.

Positive social development outcomes and impacts include: (i) increased access to social opportunities for the
target groups through improvements in access to anticipated information regarding land degradation and climate
change and their impact in rural activities; (ii) decrease in the rural migration to urban areas; (iii) increased
climate resilience of the beneficiary people and communities; (iv) increased access to relevant information, more
predictability and thus mitigation of vulnerability, availability of relevant educational inputs, and improved
access to decision making processes; and (v) strengthening indigenous peoples recognition and inclusion by
promoting respect for their visions (if during implementation they are reached by project activities).
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
No alternatives were considered during project preparation given the low related environmental risks.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project executing agency will be the National Secretariat of Environment and Sustainable Development
(SAyDS), and the main co-executing agency will be the Provincial Sustainable Development Agency (OPDS)
for Buenos Aires Province. The SAyDS has experience in the implementation of projects with the Bank and GEF
finance. As of today, the SAyDS has executed five projects which give it a good position to lead the project in
safeguards terms.

Given that the investments and their specific locations are not known by appraisal, the GoA has developed an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which includes an Indigenous Peoples Planning
Framework (IPPF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The ESMF will be used and applied by all
participating entities with the execution of the pilot projects. Specific sub-projects that will be proposed for
funding will undergo environmental screening to determine eligibility for financing and a full assessment of the
pertinent works as necessary. Eligible subprojects will include only those confirmed to be of the environmental
category of B or C.

If resettlement and/or the presence of indigenous population is identified in the area of influence in which the
works will take place, the Recipient will, prior to the carrying out of any said works, prepare and furnish to the
Bank a resettlement plan and/or an indigenous plan including relevant consultation and disclosure in accordance
with the provisions of the IPPF and RPF, as the case may be.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project aims at benefiting farmers and farmer families dedicated to small and medium-sized
agricultural-cattle production on dry lands within the direct and indirect intervention zones; counties (“partidos?)
of Puán, Villarino and Patagones, and 9 further SWBA counties. Furthermore, a wide range of actual and
potential partner organizations working on related aspects within the area and up to national level will benefit of
and contribute to a comprehensive set of capacity building and institutional strengthening measures.

During the project identification phase, consultations were carried out in five instances involving different
stakeholders:

(1) Inter-institutional consultations were undertaken within the framework of a multi-institutional working
commission, composed by the Ministry of Agriculture, National Secretariat of Environment and Sustainable
Development, National Institute for Agricultural Technology and National Water Institute. The commission met
for the first time in 2009 in order to identify “hot spots? of agricultural risk factors, and it has then evolved
towards specific working or project groups.
(2) A cooperation plan has been signed between the National Secretariat for Environment and Sustainable
Development and the provincial Agency for Sustainable Development (OPDS) in order to agree and coordinate
on joint interventions in the project area. Thereby, joint field visits were undertaken between January and
February 2010, including several meetings carried out with the presence of all the municipalities within the
project area. The interviewed stakeholders consisted of mayors, producer associations, community-based
organizations, cooperatives, universities, INTA, civil society representatives and NGO’s.
(3) During the First International Congress on Desertification in the Province of Buenos Aires, a broader
audience and representatives of small and medium-size farmers participated in a number of workshops. All
sectors within the public and private agenda were represented in this Congress. The main issues and demands
currently reflected in the project document were discussed, and participation accounted for around 700
stakeholders. Among them, about 30-40% were small and medium-size producers from the area.
(4) The OPDS, as the provincial counterpart and environmental authority of the project, carried out further visits
and consultations at the local and county levels in order to consolidate the first project idea together with affected
stakeholders. Related to this, the OPDS is a member of the Southwest Buenos Aires Province Development
Council which holds regular meetings among a multi-stakeholder constituency. Under this framework,
substantial issues related to the project objectives were and are being discussed.
(5) Consultations with technical and academic institutions were conducted along the preparation of the project
proposal in order to receive technical and scientific input for the project preparation, especially with the
Universidad Nacional del Sur and the INTA.

Overall, the development of the main project lines was carried out with contributions received in consultation
with FAO in Roma and the German Technical Cooperation Agency (GIZ; former GTZ), and the development of
the proposal took place within the framework of a specifically established working committee of the UNCCD
and UNFCCC Focal Points, and further support is provided by the International Migration Center (CIM).

During the preparation phase, a specific consultation process was planned and carried out with key social
stakeholders identified through a social evaluation. The consultation process focused on the project’s design
aspects, its priorities and participation mechanisms during execution. Consultations were held on its
environmental and social impacts and the respective mitigation measures as required. All consultations were
carefully documented.

More precisely, the conducted consultations included the following events:

(1) In the Second Congress on Desertification of the Province that was carried out with key stakeholders in
August 2011, the project proposal was presented in two instances: (a) during the launching of the congress in the
opening ceremony, and (b) in a specific workshop targeted to the beneficiaries and other relevant stakeholders
     for further discussion. SAyDS and OPDS made a joint presentation of the project scope including the main
     components and activities. The meeting was attended by participants representing NGOs, academic sector,
     municipal and provincial government, producers and the World Bank. The meeting provided useful feedback to
     agree on specific priorities and in addition, it proved useful for the SAyDS and OPDS to explain the focus of the
     project and its contribution from the environmental side of land degradation, adaptation and climate change. A
     report from this consultation meeting has been prepared, sent to the participants and disclosed in the SAyDS
     website.

     (2) A joint World Bank-SAyDS-OPDS preparation mission. Between October 3 and 7, the WB and the
     SAyDS/OPDS conducted a joint preparation mission in the project target area. The mission involved field visits
     and consultation meeting with stakeholders and potential beneficiaries in the counties where direct interventions,
     including the identification of GIAs and SIS are projected. Majors in the three counties led the consultation
     meetings, involving participation of experts, producers, teachers, NGOs, and local media. These meeting were
     crucial to define priorities at the territorial level and to jointly identify the first set of GIAs. A report from these
     consultation meetings has been prepared, sent to the participants and disclosed in the SAyDS website.

     The mission also included technical meetings with the UNS, AGAVISA, UTN and the Municipality of Bahía
     Blanca. The outcomes of these meeting included: (i) access to technical and scientific information in general, (ii)
     achieving of a better diagnosis of the problem to be addressed by the project, (iii) identify those activities to be
     potentially executed by local partners, (iv) identify a potential demonstration area (Napostá field), (v) confirm
     the importance to build more and detailed information on climate change/adaptation issues and land degradation
     for strengthening local capacities, (vi) access to critical information related to available technical and economic
     assessments and feasibility for the proposed pilot adaptation measures.
     (3) Screening of indigenous people presence in the project area. During project preparation, the OPDS conducted
     several informal meetings with (i) key stakeholders, a local representative from “Consejo de Participación
     Indígena?; Indigenous People Participatory Council, (ii) researchers from several institutes of the academic
     sector and (iii) field trips. Additionally, local municipalities were requested to confirm the presence of
     indigenous people living in rural areas involved.

     Disclosure of information has been an effective and cross cutting issue for the three consultation blocks
     described above. The SAyDS has actively filed and disseminated project related information in its website which
     is for public access. The interest of local media has levered the project’s exposure in the target region. Not only
     the project launching in the Second Desertification Congress during August 2011, but also the joint mission
     between the WB and the SAyDS/OPDS in October 2011 were widely disseminated by radio and press releases in
     newspapers which have been saved in the project files.

     During the implementation phase, the project will entail participatory planning and validation workshops as the
     first step for project implementation under its knowledge management and sustainability components in various
     steps. This will promote full inclusion of the primary beneficiaries from the beginning of the project
     implementation stage.

     The draft ESMF and RPF as well as the Social Assessment were disclosed in country on the project’s website by
     the SAyDS and the draft ESMF and RPF submitted to Bank’s InfoShop in April 2012. The final versions of the
     three safeguards instruments were disclosed in-country1 on June 17, and submitted to InfoShop on June 20,
     2013.
.
     B. Disclosure Requirements
     Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
     Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                            Yes
     Date of receipt by the Bank                                                               06/17/2013

1
    http://www.ambiente.gob.ar/default.asp?IdArticulo=10422
    Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                       06/17/2013
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                                        06/20/2013
    For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to
    the Executive Directors
    Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
    Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                        Yes
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                           06/17/2013
    Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                       06/17/2013
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                                        06/20/2013
    Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
    Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                        Yes
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                           06/17/2013
    Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                       06/17/2013
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                                        06/20/2013
    Pest Management Plan
    Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                        NA
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                           NA
    Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                       NA
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                                        NA
    If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
    issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
    If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


.
    C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the
    project decision meeting)
    OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            Yes [ X ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
    If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)        Yes [ X ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
    review and approve the EA report?
    Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the        Yes [ X ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
    credit/loan?
    OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
    Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of     Yes [    ]     No [ X ]   NA [   ]
    critical natural habitats?
    If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other Yes [   ]     No [   ]   NA [ X ]
    (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation
    measures acceptable to the Bank?
    OP 4.09 - Pest Management
    Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                   Yes [ X ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Is a separate PMP required?                                                  Yes [    ]     No [ X ]   NA [   ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist Yes [       ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
or SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does
the project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?           Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential         Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                 Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector       Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector
Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process             Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector       Yes [ X ]   No [ X ]   NA [   ]
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and                    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Yes [ X ]        No [   ]   NA [   ]
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a Yes [ X ]        No [   ]   NA [   ]
form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities   Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the   Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the   Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard
    policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the     Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
    documents?
.
.
III. APPROVALS
.
    Task Team Leader:                 Name: Marcelo Hector Acerbi
    Approved By:
    Sector Manager:                   Name: Karin Kemper                       Date: 06/18/2013
