                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/26/2011                                     Report No.: AC6198
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Argentina                           Project ID: P105288
Project Name: AR Buenos Aires Infrastructure Sustainable Investment Development
Project Phase II
Task Team Leader: Carlos E. Velez
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 23, 2007     Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2007
Managing Unit: LCSUW                         Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                             Loan
Sector: Roads and highways (40%);Sewerage (21%);Water supply (21%);Flood
protection (12%);Sub-national government administration (6%)
Theme: Urban services and housing for the poor (29%);Other urban development
(29%);Improving labor markets (14%);Infrastructure services for private sector
development (14%);Municipal governance and institution building (14%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           264.10
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      90.31
                                                                       90.31
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The overall purpose of the program is to improve the provision of infrastructure services
in the Province within a framework of fiscal responsibility. Through improved services
the Project aims to support the return to a sustainable path of economic growth, to
alleviate poverty and to increase social equity. To this end, the Province prioritized a set
of interventions through the sector wide Infrastructure Program for the period 2005-2010
specifically aimed to:
 i. Develop a multi-year public expenditure program, in line with the priorities of the
Province, to implement the Infrastructure Program following sound fiscal policies to
ensure convergence towards a long-term sustainable fiscal framework.
 ii. Improve and maintain high priority segments of the non-concessioned paved road
network to support the reactivation of the provincial economy and strengthen regional
competitiveness.
 iii. Enhance access to sanitation services, especially for the low-income segments of the
population living in highly vulnerable areas of the Conurbano Bonaerense.
3. Project Description
The proposed Project would benefit over 5 million low-income people in the Province of
Buenos Aires, through the provision of water, sewerage and sanitation services, adequate
drainage, reduction of operating and travel time cost, increased production prospects, and
the creation of significant employment opportunities. The injection of federal and
provincial investments in water and wastewater infrastructure serving about 450,000
people will have a positive social and environmental impact, but also is considered by the
Government to be the only option to return service provision to an economic-financial
equilibrium, since the necessary financial improvement of the utilities would not be
feasible without a clear improvement in the coverage and quality of the services
provided. The objective of drainage investments is to mitigate flooding caused by
rainfalls of high intensity and relatively short duration, which cause severe losses to
households, especially of low income people, and to industries and commercial activities,
both directly and indirectly due to the interruption of transport and other services.
Planned investments will benefit about 500,000 people and an area which suffers losses
estimated in the order of US$ 50 million annually.

 Project cost and components
 The total Project cost was estimated at US$ 362 million, of which US$ 270 million
would be Bank financed. The Project components and their estimated cost amounts, as
initially proposed by the Provincial Government, are:

 Component 1: Provincial Roads (Estimated Cost US$ 159 million of which US$ 107
million to be Bank financed): This component seeks to:
 (a) Rehabilitate high priority segments of the interurban provincial non-concessioned
road network, both through traditional ad-measurement type contracts and the
introduction of performance-based CREMA contracts;
 (b)Remove critical bottlenecks through: (i) widening provincial routes of the primary
non-concessioned paved network within the Conurbano Bonaerense that connect
important industrial zones and ports with production and consumption centers. Widening
does not represent a change in the current location for the particular roads and as such,
widening will take place only on areas already reserved and that are neither occupied nor
dedicated for any other use and (ii) carrying out critical road safety improvements at
selected crossings and intersections;
 (c)Rehabilitate non-concessioned access roads to communities located near the primary
road network. Rehabilitation is limited exclusively to repaving and the filling of pot-holes
and is restricted to the roads themselves; rehabilitation will not have any effect on areas
adjacent to the roads; and
 (d)Implement a well-designed maintenance program for the entire provincial non-
concessioned road network.

 Component 2: Water and Sewerage (Estimated Cost: US$ 140 million, of which U$ 110
million to be Bank financed): The objective of this component is to increase coverage in
the provision of basic sanitation services in the Province to benefit over 3 million low-
income people. Most of the interventions will be in areas of high sanitary vulnerability
under the responsibility of ABSA, particularly in the Conurbano Bonaerense. The
Government proposes to give priority attention under the proposed APL2 to investments
for the expansion of access to water, sewerage and drainage services by building
secondary networks in areas where (i) there is a high concentration of low-income
families; (ii) there is high environmental health vulnerability; and (iii) there are already or
are planned for construction main supply lines, collectors and treatment plants.

 Component 3: Drainage (Estimated Cost US$ 41 million, of which U$ 32 million to be
Bank financed): This component will finance the expansion and optimization of macro-
drainage infrastructure in urban and peri-urban areas of the Conurbano Bonaerense. The
proposed investments are part of an integrated drainage plan and follow the methodology
adopted with support of the APL1.

 Component 4: Technical Engineering Feasibility, Design, and Benchmarking (Estimated
Cost US$ 4.1 million of which U$ 3.98 million to be Bank financed): The component
would finance services to strengthen the execution of the program and to improve the
pipeline of eligible investments ready for implementation. Specifically, the component
would finance services to (i) further define a strategic framework to orient provincial
infrastructure development, including the development of master plans, infrastructure
feasibility studies and final engineering designs; (ii) identify infrastructure needs and set
strategic priorities in order to avoid investment financing bottlenecks; (iii) implement a
program of analytical work to monitor budget formulation and execution and undertake
regular and periodic monitoring of program implementation and impact; and (iv) design
the investments needed to respond to the challenges and recommendations of the Strategy
for Coastal Erosion Control study being carried out as part of the APL1.

  Component 5: Pre-investment for Competitiveness and Job Creation (Estimated Cost
US$ 7.5 million of which U$ 7.1 million to be Bank financed). The Project will finance
consultant services to assist the Province to (i) identify sectors and regions likely to play
a key role in provincial development which could then guide policymaking and planning,
updating the provincial information database; (ii) design sector and territorial
interventions and policies aimed at improving competitiveness and employment
opportunities; (iii) implement the recommendations of the Strategic Evaluation of the
Province, which is under development as part of the APL1, particularly with regards to
public information of water related risks and environmental health monitoring in high
risk areas; and (iv) support the dissemination, capacity- building, and pre-investment
studies and designs.

 Component 6: Institutional Capacity Building for Provincial Infrastructure Service
Provision and Oversight (Estimated Cost US$ 7.7 million of which U$ 7.3 million to be
Bank financed). The Project would include technical assistance activities to continue the
work done under the APL1 to support the Province in its overall supervision of
infrastructure efforts including (i) auditing the financial status of the overall Program; (ii)
supervision and certification of works; and (iii) overall institutional strengthening through
purchase of needed equipment.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Throughout the Province of Buenos Aires, particularly in the Conurbano Bonaerense,
which is urban and peri-urban converted land.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Lilian Pena Pereira Weiss (LCSUW)
   Ms Lilian Pedersen (LCSSO)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
No large-scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are foreseen from this project. In
any case, the key safeguard issues and impacts associated with this project are:

 a) Noise, dust, proper disposal of construction waste, erosion control, protection of
spring catchments, etc., produced during construction and installation of pipes, road
widening and rehabilitation, will be addressed by appropriate guidelines that will be
incorporated into the technical specifications governing the work of construction
contractors.

 b) Based on existing knowledge and experience under APL 1, there is no expectation
that cultural property would be found in the Project area. Nevertheless, because of the
nature of the works envisioned under APL 2, the Environmental Assessment sets forth
"chance find" or equivalent procedures in case such property is encountered.

 c) The International Waterways Safeguard is triggered because the drainage and sewer
projects will discharge to the Rio de la Plata, which is shared by Argentina and Uruguay.
However, as it was the case with the APL 1 project, the APL 2 works will not negatively
affect the quantity or quality of the waterway and will not be negatively affected by the
current or potential usage of these waters by Uruguay, the APL 2 project got an exception
to the notification requirement (paragraph 7 of OP 7.50). The APL 2 water and sewer
works follow the same criteria and are similar to those of APL 1 and so they are also not
expected to impact the navigability and/or the course (regime) of the Rio de la Plata;
therefore, it is not necessary to request a non objection to proceed with works from the
Comision Administradora del Rio de la Plata (to comply with the Rio de la Plata Treaty).
This exception was approved by the RVP on May 11, 2007 and sent to the ED on May
11, 2007.

  d) Given the nature of the project, involuntary resettlement was not anticipated at the
time of appraisal. However, a case of involuntary resettlement arose during
implementation, and the Province handled it satisfactorily. Cases of Involuntary
Resettlement in the future are unlikely, but they could arise during the implementation of
the project components that require civil works (Components 1, 2 and 3). For this reason,
for the APL2 the Borrower updated the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) developed
during the preparation of the Additional Financing Loan for the APL1 and disclosed it
locally and in the Bank’s InfoShop. This RPF will be applied should any resettlement be
necessary during the remaining life of the APL2. The RPF includes the eligibility criteria
for compensation and assistance that will be available to potentially affected people, as
well as dispute resolution mechanisms. Detailed information on the resettlement case
that occurred in the past can be found in Section 4.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No large-scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are foreseen. However the
following impacts are possible:

 The rehabilitated and widened roads may encourage increased traffic bringing increased
air pollution, and run-off tainted with oil and debris from the roads. Wider paved over
roads may reduce the size of water recharge zones, but this may not be significant based
on the total amount of surface area that will be paved over.

 Expansion of water supply and sewerage connections may encourage increased
population growth in areas served. Digging, construction and installation may result in
the usual noise and waste which are normally managed according to established
guidelines for contractors. Wastewater from expanded sewers will be treated in plants
that either have enough capacity or will be expanded to accommodate increased
wastewater flows.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Given that subprojects are from different sectors and locations, consideration of
alternatives were considered on a subproject by subproject basis.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower conducted an assessment of how well APL1 complied with safeguards.
Recommendations from this report were used to make changes to the second phase of the
project, especially with respect to its tools for environmental assessment, and monitoring
of results and activities. The overall conclusion of this assessment was that the works
reviewed under APL1 had been executed with the consideration of the environmental
variable from the beginning of the Project, and through all of the phases-planning,
definition, selection, bidding and execution. This has resulted in a system of
environmental management that allows for not only the proper execution of works that
consider the socio-environmental component in all stages of the project, but also for the
strengthening and hierarchical organization of those state institutions responsible for
these actions. Recommendations follow for improvements under APL2. This assessment
has been disclosed in-country and through the Infoshop.

 A case of Involuntary Resettlement arose during the implementation of a road
rehabilitation contract, which was modified to include the construction of a new viaduct
on PR4. The impacts included: (i) relocating five informal shops to enhance the
accessibility to the Industrial Park Suárez; (ii) modifying the access to this industrial
park; (iii) reducing a grassland area in a recreational park by 7.5 m per 100 m to build an
access road; and (iv) relocating the access to a construction materials shop.

 The Borrower has been addressing these impacts appropriately. The Borrower
constructed five new shops, each of approximately 15 to 20 m2, to replace the displaced
shops. The Borrower modified the entryway to the Industrial Park according to the needs
of the firm. To compensate for the reduction in grassland area, the Borrower transplanted
a number of trees from the disturbed land and planted additional trees. The Borrower also
enhanced the recreational facilities by installing new chairs and tables and a playground
for children. The Borrower converted part of the unused land at the northern corner of
this area to park land and fenced the entire area to provide more security. Finally, the
Borrower designed a new entryway to the construction materials shop to meet the needs
of the owner.

 The Borrower consulted all affected people, companies and community organizations
and took their concerns into account. The move of the five shop owners took only one
day, and they were relocated within 50 meters of their previous locations. Ten other shop
owners were temporarily affected, but did not need to relocate or stop carrying out their
business activities. All affected parties declared in writing that they were satisfied with
the adopted or planned measures.

 The Borrower thoroughly documented the whole resettlement process in a consolidated
report.

 In 2007 the Borrower carried out the environmental assessment for the rehabilitation of
PR4 and obtained the respective environmental license. General environmental
guidelines, approved in 2006, were included in the bidding documents for the
rehabilitation works. These guidelines also apply to the construction of the new viaduct
over the General Mitre railway and the small works to mitigate related minor social
impacts.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include the citizens of the Province of Buenos Aires in the areas that
will be affected or benefited by the works. The assessment of APL1 compliance with
safeguards as well as the individual environmental assessments of subprojects for the first
year-which have been prepared following the guidelines established under APL1,
reviewed and approved by the Regional Environmental Unit-have been disclosed through
InfoShop and in-country. This updated ISDS will be disclosed on the InfoShop’s website.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 04/09/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             04/19/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/19/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/15/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             08/17/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              08/18/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         No
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           Yes
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        Yes
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                 Name     Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Carlos E. Velez          08/22/2011
Environmental Specialist:
Social Development Specialist       Ms Lilian Pedersen          08/23/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Jose Vicente Zevallos    08/23/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan          08/25/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Guang Zhe Chen           08/25/2011
  Comments:
