                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC3347

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Argentina                       Project ID:      P132416
                            Project Name:      AR PROSAP3 - Third Provincial Agricultural Development Project (P132416)
                            Task Team          Renato Nardello
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          04-Nov-2013                     Estimated        10-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSAR                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), Public administration-
                                               Agriculture, fishing and forestry (20%), Irrigation a nd drainage (20%), Agro-
                                               industry, marketing, and trade (15%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and
                                               Highways (5%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Water resource management (20%),
                                               Climate change (20%), Land administration and management ( 10%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    660.00                    Total Bank Financing:        500.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                   0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     70.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       500.00
                              Local Farmer Organizations                                                   90.00
                              Total                                                                       660.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective for PROSAP3 will be to increase productivity and sales for small
                           and medium-scale producers supported by project activities.
                         To reach its objective, the project will support capacity-building and investments geared toward a
                         more efficient use of natural resources and energy, increased adaptation to climate change, long-term
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improvement in productivity and market access, overall contributing to an increased competitiveness
                         and sustainability of agricultural production systems in the regional economies.

                         Target group. The project primary target group will comprise about 80,000 small and medium-sized
                         producers who have clear potential to participate in a modern and competitive agribusiness system,
                         but need to improve their productivity and profitability in order to be competitive and reduce their
                         vulnerability.

                         Target areas. While the project is national in scope, the regional economies are the target area for
                         investment subprojects, which constitute the most sizable part of the operation. Eligibility criteria for
                         target areas would include number of small and medium-size producers, number of direct and
                         indirect beneficiaries belonging to the target group.

                         Selection criteria. To ensure the balanced and equitable allocation of public funding, subproject
                         preparation will include specific selection criteria to be applied early on in the selection and approval
                         process, which could include: (i) counterpart support proportional to the income level of
                         beneficiaries; (ii) investment caps by type of investment and by number and type of beneficiary
                         (direct and indirect); (iii) level of financial leverage (private or public-private) in the investment; (iv)
                         level of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures considered in the project design.
                         C. Project Description
                         PROSAP3 is a framework program that will support a variety of demand-based national and
                         provincial infrastructure subprojects to develop sustainable competitive agriculture systems in
                         selected regional economies. The program will also support a range of competitiveness-building
                         activities that strengthen institutions, support climate-smart project planning, enhance productivity,
                         increase value-added in the rural economies and improve market access.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Based on the successful model of its predecessors, PROSAP3 will incorporate key innovations based
                         on implementation experience and emerging trends. In particular, PROSAP3 will:
                         (a)      integrate a new focus on resilience to climate change, in particular through: (i) the
                         prioritization of investments in climate smart agriculture; (ii) the incorporation of resilience
                         indicators into subproject selection criteria; and (iii) the inclusion of services that expand access to
                         climate information for improved decision making, and its use by small and medium-sized rural
                         producers.
                         (b)      pilot mechanisms to facilitate public-private partnerships for the financing, management,
                         operation and maintenance of major infrastructure investment subprojects;
                         (c)      provide matching grants for groups that link producers with buyers to form productive
                         alliances;
                         (d)      include, upstream in the project preparation cycle, updated selection criteria to strengthen the
                         targeting of intended beneficiary groups.

                         The proposed project (US$500 million in IBRD financing) will be implemented over a period of five
                         years and comprise three components: (1) Capacity-Building and Services for Competitiveness
                         (15-20 percent of total cost); (2) Investments for Competitiveness (70-75 percent of total cost); and
                         (3) Project Management (5-10 percent of total cost). The project will be implemented by MAGyP
                         through the UCAR.
                         Component 1: Capacity-Building and Services for Competitiveness (20 percent of cost)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will support a range of interrelated services that provide integrated support for
                         agricultural competitiveness in the regional economies. Activities will include: (i) institutional
                         capacity building; (ii) identification and preparation of subprojects; and (iii) increasing insertion into
                         value chains.

                         Component 2. Investments to Support Competitiveness (75 percent of Project cost)

                         This component will support public investment and incentivize private investment in productive
                         infrastructure and services. Subproject types will include:

                         2.1 Provincial Investment Subprojects
                         This component constitutes the primary instrument of PROSAP and finances investments in public
                         infrastructure. UCAR will supervise project implementation, to be conducted entirely by a provincial
                         implementing unit. Eligible provinces apply for sub-loans for the construction, rehabilitation or
                         expansion of infrastructure including, but not limited to, drainage and irrigation systems, rural roads,
                         rural electrification, gas pipelines, as well as agricultural and marketing development infrastructure,
                         and land administration.

                         2.2 On-farm and off-farm matching grants
                         This subcomponent will provide matching grants to expand the productive reach of provincial
                         infrastructure subprojects, expand local ownership of investments, leverage private investment, and
                         address the imbalance of access to credit for small and medium-sized producers in the regional
                         economies. Group or individual small investment projects may be prepared with or without the
                         support of Component 1 services. Different scales of financing will be developed for categories of
                         investments based on type of beneficiary and investment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2.3 Small Rural Infrastructure
                         This subcomponent will support the construction, rehabilitation or expansion of community
                         infrastructure projects, at a scale lower than subcomponent 2.1. These investments would be financed
                         through a specific national subproject.

                         Component 3. Project Management (5 percent of Project cost)
                         This component will support the strengthening, operation and maintenance of the M&E system,
                         incremental costs of UCAR; preparation of studies, including impact evaluations, progress reports,
                         and audits.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Specific subprojects are not likely to be identified before appraisal and therefore the specific
                         locations, environmental and social conditions, and impacts of each subproject are not likely to be
                         known. While the project is national in scope, the non-Pampean provinces constitute the target area
                         for investment subprojects, which represent the most sizable part of the operation. The natural
                         environment of those provinces is very varied, as it includes ecosystems going from forests to desert
                         to the Andes Mountains.
                         The project would focus in areas with larger concentrations of small and medium-scale producers
                         with the potential to fully participate in modern, competitive, agribusiness systems.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         UCAR includes a Social and Environmental Unit (UAS) with good capacity and satisfactory
                         experience in the implementation of safeguard policies and responsible for ensuring compliance with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the safeguard policies for UCAR projects, including PROSAP. The Social-Environmental Unit is
                         responsible for overseeing compliance with the safeguard policy and the ESMF, enforce relevant
                         quality control and deliver specific training on environmental and social safeguards and the use of
                         the ESMF.

                         The UAS currently comprises eight full-time staff, in addition to short-term consultants who assist
                         with aspects of management oversight, review, and quality control functions. PROSAP has also
                         strengthened its cadre of professionals with technical staff to lead the field supervision of safeguards
                         compliance. Additional capacity building activities of PROSAP departments involved with project
                         preparation and implementation and its participating provincial entities is part of the technical
                         assistance activities at the provincial level.

                         During PROSAP2, the UAS has matured considerably its role in subproject preparation, evolving
                         from an approach limited to mitigating the impacts of subprojects ready to be implemented in order
                         to satisfy Bank requirements to a multi-disciplinary group that incorporate an integrated social and
                         environmental focus from the initial stages of project formulation.

                         Responsibility for safeguard compliance during subproject implementation rests with the Provincial
                         Subproject Implementation Entities (UEP). Each UEP must hire a full time Environmental and
                         Social Specialist (IASO) who is responsible to supervise compliance of subprojects with their EMPs
                         and the safeguards policies. All provinces that have been implementing PROSAP subprojects have
                         an IASO on board. Most Provincial teams have also been strengthened and have acquired experience
                         during the implementation of PROSAP2.

                         PROSAP 2 has been implemented for four years and includes about 20 subprojects at the national or
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provincial level. With the triggering of OP/BP 4.04 and OP/BP 4.37 in 2012, the safeguard
                         instruments cover all the environmental and social issues associated with the implementation of the
                         project and are considered adequate.

                         Performance in the implementation of safeguard instruments and remedial actions has been
                         satisfactory, based among other things on: (i) compliance with the ESMF and relevant EIA
                         procedures; (ii) issuance of needed environmental authorizations for all subprojects, when needed;
                         (iii) absence of environmental and social problems caused by project implementation; (iv) absence of
                         complaints or objections from local communities or civil society organizations.

                         The Project has satisfactorily adopted good-practice measures, both preventive and corrective, in
                         order to avoid and/or mitigate environmental impacts. Two noteworthy examples:
                         (a) Three subprojects have been intervening around the Critical Habitat identified: Lagunas de
                         Huanacache, Desaguadero y Bebedero, which is a RAMSAR site. In addition to the environmental
                         management plans for the individual subproject, the project and the Province developed an action
                         plan to increase environmental conservation of the wetland, affected because of the agriculture
                         infrastructure and land use upstream of the lagoon, in order to mitigate cumulative effects on the
                         wetland; (b) The livestock development subproject in the Province of Neuquen intervenes in
                         highland wetlands meadows which are the main source of cattle pasture. The subproject has included
                         specific measures to ensure mitigation of impacts, including the use of only native species, water
                           resources management and fencing to manage the grazing load.

                           The implementation of PROSAP2 has been a learning process, both for the executing agency and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Bank. Lessons learned include: (a) In order to improve the efficiency and usability of the ESMF, this
                           has been approved as a common instrument for both the Bank and the IADB; (b) The analysis of
                           social and environmental impacts of subprojects has been incorporated systematically throughout the
                           subproject cycle; (c) The availability of Bank social and environmental staff or consultants based in
                           Buenos Aires is crucial; (d) Strengthening of environmental and social management capacity both at
                           the center and provincial levels in PROSAP and in the provinces is important to ensure adequate
                           implementation of safeguards.

                           PROSAP3 will update the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) of PROSAP2
                           which was revised in 2012 and accepted by the Bank when PROSAP2 was restructured to trigger
                           Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) and Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37). The revised ESMF will include
                           new procedures to evaluate subprojects affecting natural and critical habitats, as well as irrigation
                           systems connected to dams to ensure dam safety and due diligence according to the safety of dams
                           policies. It will also include a revised negative list and checklist to ensure a better screening-out of
                           subprojects which are Category A and better identification and management of subprojects involving
                           critical or natural habitats. In addition. it will require preparation of an Environmental and Social
                           Accumulative Impact Assessment when more than two subprojects with similar impacts are
                           identified in the same geographical, hydrological or direct influence area, along with its
                           corresponding Mitigation Action Plan
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Lilian Pedersen (LCSSO)
                           Claudio Luis Daniele (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project aims to have an overall highly
                           BP 4.01                                               positive socioeconomic impact, by improving
                                                                                 the efficiency of agricultural productivity in
                                                                                 Argentina’s provinces. OP/BP 4.01 would be
                                                                                 triggered because the physical interventions
                                                                                 resulting from the implementation of
                                                                                 investments under Component 2 could have
                                                                                 negative impacts on the environment.

                                                                                 The project is not expected to finance
                                                                                 subprojects with significant negative
                                                                                 environmental impacts that cannot be mitigated.
                                                                                 The majority of project activities are expected to
                                                                                 have low to moderate impact, including
                                                                                 rehabilitation or improvement of existing
                                                                                 infrastructure (such as rural roads or irrigation
                                                                                 schemes), construction of low-impact
                                                                                 infrastructure (such as small-scale electric lines
                         or gas pipelines), introduction of irrigation on
                         rain-fed agricultural land, or small constructions
                         in low-sensitivity areas (such as the construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of small marketing buildings). Potential
                         negative environmental impacts could include
                         land use change, soil movements, increased
                         pressure over natural resources, loss of soil
                         nutrients, water quality effects, and increased
                         use of pesticides and/or chemicals for animal
                         health control. These impacts and relevant
                         mitigation measures will be described in the
                         project’s ESMF.

                         The project is expected to result in positive
                         social and environmental outcomes, through its
                         supports to improve the efficiency of
                         agricultural productivity in Argentina’s
                         provinces. Improvements in water allocation
                         and efficiency, coupled with technical assistance
                         to encourage integrated pest management and
                         modern production methods, are likely to result
                         in improved environmental management in the
                         rural sector.

                         Cumulative impacts are not expected to be
                         significant, as the project is nationwide but
                         relatively limited in scope, and all activities
                         would be implemented in areas already under
Public Disclosure Copy




                         agricultural production or livestock grazing
                         lands. However, the ESMF will include criteria
                         and tools to address cumulative, synergic and
                         indirect/regional impact which are expected in
                         those project involving water resources, road
                         rehabilitation, etc. These will be included in the
                         future EIA for subprojects to be prepared during
                         the PROSAP 3 implementation.

                         As part of the EA process during preparation,
                         the Borrower will update the project's
                         Environmental and Social Management
                         Framework (ESMF), based on the current
                         ESMF for PROSAP2, to set forth the specific
                         measures to mitigate all identified impacts,
                         including screening criteria for sub-projects and
                         sites.
                         The ESMF includes guidelines for the
                         preparation of a Social and Environmental
                                                             Management Plan to address the mitigation of
                                                             social and environmental impacts of each
                                                             specific subproject including, as the case may
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             be: impacts of minor infrastructure, waste
                                                             management, worker and road safety, impacts to
                                                             public services and infrastructure (roads,
                                                             railroads), environmental protection measures
                                                             (soil, air, flora, fauna, water, and landscape),
                                                             and public information, among others.
                                                             The ESMF will also include guidelines for the
                                                             preparation of an Environmental and Social
                                                             Management Plan of Public Works (Plan de
                                                             Gestión Ambiental y Social de Obra) detailing
                                                             administrative and legal procedures for the
                                                             UCAR, IASO, and provincial implementation
                                                             entities with respect to social and environmental
                                                             issues
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   Even though all project activities would be
                                                             implemented in areas already under agricultural
                                                             production, OP/BP 4.04 is triggered because it
                                                             is possible that some sub-projects could be
                                                             located in areas close or connected to natural
                                                             and/or critical habitat or protected areas. If this
                                                             is identified at the subproject screening stage,
                                                             the ESMF will include the criteria and
                                                             procedure to avoid negative impacts and
                                                             conversion and to support the strengthening of
                                                             associated natural habitat management
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             instruments. Subprojects contemplating
                                                             significantly degradation or conversion of
                                                             natural habitats will not be eligible for
                                                             financing.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   While it is not known at this stage whether
                                                             subprojects could affect the rights and welfare
                                                             of people dependent on forests and would bring
                                                             changes in the management, protection, and
                                                             utilization of natural forests OP/BP 4.36 is
                                                             triggered as a precautionary measure. The
                                                             ESMF will include specific screening criteria
                                                             that would flag potential impacts on forests or
                                                             their management.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes   Integrated Pest Management (IPM) would be a
                                                             part of sub-project activities. As procurement of
                                                             pesticides is likely to occur, a positive list will
                                                             be prepared to identify pesticides that can be
                                                             used. The ESMF will include guidelines for
                                                                 preparation of a Pest Management Plan, for
                                                                 each subproject that may require it.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Project implementation is not expected to have
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.11                                 any negative impact on physical cultural
                                                                 resources. However, the policy is triggered to
                                                                 handle potential “chance findings” during
                                                                 construction activities. UCAR has proven
                                                                 experience and appropriate procedures to
                                                                 recover (under IADB financing) and to monitor
                                                                 (under IBRD financing) “chance findings” in
                                                                 line with Argentina’s well-developed legislative
                                                                 and normative framework on this subject. The
                                                                 ESMF will include screening criteria to evaluate
                                                                 potential impacts on cultural resources and
                                                                 provide guidance on chance finds procedures.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   Although the proposed project would not target
                                                                 indigenous people as a beneficiary group, its
                                                                 intended coverage of non-Pampean agricultural
                                                                 areas means that it is possible that members of
                                                                 one or more of Argentina’s indigenous peoples
                                                                 could be present within the project’s
                                                                 geographical influence area. In order to avoid
                                                                 the risk of potentially excluding such groups
                                                                 from project benefits, or otherwise affecting
                                                                 them in an adverse way, the project triggers OP/
                                                                 BP 4.10 and The Borrower will adapt the
                                                                 project Indigenous Peoples Planning
                                                                 Framework (IPPF), based on the current IPPF
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 for PROSAP2, to strengthen and coordinate
                                                                 overall attention to indigenous peoples’
                                                                 participation. In addition, the specific sub-
                                                                 project Environmental Management Plans to be
                                                                 developed under the project would include pre-
                                                                 screening. In the case that IP are affected by a
                                                                 specific subproject, a site-specific Indigenous
                                                                 Peoples Plan would be developed based on the
                                                                 IPPF guidelines.
                                                                 PROSAP1 and PROSAP2 financed subprojects
                                                                 involving IP. Preparation of PROSAP3 will
                                                                 include an assessment of past performance to
                                                                 ensure access and inclusion of IP and in order to
                                                                 draw lessons to be incorporated into PROSAP3.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Subprojects financed by PROSAP (such as
                         4.12                                    rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage systems,
                                                                 rehabilitation of feeder roads, and rural
                                                                 electrification works) are likely to require land
                                                                 easement and/or acquisition, which could cause
                                                           loss of assets or affect livelihoods, even though
                                                           the project would exclude any investment that
                                                           might entail physical displacement of people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           The Borrower will prepare a Resettlement
                                                           Policy Framework (RPF), based on the current
                                                           RFP for PROSAP2, to ensure that analysis of
                                                           alternatives and appropriate support to
                                                           potentially affected persons are incorporated
                                                           into the subproject design. During PROSAP
                                                           Involuntary resettlement has constituted a
                                                           challenge because of different legal framework
                                                           of the different provinces of intervention. This
                                                           experience is being capitalized by the UAS and
                                                           will contribute to the revised Involuntary
                                                           Resettlement Framework. Preparation of
                                                           PROSAP3 will include an assessment of past
                                                           performance of some provincial units in the
                                                           identification, appraisal, and management of
                                                           resettlement impact, including an analysis of
                                                           PROSAP RPF and a review of relevant
                                                           regulation at national and provincial levels.
                                                           The ESMF will include clear criteria to
                                                           document voluntary land donations.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   Yes   While the Project would not finance building of
                                                           any large dam, it is possible that irrigation or
                                                           water supply subprojects financed might rely on
                                                           the storage and operation of an existing dam for
                                                           their supply of water and would not function if
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           the dam failed. The ESMF under PROSAP 2
                                                           stipulates that financing of any such subproject
                                                           requires a preliminary specialized dam safety
                                                           assessment, including a review and evaluation
                                                           of the operation and maintenance procedures of
                                                           the existing dam and the presentation of a
                                                           written report including finding and
                                                           recommendations for any remedial work or
                                                           safety related measures, which, if needed, have
                                                           to be undertaken before the start of operations
                                                           on the relevant subproject. This procedure has
                                                           proven to be robust and satisfactory during
                                                           PROSAP 2 implementation. In addition, it is
                                                           worth noting that during PROSAP2, an
                                                           agreement was reached between UCAR and the
                                                           Argentine Safety of Dams Authority
                                                           (Organismo Regulador de Seguridad de
                                                           Represas, ORSEP) in order to ensure a proper
                                                                                                                                 dam safety supervision of any future sub-project
                                                                                                                                 connected to a dam under PROSAP.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            While there is no known activity that may
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            trigger this policy, subprojects that may affect
                                                                                                                                 International Waterways will not be eligible for
                                                                                                                                 IBRD financing under PROSAP3.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project will not finance activities that would
                                 7.60                                                                                            take place in disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Oct-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Safeguard related documents will be based on an update of the ESMF and related documents for
                                      the ongoing PROSAP2 (P106684). The updated ESMF will be available before appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Renato Nardello

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Laurent Msellati (SM)                                                                                                Date: 15-Aug-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
