                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/29/2012                                     Report No.: AC6686
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Argentina                            Project ID: P070628
Project Name: Provincial Road Infrastructure Project
Task Team Leader: Gylfi Palsson
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 6, 2005         Estimated Board Date: June 7, 2005
Managing Unit: LCSTR                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Roads and highways (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%);Injuries and non-
communicable diseases (25%);Administrative and civil service reform (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           150
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                     136.00
                                                                      136.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objectives of the Project are: (a) to improve paved road sector assets of Participating
Provinces I; and (b) to enhance DPVs’ capacity to manage and administer said road
assets, so as to facilitate the transport of products within the borrower’s territory.

3. Project Description
The Project consists of three components: (i) Civil Works Component with two
subcomponents: (a) performance-based rehabilitation and maintenance through
CREMAcontracts, and (b) conventional rehabilitation and/or upgrading/repaving
contracted under ad-measurement type system. (ii) Road Sector Management and
Institutional Building aimed at strengthening participating provincial road agencies and
(iii) Project Management and Technical Assistance.

 (1) CREMA contract means a multi-year performance contract entered into by a road
agency with a private sector contractor which contract obligates the private sector
contractor to undertake all phases of road rehabilitation and maintenance work as a single
package, from design and programming of the works, through the execution of such
works.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Provinces of Córdoba, Corrientes, Chubut, Entre Rios, Neuquén and Santa Fe.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Glenn D. Pederson (ECSSD)
   Ms Elba Lydia Gaggero (LCSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Under Component 1, the Project involves rehabilitation and maintenance works within
the right of way of existing provincial roads (including paving). At the time of appraisal
only Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) and Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11)
were triggered. The applicability of Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) was considered but the
policy was eventually not triggered. At that time it was deemed that the effect of the
rehabilitation of the road leading to Parque Nacional Los Alerces, a 18.8 km segment of
the Ruta 71 that runs outside the protected area's buffer zone and ends in the North
entrance of the park, would not in a material manner infringe on the park itself nor the
natural habitats in the area surrounding the park.
 Following a review of existing and remaining known planned sub-projects, and
particularly an updated and detailed documentation for the paving works on Ruta 71 in
the Province of Chubut, by the Project Coordination Unit (UCP) and the Province, it is
now the Bank's assessment that there is indeed a need to trigger OP 4.04 through this
proposed restructuring. The sub-project will be carried out under Component 1,
Subcomponent 2. The Project continues to be classified as Category B.
 Also, after appraisal of the Project, UNESCO/MAB designated a new Biosphere
Reserve - Reserva de Biósfera Andino Norpatagónica - a vast cordilleran zone across
three Argentinean provinces, including Parque Nacional Los Alerces, which highlights
the importance of the critical natural habitat under consideration.
  Although the sub-project would be located outside the established boundaries of the
park and even the buffer and transition zones of the biosphere reserve, works would still
take place in the immediate adjacencies of the environmentally sensitive Park, and
accordingly within its influence zone.
  Safeguard compliance has largely been satisfactory during Project implementation,
although upon recognition that Natural Habitats OP 4.04 needed to be triggered, the latest
ISR rating for overall safeguard compliance was reduced to Marginally Satisfactory. That
rating is expected to be revised upon successful fulfillment of the triggering and subject
to continuous satisfactory safeguard compliance.
  Natural Habitats, OP 4.04. Of a group of 12 sub-projects under both parts of Component
1 as revised, the Natural Habitats Safeguard is triggered only by Ruta 71, which has not
yet been awarded. The environmental assessment of this sub-project performed by the
Environmental Unit of the Chubut Provincial Road Agency (UA-DPV) followed the
procedures of the Project's safeguards instruments approved by the Bank at appraisal,
involving a preliminary checklist, an expedited Environmental Assessment (EA) and an
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). The EIA was developed in compliance with
local regulations, which are consistent with OP 4.01 processes and requirements. A
public consultation on the EIA was carried out in March 2011 and the Provincial
Environmental Authority approved the Ruta 71 subproject. The National Park
Administration was also consulted and gave its no objection to possible machinery
maneuvers around the North entrance inside the park. According to procedures, the UCP
performed overall supervision of this process.
  As a result of the sub-project updated information, the Bank provided UCP with
additional recommendations to ensure compliance with the Bank safeguard policies to be
incorporated in the bidding documents. The Bank will review the bidding documents
once presented by Chubut DPV.
  In this way, sub-project implementation is expected to comply with all mitigation
measures, conditions and procedures to minimize the environmental and social impacts
established in: i) the Province's expedited EA and EIA; ii) the authorities' permits; iii) the
Project's instruments; and iv) the Bank's additional recommendations, including those
which will be potentially provided at the time of the review of the bidding documents.
The contractor will prepare an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and all the
activities involved will be supervised by an environmental specialist of the contractor and
the Environmental Inspector representing the Province, who will report monthly to the
UCP. National Park Administration personnel will also supervise the works and UCP
environmental inspector will perform audits to the project area at least every 3 months.
  Physical Cultural Resources, OP 4.11. It was triggered by appraisal in relation to
Component 1 of the Project. Since excavation activities and civil works take place,
physical cultural resources along existing routes might be directly or indirectly affected.
Accordingly, guidelines and procedures for the identification and protection of physical
cultural resources have been included in the Environmental and Social Framework of the
Project. Bidding documents include clauses for the contractors to avoid damages to
cultural resources and chance find procedures.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
n/a

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
n/a

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The UCP and the UA-DPVs operate according to an Environmental Manual included in
the Operational Manual (OM) of the Project ("Módulo Ambiental para Obras Viales")
and an Environmental and Social Management Framework ("Marco Conceptual para el
Manejo Ambiental y Social", MCMAS) also included in the OM, both which were
approved by the Bank.
 The MCMAS, which was updated for the Additional Financing, includes the socio-
environmental guidelines and procedures and management instruments for the screening,
assessment and supervision of subprojects, both for the UCP and the Participating
Provinces and identifies responsible agents and their roles in each of the sub-project’s
phases. The Environmental Manual defines procedures for the consideration and
application of environmental criteria in the planning, design, works execution and
operation of roads. Bidding documents prepared by DPVs include environmental clauses
that follow the Manual and comprise the elaboration by contractors of an EMP that must
comply with the provisions of the Environmental Manual, the MCMAS, sub-project
environmental studies, pertinent regulations, authorities´ requirements and Bank
safeguard policies. The EMP is implemented by contractors who are in turn required to
hire an environmental specialist for all these tasks. UA-DPVs provide overall supervision
and systematic reports to the UCP while the UCP reviews and follows the reports as well
as performs field audits.
 Despite the fact that the Natural Habitats OP 4.04 was originally not formally triggered
for the Project, the safeguard instruments already contained some considerations
regarding compliance with the policy. In order to complete, clearly state and
appropriately address all the requirements derived from the triggering of OP 4.04, the
MCMAS has now been revised to include an upgraded preliminary checklist and agreed
additional environmental guidelines and procedures. The updated MCMAS was disclosed
locally and in INFOSHOP on March 28, 2012.
 Although not related to the triggering of OP 4.04, during the revision of the relevant
sections of the OM it was agreed with the borrower that the Environmental Manual will
also be revised in order to improve the organization of chapters and other format issues.
 The updated instrument will be applied for the remaining CREMA and conventional
rehabilitation sub-projects to be financed.
 During the former Provincial Roads Project (PRP), Environmental Units were created
within the DPVs with the objective of introducing the issue of socio-environmental
management into the road sector of all participating Provinces. From that time, UCP and
the UA-DPVs have strengthened their institutional capacity in terms of socio-
environmental management, through the implementation of the Institutional
Strengthening Plans for Socio-Environmental Management established for the Provincial
Road Infrastructure Project and its ongoing Additional Financing. Said units have the
technical staff and the experience required for adequate socio-environmental
management during project implementation. Diffusion activities among UA-DPVs on the
new updated MCMAS are foreseen.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Provincial Environmental Authorities are consulted on the environmental studies
developed for all sub-projects. Consultation processes include public consultation on
EIAs for sub-projects that are required to have this kind of environmental assessment
based on legal and/or MCMAS procedures. Consultation with corresponding authorities
is also required for sub-projects that are known to involve physical cultural resources or
critical natural habitats. In all cases, bidding documents include consultation and
dissemination requirements as part of the EMPs to be prepared and implemented by
contractors, including grievance mechanisms for the whole period of the road works. The
Project’s consultation processes are being improved and consolidated through the
implementation of the Additional Financing (effective October 2011), supported by new
procedures and technical specifications introduced during its preparation and the
incorporation of a social specialist in the UCP team.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 04/12/2005
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             04/18/2005
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/19/2005
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        Yes
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             N/A
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           N/A
adverse impacts on cultural property?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name     Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Gylfi Palsson        03/23/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Elba Lydia Gaggero   03/23/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Lilian Pedersen      03/23/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan      03/23/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Aurelio Menendez     03/23/2012
  Comments:
