                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/01/2011                                     Report No.: 63109
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Argentina                            Project ID: P110612
Project Name: Argentina Sustainable Industrial Development Project
Task Team Leaders: Renan Alberto Poveda and Anjali Acharya
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 27, 2011       Estimated Board Date: August 4, 2011
Managing Unit: LCSEN                          Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                              Loan
Sector: General industry and trade sector (100%)
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (50%); Regulation and
competition policy (25%);Climate change (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            40.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                     10.00
                                                                      10.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
22.     The objectives of the Project are to control and reduce industrial pollution in
Argentina by: (a) improving the environmental performance of Participating SMEs
through a voluntary clean production matching grants program; (b) strengthening key
Participating Provinces and Participating Municipalities to enhance environmental
monitoring and enforcement; and (c) developing incentives and alternative approaches to
pollution control through the establishment of an environmental public disclosure system,
all aimed at stimulating local development, enhancing competitiveness and productivity
in Participating SMEs, and contribute to environmental sustainability.

3. Project Description

Component 1: Matching Grants for Financing Cleaner Production in SMEs (US$32
million).

1.     This component will assist in carrying out of demand-driven investments within
Selected Industrial Sectors, which investments shall consist of the improvement of the
environmental performance of Participating SMEs and fostering their compliance with
environmental regulations through, inter alia: (i) the adoption of cleaner production
technologies and/or processes to control, reduce and/or eliminate pollution
emissions/discharges to legal limits or below; (ii) a decrease in the use of natural
resources, promoting reuse and recycling; (iii) the control, reduction and/or elimination
of toxic inputs and emissions to legal limits or below; and (iv) the improvement of
Participating SMEs’ general productivity through, inter alia, the carrying out of activities
such as the paving of access to roads, fencing perimeters for cattle, and the purchasing of
engraving machines for tanneries, all acceptable to the Bank.

2.      During APL-1, subprojects would be piloted in four key sectors viz. tanneries,
electroplating, meat processing and dairies. These sectors were prioritized in consultation
with the Ministry of Industry, and on the basis of their pollution intensity, potential
competitiveness and interest expressed by SMEs. While SME participation in the project
is voluntary, SMEs would have to meet eligibility criteria to qualify.1

3.      Successful projects in this phase can be replicated in APL-2 throughout the
country, and could encourage more industries to adopt clean production practices as a
business and environmental management strategy. During APL-2, the lessons from Phase
1 would be embedded in project design and the matching grants program would be
deepened to engage more intensively in SMEs in the initial four targeted sectors and/or
broaden to include SMEs from other polluting industrial sectors as well as potential
industrial parks, based on diagnostic studies financed under APL-1.


Component 2: Technical Capacity and Institutional Strengthening (US$5 million)

4.      This component would complement the efforts carried out by SMEs (under
Component 1) by providing TA to SMEs that implement cleaner production processes
and by building technical capacity within provincial and municipal governments through
the following activities:

    (a) Provision of technical assistance to Participating SMEs through the carrying out of
    technical studies and preparation of related guidelines, for the purposes of, inter alia:
    (i) developing cost-effective Cleaner Production Subprojects; (ii) supporting Cleaner
    Production Subprojects implementation; (iii) improving Participating SMEs’ access
    to commercial credit; and (iv) raising awareness among commercial financial
    institutions about the potential market for SMEs’ financing.

    (b) Strengthening of Participating Provinces and Participating Municipalities’
    institutional capacities, on a demand-driven basis, for purposes of improving their
    environmental management and enforcement and monitoring systems, through, inter


1
 While at this stage the exact location and nature of subprojects is unknown, it is likely that the subprojects
will be located along the Reconquista and Matanza-Riachuelo River Basins and in the provinces of
Rosario, Córdoba, Mendoza, La Pampa and Santa Fe where SMEs of the four selected sectors are
concentrated.
    alia, the provision of technical assistance and training, and the acquisition and
    utilization of equipment required thereto.

    (c) Carrying out of a viability analysis for the establishment of a cleaner production
    center within MI, and provision of administrative support for its initial set up in case
    it is established.

    (d) Design and implementation of an environmental performance disclosure program
    for purposes of, inter alia, ranking the overall standing of industries with regard to
    adherence to environmental principles, compliance with emissions standards, and
    overall commitment to cleaner production, including the carrying out of technical
    assessments, data-gathering and monitoring required thereto.

    (e) Provision of: (i) technical assistance to Participating SMEs seeking to obtain the
    ISO 14,000 certification for their industrial processes; and (ii) financial support to
    cover processing and administrative fees incurred by Participating SMEs that receive
    such certification

Subcomponent 2.1: Technical Assistance for Subproject Implementation (US$2 million)
5.      Under this sub-component, technical assistance would be provided by cleaner
production specialists (contracted by the Ministry of Industry with support from
industrial chambers and associations) to eligible SMEs in order to: (i) identify cleaner
production measures that would help improve their environmental compliance, by sector;
(ii) prepare technical guidelines for subproject preparation; (iii) support SMEs in
preparing executive subproject proposals; (iv) develop detailed subproject proposals if
these have passed the first screening process;2 and (v) provide overall technical assistance
during subproject implementation. These TA activities would help build knowledge and
capacity among SME owners and staff about best available technologies to improve
environmental compliance by sector. Technical assistance will also be provided to SMEs
interested in improving access to commercial credits for investments by building credit
histories, developing formal audited financial statements, etc.3 Furthermore, in
preparation for APL-2, analytical studies will be undertaken to identify other potential
industrial sectors and common cleaner production activities and investments in industrial
parks that might benefit from such financing.



Subcomponent 2.2: Institutional Strengthening (US$3 million)
6.      This subcomponent would focus on providing support to the environmental
licensing, audits, monitoring and enforcement to be carried out by selected municipalities
and provincial governments. Interested municipal and/or provincial governments would
2
  This would include: (i) technical specifications of equipment to be procured or engineering design; (ii)
detailed costs per activity/investment; (iii) proposed procurement arrangements; (iv) potential adverse
social and/or environmental impacts caused by the subproject and mitigation measures, among others.
3
  In addition to serving as an incentive to participate in the program, commercial credits may also be used
to complement the matching contribution by beneficiary SMEs under component 1.
be required to submit a detailed proposal to MI, indicating the specific areas of support.
Only provinces or municipalities with large concentrations of polluting industries would
be considered. The requests would be prepared based on guidelines prepared by the PCU,
indicating the scope and dimension of the institutional strengthening that can be
requested. This subcomponent will finance specialized consultants for capacity building,
preparation of technical guidelines to support institutional enhancement technical
exchanges with other municipal governments in the region that are addressing similar
challenges in regulating pollution from SMEs. Furthermore, this subcomponent will
finance the equipment required to carry out environmental audits and monitoring (i.e.
including laboratory equipment and supplies).

In addition, the project will contribute to assessing the establishment of a Cleaner
Production Center (CPC) within MIT that could contribute to mainstreaming the
sustainable industrial production agenda within the institutional structure of the ministry.
Initially serving as a clearinghouse for cleaner technology promotion issues, the CPC
could also coordinate the identification of potential subprojects and provide technical
advice on identifying industrial competitiveness measures for industries (i.e., large firms)
outside the project. As mentioned above (d and e), this subcomponent will also support
the design and implementation of an environmental performance disclosure program
(EPDP)4 as well as SMEs that wish to obtain their ISO 14,000 certification.


Component 3. Project Administration (US$3 million):

7.      This component will finance the provision of support for the operation and
maintenance of the Project Coordinating Unit (PCU) for the implementation, supervision,
monitoring and coordination of the Project. This will involve the financing of (i) human
resources necessary for the functioning of the PCU5 including procurement, financial
management, as well as environmental and social safeguard specialists; (ii) the physical
space and equipment for the PCU; (iii) a communications strategy aimed at promoting
project activities among SMEs, disseminating lessons learned, conducting outreach
programs and helping build public support for environmental programs within industry
associations and local governments; (iv) technical guidelines and monitoring studies; and
(v) the provision of expert support to provide periodic advice and technical assistance in
conjunction with project implementation.

8.      The PCU would coordinate project activities with SMEs, liaising with the clean
production unit within SAyDS, specific relevant sectors (i.e., agriculture), and other key
stakeholders. The PCU would also be in charge of coordinating and channeling technical
assistance and capacity building to SMEs as well as to municipalities on a broad range of

4
  This would consist of a system of colored flags and/or eco-labeling and for those SMEs that have a
continued satisfactory environmental performance the project could establish within MI a ‘green seal’
public outreach program.
5
   The PCU within the Secretariat of Coordination (Secretaría de Coordinación) has demonstrated its
overall technical and administrative capacity during the implementation of the Argentina Reduction of
Ozone Depletion Substances Project (a Montreal Protocol grant) since 1997.
subjects. The PCU would also call upon and liaise with the members of the independent
evaluation committee (IEC) for the review and endorsement of subproject proposals. The
PCU will benefit from the technical and operational experience gathered in the
implementation of the Reduction of Ozone Depleting Substances Project (also within
MI).


4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The environmental baseline context for this project will be geographic areas where the
specific SME interventions will occur, which are anticipated to be primarily in urban and
semi-urban areas in the provinces of Buenos Aires, Santa Fe, Cordoba, Rosario, and
Mendoza and the city of Buenos Aires. Many of these areas are suffering from different
degrees of industrial and municipal pollution. Industrial discharges are a major source of
air, water and solid waste pollution in Argentina. In the Buenos Aires metropolitan area,
industrial sources account for nearly half of wastewater discharges, which are responsible
for the poor quality of rivers and groundwater. In a few areas, industrial effluents are
reported to be the dominant source of pollution.

 As in many other countries, SMEs in Argentina are typically more polluting and are
falling behind in the adoption of environmentally sound production. They generally use
obsolete technologies and lack knowledge about newer cleaner technologies. Improper
use of chemicals, inadequate treatment or disposal of waste, uncontrolled emissions, and
production techniques that make intensive use of nonrenewable resources further add to
potential environmental impacts. Data from Argentina#s largest industrial hotspot, the
Matanza-Riachuelo Basin, which includes SMEs, reveal high contaminant loads
attributed to these sectors. For example, tanneries contribute about 26 million kg of BOD
per year or 61 percent of the total discharge to the basin, while meat-processing and dairy
industries together contribute about 10.3 million kg annually, or 17 percent of the total.
Toxic effluents are also high, particularly for tanneries with a discharge to the basin of 34
tons/year of chromium VI (100 percent of total discharge to the basin) as well as sulfates
with 20,000 tons/year (100 percent of the total discharge to the basin). The metallurgy
industry is also high, including chromium, zinc and cyanide.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Ricardo Schusterman (LCSUW)
   Mr Marcelo Hector Acerbi (LCSEN)
   Mr Robert H. Montgomery (LCSEN)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project involves investments in cleaner production schemes for SMEs in order to
achieve more environmentally friendly operations. The investments are restricted to
SMEs operating in the dairy, electroplating, meat processing and tannery industries. The
investments are not likely to have significant adverse environmental impacts that are
sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented. Among others, targeted improvements will include:
optimization in the use of natural resources, reduction in the pollution load in discharge,
reduction of noise, gaseous and odor emissions, better solid waste management,
workplace safety, optimization of land use, community outreach, and other measures.
The scope of impacts can be summarized as follows:

  a.    The matching grants will not have significant adverse environmental impacts that
are sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented.
  b.    These impacts are not likely to affect an area broader than the sites or facilities
subject to the improvement of physical works or processes in the SMEs.
  c.    Areas where improvement would take place would be in the SMEs, and are not
likely to involve public areas or other private lands.
  d.    No regional and indirect impacts of the envisioned improvements are expected
since the SMEs already exist and have only a direct influence. In fact, the expected
indirect regional or potential effect will be positive. The impacts are likely to be site
specific.
  e.    Impacts are not expected to be irreversible.
  f.    Mitigation measures for industrial reconversion are well known and can be
readily designed.
  g.    Participating SMEs will develop contingency plans to face unexpected problems.
  h.    Environmental liabilities and/or other environmental, health or safety issues in
company will be considered

 The project#s main potential adverse impacts include both construction and operation
impacts. The short-term small construction activities have potential direct impacts but
will likely be localized, relatively small, and easily mitigated by proper design and the
implementation of an environmental management plan that each SME would develop and
implement associated with it receiving financing. The potential operational related
impacts and risks are sector specific, because they involve differentiated production of
waste and emissions in terms of quality and quantity. Tanneries, dairy production,
electroplating, and meat processing can be considered to involve medium to high levels
of environmental impact/risk.
 #      Tanneries. A highly polluting industry because it involves the production of
wastewater with high organic content, as well as discharges of heavy metals such as
chromium, ammonia, sulfides, and residues of pesticides used for hide preservation.
Decaying organic material produces strong odors. Volatile organic compound (VOC)
emissions from finishing processes are also common.
 #      Electroplating. This industrial activity involves the use of solvents and stripping
agents including caustic soda and strong acids, and in some cases cyanide, and other
chemicals that can be found in the wastewater. Solvents and hot plating may result in
VOC emissions and discharges of heavy metals (including chromates, cadmium, lead,
copper, zinc).
 #      Meat processing. This involves the production of wastewater with high organic
content. It may also contain pathogens such as Salmonella and Shigella bacteria, parasite
eggs, and amoebic cysts, which pose a threat to human health.
 #      Dairy Production. Similar to the meat-processing industries, this productive
activity produces large amounts of organic waste that needs treatment before effluents
can be discharged into the environment. Strong, unpleasant odors from cheese production
can also occur.

 The degree of impact on the environment is also related to the waste load discharged/
released and the assimilative/recovery capacity of the ecosystem receiving the discharges.
Therefore, it is important to determine the environmental absorption, dilution and
recovery capacity of industrial sites in order to identify potential environmental risks and
benefits associated with the measures to be funded by the project. Measures aimed at
improving or upgrading environmental management infrastructure at industrial estates
would be better justified at sites where ecosystems have already been affected beyond the
point of natural recovery.

 The potential environmental impacts of this project would be addressed through
measures to prevent, contain and treat effluents and solid waste resulting from industrial
processes. These impacts are expected be site specific, and mitigation measures can be
designed.

 Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01). This project has been classified as Category B.
The investments are not likely to have significant adverse environmental impacts that are
sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented. Per the Bank#s OP 4.01 policy, since the
subprojects are not unknown at the time of Board approval, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) ) is being developed related to Component 1,
specifying procedures for screening, evaluation, preparation and implementation of
proposed investments in SMEs from an environmental and social perspective. The ESMF
builds on the national environmental framework, aiming at complying with the Bank’s
environmental and social safeguard policies.

 Natural Habitats (OP 4.04). Overall, the activities associated with the reconversion of
industries to improve their environmental performance are expected to be beneficial and
sustainable. Consequently, it is expected that investments under Component 1 would
have significant positive impacts on the external environment including any natural
habitats or sensitive ecosystem which is currently been affected by industrial pollution.
Nonetheless, this policy is triggered to ensure that during the screening process any
potential impacts (such as downstream pollution loads to natural and sensitive areas) are
properly managed and mitigated under good practice standards.

 Pest Management (OP 4.09). The project will not procure nor will it lead to increased
use of pesticides. Therefore, no action is required under this policy.

 Forests (OP 4.36). There are no forests affected by the project and there are no
interventions that would promote improved forest management. Therefore, no action is
required under this policy.

 Dam Safety (OP 4.37). The project neither finance the construction or rehabilitation of
dams nor depend on them. Therefore, no action is required under the policy.

 Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11). There are no anticipated and expected impacts
on cultural resources. Therefore, no action is required under this policy.

 Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12). The policy has been triggered as a precautionary
measure, even though no resettlement associated with the activities to be funded is
foreseen. However, since the physical interventions relating to cleaner production
investments for SMEs that would be financed by this project have not yet been
determined, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared by the Borrower.
The RPF identifies the eligibility criteria, forms of compensation, and dispute resolution
mechanisms that would be available to potentially affected people. The MI will supervise
the SME projects to ensure that the company takes adequate measures to assist persons
affected by land acquisition for resettlement to restore their livelihoods. A specific
Resettlement Action Plan or Land Acquisition Plan would be prepared for each
subproject eventually requiring land acquisition.

 Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10). No indigenous peoples are affected by this project as
defined by World Bank policy. Therefore, no action is required under this policy.

 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60). The project is not being implemented in
any area known to be the subject of international dispute as defined by the policy.
Therefore, no action is required under this policy.

 Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50: While no potential subprojects
which could affect international waterways have been identified during project
preparation, this policy is triggered since there may be subprojects selected that may have
potential impacts from such subproject activities on international waterways during the
implementation phase. Project activities will seek to improve the environmental
performance of SMEs’ industrial processes and contribute to reducing/controlling their
emissions. It is the team#s assessment that project activities: (i) will not adversely change
the quality or quantity of water flows, nor will cause appreciable harm to the other
riparians; and (ii) will not be adversely affected or appreciably harmed by the other the
riparians# possible water use. Consequently, an exception to the riparian notification
requirement has been sought since the proposed activities (industrial reconversion and
works) would be undertaken to support improvements or changes to ongoing industrial
processes. These activities would involve minor additions or alterations to the ongoing
and existing industrial processes, and will not cover works/ activities that would exceed
the original production scheme, nor change its nature, or so alter or expand its scope and
extent as to make it appear as a new or different production scheme.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
This project is not expected to cause potential indirect and/or long term impacts. Most of
the proposed interventions would be planned in existing industrial locations.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
As the proposed interventions will be defined during the implementation of the loan, it
has not been possible to conduct an analysis of alternatives by appraisal. However, it
could be anticipated that most of the proposed interventions would be planned in existing
industrial locations; therefore it will not be necessary to conduct an analysis of
alternatives to explore the impact of different locations. However, and given the specific
nature of each SME in particular, which could be a result of its location or the proximity
to a sensitive environment, the analysis of alternatives would be part of the specific
environmental assessment process to be conducted at the intervention level, once
investments are identified during the implementation of the loan. The ESMF will include
criteria to conduct the analysis of alternatives as part of TOR to conduct EIA.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The main safeguard instrument to manage project impacts will be an ESMF (including a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)). The ESMF includes an analysis of the baseline
conditions and a set of technical guidelines describing procedures and institutional
responsibilities to assess and manage the potential environmental and social risks and
impacts that could be faced throughout the project cycle.

 This ESMF will support essential safeguard goals: (a) to ensure the environmental and
social sustainability of the interventions in SMEs, (b) to comply with national
environmental legislation, (c) to comply with the Bank#s environmental and social
safeguard policies, and (d) to define institutional responsibilities and the creation of
capacities for the management of environmental and social instruments. The ESMF
includes:

 (i)     A methodology for intervention screening including a Screening Datasheet to
guide the environmental and social classification of potential interventions with detailed
criteria and a negative list of actions/activities to ensure the exclusion of works of greater
impact. After the screening stage, if needed the SMEs will prepare Environmental
Assessments to analyze specific environmental and social impacts and identify additional
studies and consultation, following local regulations and Bank safeguards. In those cases
where the environmental complexity is minimal, best practices will be applied.

 (ii) Tools and procedures for carrying out the preparation, implementation and
monitoring of environmental and social management associated with the interventions in
SMEs.

 (iii) Specific safeguards instruments such as an Environmental Assessment Guideline
and a Public Disclosure and Consultation Procedure.

 A process of screening would be carried out by the PCU based upon information
provided by the SME in order to help identify potential environmental impacts risks and
the type of environmental management required to ensure compliance with the Bank#s
environmental and social safeguards. The screening process would take place for all the
interventions to be financed by the project.

 Once eligible interventions have been categorized according to their potential
environmental risks, they would have the following requirements.

 #      Low-risk subprojects. These subprojects would be classified as Category I. In
these cases, no environmental assessments (EAs) would be needed and only standard
mitigation measures, including best practices, would be required.
 #      Medium-risk subprojects. Subprojects classified as Category II would need to
have a sub-project specific Environmental Management Plans (EMP).
 #      High-risk subprojects. These subprojects would need Environmental Impact
Assessment (EIA), public consultations, and Environmental Management Plans (EMPs).

 In addition, a set of measures will be adopted in order to assist in preventing conflicts
related to project intervention impacts as well as setting up mechanisms for reaching
adequate resolution. If complaints are made about actions carried out by the project, the
regular mechanisms for dealing with complaints put in place by the Secretariat of
Industry, Commerce and SMEs will be used, as well as those to be planned by the project
before appraisal. These mechanisms will be part of the ESMF.

 The PCU will review and approve all applications in relation to environmental and
social aspects, including EMPs and EIAs. Specific environmental and social requirements
will be included in the Operating Agreement with the SME. The SME will be required to
submit routine monitoring/supervision reports, and the PCU will perform supervision site
visits to assess performance and compliance.

 The PCU will be located in the Ministry of Industry, under the Secretariat Coordination.
The SI has experience in implementing competitiveness programs for SMEs funded by
the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB). In addition, the SI has been
implementing the Montreal Protocol Program with the World Bank for more than 10
years. This experience would be complemented by hiring an environmental and social
specialist with safeguards expertise as part of the PCU.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared by
GoA and has been disclosed for consultation prior to appraisal (27 June 2011). A
consultation process started on 1 June 2011, involving a specific consultation meeting
and several subsequent follow-up/specific technical institutional meetings. The
consultation process has been documented in the Project files and has involved NGOs
industrial chambers, interested SMEs and representatives from the national and
provincial governments.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    05/31/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                05/31/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 06/27/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    05/31/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                05/31/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 07/01/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                          No
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification            Yes
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                         Yes
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Renan Alberto Poveda                     06/22/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Marcelo Hector Acerbi                    06/24/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Ricardo Schusterman                      06/24/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Karin Erika Kemper                       06/24/2011
  Comments:
