                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                           Report No.: AC6418


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/29/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Armenia                               Project ID: P126782
Project Name: LIFELINE ROAD NETWORK IMPROVEMENT PROJECT
Task Team Leader: Vickram Cuttaree
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 2, 2012          Estimated Board Date: October 2, 2012
Managing Unit: ECSS5                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (40%);Trade facilitation and market access
(40%);Infrastructure services for private sector development (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           40.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                        10.00
                                                                        10.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The Project Development Objective is to upgrade Lifeline Roads in selected regions, create local
employment in road construction, and improve access to markets.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project will be either a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) or a Program for Results
(P4R) lending. The decision to prepare the project as a P4R will be taken following the
assessment of the feasibility and scope during project preparation. The proposed loan amount is
$40 million out of a total $50 million project. Additional contributions from other IFIs to the
program (possibly including European Investment Bank and Asian Development Bank) will be
discussed during project preparation.
  The proposed components for the project would include:
  a.    Component 1: Lifeline Road Network Improvement (about US$45 million): This
component will improve about 400-500 km of Lifeline roads in 2-3 regions that are strategic for
agricultural development and improved access. This would be implemented through
performance-based contracts where the contractors would be responsible for all road works
(including rehabilitation, routine, periodic and winter maintenance) required to ensure that the
selected network of roads and bridges are kept at defined levels of service for the duration of the
contracts. This component will also include road safety improvements for pedestrians (such as
sidewalks, shoulders and crossings in all villages) and road users (such as road signs and
shoulders). Project preparation will include the prioritization of areas, assessment of the Lifeline
road network, and preparation of bidding documents.
 b.     Component 2: Technical Assistance (about US$5 million): This component will include
studies and training programs to improve the capacity of the Ministry of Transport and
Communication (MOTC), the Armenian Road Directorate (ARD), and the Project
Implementation Unit (PIU) to prepare, procure and monitor performance based contracts. The
component will also include activities to develop the capacity of local consultants and
contractors. The studies will support sector reform necessary to ensure the sustainability of the
sector, including institutional arrangements and financing of the sector. The component will also
include follow-up activities to enhance further road safety audits and improvement programs at
the national level. This component could also include the expansion of vehicle overloading
control and could provide funds to prepare detailed designs for other parts of the Lifeline road
network, and other needs considered essential for strengthening the MOTC and its agencies. The
detailed activities will be defined and finalized during project preparation.

D. Project location (if known)
The project is will improve local roads, and may cover civil works anywhere in the country,
depending on the selection of priority areas of roads by the Government of Armenia at a later
stage of the Project preparation

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
MOTC and the Transport PIU under it are judged to have significant ability to manage the
Project, including its compliance with safeguard policies. They are successfully implementing
the World Bank financed Lifeline Roads Improvement Project and already have experience in
managing OPRCs for roads maintenance. However, the PIU has recently been given additional
responsibilities for non-IFI supported projects and this has increased its workload. It is expected
that the use of OPRC will ultimately lead to a reduction in workload by reducing the number of
contracts and bidding processes. At the same time, the PIU may need guidance and support to
adapt its monitoring and oversight to the performance-based contract approach.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr I. U. B. Reddy (SASDS)
   Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSS3)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes        No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
    The proposed project triggers OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. Provided that no
construction on new road alignments will be financed and the likely negative impacts of civil
works on the environmental are modest, the project is classified as environmental Category B.
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be developed to guide
contractors on the scope and type of the required site-specific environmental management
planning, which would be performed as contractors identify specific activities for rehabilitating
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes           No       TBD
and maintaining the Lifeline roads network. The ESMF will set out how implementation of
environmental and social safeguards (WB and national requirements) will be integrated in the
performance-based (i.e. the contractor will be responsible for delivering acceptable
environmental and social performance along with other aspects of quality). This will have
implications for the terms of reference for the selection of the contractors (they must demonstrate
they have the capacity and systems needed to deliver on these apsects). This could be
incorporated into a "post-qualification" process.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                 X
    Provided that the Project does not finance construction of any new roads, it is unlikely to
significantly impact natural habitats. Final decision on triggering OP/BP 4.04 will be taken once
the sections of roads to be covered by the Project are selected, any need for re-routing of
particular segments is identified, and implied risks to the natural habitats are assessed.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                               X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                          X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                      X
    Once the road sections to be covered by the Project are selected, likelihood of the Project’s
impact on any known cultural property sites will be assessed and the final decision on triggering
OP/BP 4.11 will then be taken. Regardless the above, ESMF will provide guidance on proper
handling if such cultural resources are encountered during civil works.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                    X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
    The proposed project will trigger #OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement#. It is expected to
have positive social impacts in the form of improving access to markets, nearby towns, and
provide opportunities for temporary employment through the contractors. Based on the
experience of the on-going project, the road improvements will include upgrading or
arrangement of sidewalks, drainage, etc, with good engineering standards and will require a
minimum road cross-section of 10 meters. It is possible that all roads may not have 10 meters
encumbrance free cross-section. Thus, the project may encounter some minor land acquisition
and resettlement impacts. In order to mitigate the potential minor land take acquisition related
impacts, a Resettlement Policy Framework ( RPF) will be prepared by the Government which
will cover the process of identifying the anticipated impacts, process of consultations during
design and Implementation stages, grievance mechanisms, implementation arrangements,
monitoring mechanism, coordination with civil works, etc. As the contractors will ultimately
decide when and where to undertake civil works, a first draft of the Resettlement Action Plan
(RAP) will be prepared by the contractor, finalized by the Government and submitted to the
Bank for approval. The Government will be responsible for implementing the RAPs prior to civil
works. VP approval will be sought if project financing is proposed for land acquisition
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                        X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                   X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                            X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 05/01/2012

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The preparation of Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and
   Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be commissioned by the PIU with the help of
   local consultants during the project preparation and these frameworks will be adopted
   through appropriate Government approvals and Bank#s endorsements prior to project
   appraisal. The draft TORs for these frameworks are shared by the Bank with PIU for
   finalizing the TORs for commissioning the consultants in the near future. Based on these
   policy provisions to be proposed in ESMF and RPF, section specific EMP and RAPs will be
   prepared based on the magnitude and nature of environment and social impacts to be
   assessed as part of feasibility studies and detailed engineering.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Vickram Cuttaree                                            07/27/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Ms Agnes I. Kiss                                               07/27/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Henry G. R. Kerali                                          07/28/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
