                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 12/09/2011                                   Report No.: AC6601
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P094225                  Original Project Name: Social Investment
                                              Fund III
Country: Armenia                              Project ID: P128740
Project Name: Third Additional Financing for Social Investment Fund III Project
Task Team Leader: Ivan Drabek
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 12,        Estimated Board Date: February 14, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: ECSHD                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: General education sector (49%);Other social services (25%);General water,
sanitation and flood protection sector (10%);Public administration- Other social services
(9%);Health (7%)
Theme: Municipal governance and institution building (29%);Rural services and
infrastructure (29%);Decentralization (14%);Participation and civic engagement
(14%);Municipal finance (14%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             11
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               2.89
         Local Communities                                                0.72
                                                                          3.61
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Development Objective of the proposed Third Additional Financing (AF) is the same
as the development objective for the Armenia Social Investment Fund (ASIF) III Project
as expanded under the First AF and maintained for the Second AF, i.e., to support the
government policy to raise the living standards of the poor and vulnerable groups
through: (i) improving the quality and access, and increasing the coverage of community
infrastructure and services in poor communities, and for the most vulnerable groups; (ii)
promoting complementary institutional capacity building at the community and
municipal level to improve the quality and sustainability of community investments and
service delivery, increase accountability, and enhance greater stakeholder empowerment
at the local level; and (iii) creating employment associated with the provision of
community infrastructure and services.

3. Project Description
The main aim of the proposed Third AF is to enable the client to scale up the investments
under the on-going project in order to implement additional community infrastructure
micro-projects of the same typology and scope as those funded under ASIF III Project,
the First AF, and the Second AF.

 Component 1: Community Investments - would support activities similar to those being
implemented under ASIF III Project in support to the small-scale infrastructure, as a
short-term solution to the crisis through immediate temporary work opportunities. The
community infrastructure micro-projects would include the renovation and rehabilitation
of key social infrastructure covering education (i.e., kindergarten, primary, secondary and
special schools), health (i.e., primary healthcare facilities), multipurpose community
centers, social service centers for vulnerable groups; small-scale water supply, sanitation,
and irrigation systems excluding dams; and rural electrification. Micro-projects would
also cover school heating systems, and the rehabilitation of gymnasiums and
playgrounds. Small scale new construction may be financed provided that it does not
require land acquisition and does not restrict any type of the existing formal or informal
land use. The AF would also provide goods for micro-projects, primarily in the form of
furniture for rehabilitated schools and community centers. To ensure proper design and
supervision of community infrastructure micro-projects, the component would finance
local consultancies for micro-project design and supervision and field work in the form of
technical assistance and logistical support.

 Component 2: Local Level Institutional Strengthening, Monitoring and Evaluation -
would support training of local government officials and ASIF staff (including study
tours for ASIF staff), and carrying out of an impact assessment.

 Component 3: Project Management - would finance operating costs of ASIF required
for project management, monitoring and evaluation, coverage of salaries, utilities, office
equipment, training, financial audits, and the maintenance of the Monitoring and
Information System (MIS) throughout the Project life.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Nationwide. As in the original Project, and the First and the Second AFs, the Third AF
will target poor communities in all regions of Armenia.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSS3)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed Third Additional Financing would support activities similar to those being
implemented under the ASIF III Project and the First and the Second Additional
Financing. However, the proposed Third Additional Financing is classified as
Environmental Category B, in contrast with the original project and the subsequent
additional financings, which were Category FI. Although the proposed Third Additional
Financing would continue to finance micro-projects the technical details of which are not
known up-front, there is no element of on-lending involved in the project design and the
ASIF therefore does not meet the definition of a Financial Intermediary (FI).

  The Third Additional Financing would not trigger any new safeguard policy, because
the nature and magnitude of micro-projects remain the same as under the original Project.
In response to the client’s demand, the Third Additional Financing would allow small-
scale new construction, but only under the condition that it does not require land
acquisition, i.e. the micro-project must be carried out on publicly held land, and does not
disrupt any current formal or informal land use. Therefore, OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary
Resettlement is not triggered. Potable water supply micro-projects would finance either
rehabilitation of the damaged sections of the existing schemes without altering volumes
of water intake, or would provide new schemes at a village level supplying water from
wells and small surface springs. Therefore, like ASIF I, II, and III, the Third Additional
Financing does not trigger OP 7.50 Projects on the International Waterways. OP/BP 4.11
Physical Cultural Resources is not triggered, as the Project would not finance civil works
at any known sites of historical and/or cultural heritage and the number of micro-projects
involving new construction is expected to be minimal. In the unlikely case of chance
finds, construction supervisors would follow the guidance of the Project Operational
Manual, which calls for immediate suspension of works, notification to the State
authority for cultural heritage, and adherence to the course of action worked out by such
authority.
  Micro-projects to be financed under the Third AF would fall under environmental
categories B or C and hence are not expected to have any major or irreversible impacts on
the environment, while their social impacts would be positive. No category A micro-
projects would be financed. Nature and scope of the possible environmental impacts of
micro-projects will be identified through environmental screening and respective
mitigation measures would be applied. Environmental due diligence would be built into
the micro-projects selection, approval, and monitoring procedures outlined in the ASIF
III PAD, and in the Project Operational Manual. Adherence to these procedures would be
closely monitored by the ASIF.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No negative indirect and/or long term impacts are expected due to anticipated future
activities in the project area. Improved operation of the rehabilitated priority public
infrastructure is expected to have a positive social impact on the beneficiary
communities.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Based on the accumulated experience from the implemented micro-projects, the Third AF
would introduce additional safeguards against risks to human health and safety at the
operation phase of micro-projects aimed at the rehabilitation of the existing buildings.
This implies identification of seismic resistance and potential water damage to the
existing structures proposed for rehabilitation and incorporation of the relevant
engineering solutions into the micro-project designs.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
For the purposes of implementing the ASIF III Project, the Borrower developed the
Operational Manual, including Guidelines on Environmental Procedures. These
guidelines provide an environmental management framework for the Project
implementation. The Environmental Guidelines were disclosed in Country and through
the Bank InfoShop in 2006. The Guidelines were revised for the purposes of the first and
second AFs. These revisions streamlined environmental review process and
documentation at the micro-project appraisal stage and implied, inter alia, introduction of
micro-project classification under environmental categories according to OP/BP 4.01.
With that the Environmental Guidelines provide a clear framework for ensuring micro-
project compliance with the Armenia national legislation and with the Bank safeguard
policies.

 In the course of supervising the ASIF III Project to date, no cases of major
environmental incompliance have been identified, though there were issues with the
quality of documented reporting on the environmental screening and monitoring of
operations. An environmental specialist was hired by ASIF after provision of the second
AF, leading to tangible improvements which include the use of environmental screening
and field monitoring checklists, and photo documentation of the findings from site visits.
The Borrower confirms the intention to maintain the staff unit of an environmental
specialist within ASIF under the Third AF, which would be important for keeping the
Project environmentally compliant.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The ASIF, micro-project implementing agencies (PIAs), beneficiary communities, and
municipal governments would be the key stakeholders of the Project. Guidelines on
Environmental Procedures, prepared for the ASIF III project, were made available for the
stakeholders through the public disclosure of the Project Operational Manual containing
the Environmental Guidelines, in-country and through the Bank InfoShop. The
Guidelines were re-disclosed as part of the Third AF preparation process with minor
revisions aimed at better integration of the environmental review and monitoring
functions into the mainstream procedures of the micro-project preparation and
implementation cycle, as well as integration of the environmental documentation into the
MIS.

 The process of consultation with the beneficiaries would take place at three stages: (i)
public information and outreach campaign at the beginning of a micro-project cycle; (ii)
appraisal of micro-projects; and (iii) monitoring and evaluation for assessing outcomes
and results. Disclosure of the project-related environmental information and consultation
with affected communities would be the responsibility of the ASIF and PIAs. The ASIF
would carry overall responsibility for the meaningful public involvement in the micro-
project cycle. Beneficiary assessments, included in the monitoring and evaluation
mechanism, would be used to obtain public feedback on the ongoing operations,
including their environmental and social implications.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/15/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             11/22/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              11/22/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         N/A
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        N/A
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name     Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Ivan Drabek            12/07/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Darejan Kapanadze      11/29/2011
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Agnes I. Kiss          12/08/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Kathy A. Lindert       12/08/2011
  Comments:
