                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/12/2011                                   Report No.: AC6337
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Azerbaijan                          Project ID: P122944
Project Name: Second Rural Investment Project
Task Team Leader: Daniel P. Owen
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 18, 2011      Estimated Board Date: November 8, 2011
Managing Unit: ECSS4                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Other social services (40%);Microfinance (15%);Water supply (15%);Rural and
Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (15%);Transmission and Distribution of Electricity
(15%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (33%);Participation and civic engagement
(25%);Rural non-farm income generation (25%);Decentralization (17%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            30.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                       3.00
                                                                        3.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
To improve access to and use of community-driven rural infrastructure and expand
economic activities for rural households. This would be achieved through: (i) financing
demand-driven, community-identified priority rural infrastructure investments; (ii)
strengthening the capacity of communities in partnership with municipalities and local
support institutions to effectively identify, plan and implement their development
priorities; (iii) building opportunities for rural employment and livelihood support
services; and, (iv) supporting project management capacity in order to coordinate, plan,
monitor, program and supervise a wide range of community driven activities.

3. Project Description
The project is a multi-sector investment loan that will scale up the current AzRIP both
geographically into currently un-serviced Rayons and vertically through the inclusion of
second generation institutional support in current AzRIP active project areas. The
project has three components:
 Component A - Rural Community Infrastructure. This component will support demand-
driven micro-projects (MPs) in rural infrastructure. Potential investments include basic
economic (e.g., rehabilitation of secondary roads, potable water systems, irrigation
infrastructure, electricity transformers) and social (e.g., school and clinic rehabilitation
and construction) infrastructure, based on priority needs identified by communities. The
average size of MPs will be US$ 70,000, while MPs over US$85,000 will require prior
review.

  Component B - Technical Assistance for Rural Infrastructure. This component will fund
support services for micro project implementation as well livelihood support services
(SWOT analysis, business plan preparation, legal and institutional analysis, business
training).

  Component C - Project Management and Results Monitoring. This component will
finance the administrative and operational project implementation and management costs.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The coverage for the proposed Project would scale up the current Project to encompass
the 11 currently un-serviced rayons and include 56 rayons in total. With a project
envelope of roughly US$ 30 million, the project could support approximately 650 sub-
projects in 650 communities. Given the almost nationwide coverage of the project,
activities will take place in all of the Country#s agro-ecological zones (Lowland Plains,
Upland Rainfed, and Highlands).

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSS3)
   Mr Martin Henry Lenihan (ECSS4)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project does not raise any significant adverse environmental concerns. Experience
derived from the original AzRIP indicates that positive environmental impacts resulted
from the implementation of such micro-projects as improved irrigation, water supply and
sewerage systems. The potentially adverse environmental impacts of AzRIP-2 are mainly
associated with civil works during micro-projects implementation, and include, inter alia,
dust, noise, soil and water pollution, generation of waste materials, waste disposal
(including medical waste), damage to soil by excavation works.

 Environmental Assessment.

 These potential negative environmental impacts trigger the Operational Policy OP 4.01.
The impacts are minor and can be prevented or minimized through appropriate preventive
actions and mitigation measures. Therefore, the project is classified as environmental
category #B#, requiring partial assessment. Since micro-projects are not pre-identified
and will be determined in the course of project implementation by applicant communities
through intensive participatory processes, an environmental management framework will
be applied which will establish screening mechanisms and govern the process of
development and implementation of specific mitigation plans. The Environmental
Management Framework for the original AzRIP has been updated by the Borrower to
address impacts from the newly proposed activities to strengthen rural livelihoods and to
reflect the expanded geographical coverage. This updated framework includes screening
mechanisms to exclude the possibility of land acquisition and resettlement resulting from
sub-project implementation. The updated EMF has been discussed with stakeholders and
publicly disclosed by the Borrower.

 Projects in International Waters.

 As was the case with the original AzRIP, AzRIP-2 will support activities on
rehabilitation or construction of irrigation and drainage systems, water supply
improvement and wastewater treatment. Such activities are likely to be developed inter
alia on rivers flowing into the Caspian Sea and trans boundary rivers, which are
international waterways for the purposes of the World Bank Operational Policy on
Projects on International Waters (OP 7.50). It is expected (and also based on the
experience under the original project) that proposed micro-projects would not produce a
noticeable change for the abstraction volumes of the systems and would not have an
adverse change to the quality or quantity of river flows, while the works would not
change the nature of the original systems. With OP 7.50 being triggered, riparian states
have been notified accordingly.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
AzRIP-2 will be implemented by the same PIU which is implementing AzRIP and AzRIP
Additional Financing. Capacity for the EMF implementation has been built under the
original project through series of training regularly provided to the PMU, its Regional
Offices and potential beneficiary communities. The PMU Environmental Specialist is
responsible for training delivery, assists the Regional Offices and applicant communities
throughout the whole cycle of micro-project development and implementation and
closely supervises implementation of specific preventive and mitigation measures by
project beneficiaries. As a result of the implementation of capacity building assistance,
the PMU staff in the Regional Offices became able to guide project applicants as to the
eligibility of proposed activity from environmental perspective, to provide advice on the
environmental documents and permits to be prepared/obtained by applicants. The
Environmental Specialist was screening all the proposals for potential adverse impacts
and provided guidance at the very early stage of preparation of proposals with respect to
site assessment and selection, potential environmental sensitivities and alternative
solutions, if any. Only those micro-project proposals meeting all the environmental
requirements (no sensitivities identified at the early stage, specific EMPs available and of
good quality, permits obtained) were allowed for further evaluation. Each micro-project
has been supervised by the Environmental Specialist at least twice during the
implementation period. The micro-projects# duly completion was certified by the
Environmental Specialist, along with other technical specialists of the PMU. Close
supervision of micro-projects ensured that proposed mitigation measures were properly
implemented by contractors and communities (e.g., proper site selection, quick removal
and duly disposal of construction and medical wastes, non-use of toxic materials in
construction). Also, the awareness raising seminars among potential beneficiaries which
have been periodically undertaken in the project area, significantly improved
communities# understanding of, and commitment to environmental compliance.
Community members with appropriate background (medical, biological) were selected to
monitor contractors# environmental performance. The same good practice will continue
under AzRIP-2

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The primary stakeholders driving this project are the communities themselves, who will
be actively supported in identifying, selecting, planning, implementing and maintaining
infrastructure micro-projects. Public meetings were held in March 2011 at the rayon level
for disclosure of the EMF. The consultation meetings were attended by representatives
from communities, municipalities, the Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources,
Regional NGOs and Regional ExComs of the areas where the Project will be active.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/06/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             04/15/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/27/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)        Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the        Yes
credit/loan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                       Yes
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification         N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
  to the RVP prepared and sent?
  Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        N/A
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Daniel P. Owen                            07/11/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva                      06/27/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Martin Henry Lenihan                      06/27/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Caroline M. Kende-Robb                    07/12/2011
  Comments:
