                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/21/2012                                   Report No.: AC6656
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P094220                 Original Project Name: Health Sector
                                             Reform Project
Country: Azerbaijan                          Project ID: P129093
Project Name: Additional Financing - Health Sector Reform Project
Task Team Leader: Claudia Rokx
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 19, 2012      Estimated Board Date: January 8, 2013
Managing Unit: ECSHD                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Health (83%);Central government administration (14%);Compulsory health
finance (3%)
Theme: Health system performance (50%);Improving labor markets
(25%);Administrative and civil service reform (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            30
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objectives are to improve quality and availability of health-
care services and strengthen the capacity of the Health authorities to manage the system
(stewardship).

3. Project Description
Component A: Building MoH Capacity for Stewardship (total estimated cost US$2.08
million, of which US$1.81 million will be Bank-financed). This component will continue
to assist the MoH to build its capacity in policy making, planning, and regulation by
financing consultancy services, training and goods. This component will include three
sub-components:

 Sub-component A.1.Building Capacity in MoH (total estimated cost US$0.19 million,
of which US$0.16 million will be Bank-financed). The HSRP developed the health
system monitoring and evaluation strategy and set of indicators, as well as the draft
reports on health system performance assessment. To strengthen MoH's capacity in
assessing the situation, setting priorities and improving decision-making, it is intended to
continue such activities under the AF. For this purpose, additional support needs to be
provided to health policy organizations that are charged with analyzing data and
disseminate information on the health sector for evidence-based policy-making and
preparing reports on policy implementation. Under this sub-component, the proposed AF
would support (i) annual health system performance assessments report; and (ii) building
the capacity on health policy, monitoring and evaluation.

 Sub-component A.2. Strengthening Health Information System (total estimated cost
US$1.70 million, of which US$1.49 million will be Bank-financed). This sub-component
will implement the Road Map developed under the HSRP for the National Health
Information System (AZ-NHIS) at the national level and in the selected districts. The full
implementation of the NHIS will facilitate data flow and health information exchange
within the Azerbaijan health sector and the Azerbaijan e-Government Program.
Specifically this component includes the definition and implementation of: (i) a National
Health Data Dictionary and Minimum Health Data Sets standards; (ii) National Health
Standards; (iii) Health Information Exchange for Minimum Health Data Sets (MHDS)
allowing the link between primary health care facilities with district hospitals and
national reference centers; and (iv) a Health Statistics and Monitoring System for online
registry and processing of statistical health information from the health care providers,
including public and private hospitals. In addition, the project will support the IT support
group, which provides regular assistance to MoH in developing and implementing new
IT platforms and technologies. From the view point of expanding the activities in health
information system through the implementation of the Road Map for the Unified Health
Information System in Azerbaijan, the Project will continue and strengthen its support to
IT support group.

 In the selected districts, the AF would scale up the implementation of the hospital and
the PHC management information system (HMIS – Akgun system has been piloted in
Hospital #1 in Baku and in the Gakh Central District Hospital). The proposed AF would
expand th coverage of the e-Health-card to the adult population and would support the
MoH in the implementation of the required IT platform in the health facilities selected in
the five pilot regions.

 Sub-component A.3. Assist the GoA in preparing for the implementation of the Health
Insurance law and Health Financing Reform (total estimated cost USD0.19 million, of
which US$0.16 million will be Bank-financed). This is part of the former Component
C—Ensuring Sustainable Health Financing and Resource Allocation. Specifically, this
sub-component would finance consultancy services and training to: (i) develop and
eventually pilot new performance-based payment mechanisms in project regions at the
PHC level; (ii) continue the pilot of the DRG system at the hospital levels; (iii) support
the evaluation of the basic benefit package, including a review of the essential drug list
and pharmaceutical policy; (iv) assess future resource needs, pro-poor co-payment
options and fiscal space taking into account epidemiological and demographic transitions;
(v) assist policy making through sharing of international experiences in health financing
reforms; and (vi) establish a health network delivery performance scorecards and
dashboard to support district benchmarking and resource allocation efficiency.

 Component B: Improving Delivery of Healthcare Services - (total estimated cost
US$27.63 million, of which US$23.41 million will be Bank-financed). This component
will finance consultancy services, civil works and goods in fourteen districts of Agdash,
Aghsu, Balakan, Barda, Gabala, Gakh, Imishli, Ismayilli, Khachmaz, Kurdemir, Oghuz,
Shamakhi, Sheki and Ujar. The component will (i) reconstruct 9 primary health care
facilities in HSRP original districts that were not finalized due to cost-overruns,
envisaging entire demolition of the existing facilities and construction of new facilities on
the original site or at new locations if found appropriate by specific assessment; (ii)
reconstruct 17 primary health care facilities and 3 village hospitals in the nine additional
districts; and (iii) rehabilitate 1 children's hospital in Sheki. The list of selected health
facilities to be reconstructed and detailed estimated costs for primary health care facilities
are presented in Annex 4. This component would also support activities aim at improving
governance of health facilities at all levels and their referral system within each district
and with the national level in order to reduce the number of referrals to Baku. Training of
health workers previously under this component has been included under Component C
Human Resources Development.

  The following specific activities would also be financed: (i) assessments of newly
selected facilities to provide information on the necessary inputs (goods, civil works,
training, etc); (ii) preparation of detailed specifications and architectural designs based on
the existing standards for facilities' reconstruction; (iv) preparation of business plans for
each facility, including a outline service portfolio assessment and expected service
delivery performance, maintenance plan, and recurrent operating costs financing plan; (v)
improvement of coordination and governance, clinical and managerial structures (system
hierarchy) within and between the primary and secondary levels of health care; and (vi)
development of a modern surveillance system at the national level by improving
laboratory capacity in terms of laboratory equipment.

  Component C: Human Resources Development (total estimated cost US$3.49 million,
of which US$ 3.06 million will be Bank financed). This component would support the
effective implementation of human resources reforms through financing consultancy
services, training, and minor civil works and goods. This component also includes the
training of health workers previously covered under component B.1 and B.2. There are
two sub-components:

 Component D: Project management, monitoring and evaluation (total estimated cost
US$ 1.80 million, US$1.72 million of which will be Bank financed). This component
would ensure effective administration and implementation of the project by supporting
the operation of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) which is responsible for the day-
to-day management and coordination of project activities. This includes liaising with
relevant stakeholders and donors, procurement, disbursement, financial management,
safeguards management, coordination of training events, and effective monitoring and
evaluation of project outcomes. The component will finance the services of a project
management advisor for the initial project period, project audits, additional IT equipment
for PIU staff, a vehicle and training expenses. In addition, the component will finance
operating costs of the PIU until Project closing.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The AF would support further improvements in the provision of primary healthcare
services in selected districts based on the adopted rationalization plans developed by the
current Project. As a result of the underestimated costs, of the initially planned 30 PHC
facilities only 8 (6 completed, 2 in progress) PHCs will be constructed under the ongoing
Project. Of the 15 village hospitals, 4 were constructed, and 2 out of 3 central rayon
hospitals were constructed. The remaining facilities have yet to be reconstructed which
will be done under the AF. The provisions of the existing Environmental Management
Plan (EMP) outlining negative environmental impacts, mitigation measures and
implementation procedures will remain applicable for the AF.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSS3)
   Ms Joanna Peace De Berry (ECSS4)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
 In addition to the OP/BP 4.01 'Environmental Assessment' already triggered for the
original project, the proposed scale-up activities under the AF will also trigger a new
safeguard policy OP/BP 4.12 'Involuntary Resettlement'. The AF will support civil works
of the same nature and magnitude as the original Project. The potential environmental
impacts identified by the project Environmental Management Plan (EMP) include
generation of construction and domestic wastes and waste water, excessive noise and dust
during the construction period, soil excavation and topsoil preservation, disposal of
medical waste during the operation of health facilities. All those impacts are temporary
and mitigatable if treated appropriately, thus the environmental category of the project
AF remains B and the environmental procedures outlined in the existing Environmental
Management Plan (EMP) will remain applicable. Site specific EMPs, or EMP checklists,
will be developed for individual construction works as envisaged by the project EMP.
The identified site specific mitigation measures will be duly addressed by the design of
health facilities and incorporated as contractual obligation of contractors

  Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement is not foreseen under the project. Civil
works under the AF will take place on the site of existing facilities on publicly owned
land. However the final design of renovations works is not yet known and there is the
possibility that in order to ensure the best possible design and to allow contractors to gain
access to the site, some temporary or permanent loss of privately owned assets and
acquisition of land may be entailed. For this reason, and largely as a precautionary
measure, the project triggers the safeguard policy OP/BP 4.12 'Involuntary Resettlement.'

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The health facilities to be constructed or rehabilitated under the project AF, will introduce
improved operational practices as compared to the current practices (for example, in
terms of medical waste management), and will provide better health care services. Thus,
the overall long term impacts of the project activities are expected to be positive.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Due to insufficient in-house environmental expertise within the MOH PIU, the
environmental compliance of the original project activities has not been properly
monitored. Resulting problems included inadequate provisions for solid waste disposal
(including medical wastes) and wastewater management and inadequate construction site
management. Under the AF, it will be ensured that the PIU is fully capable and
committed to the fulfillment of its environmental management responsibilities and is able
to enforce compliance with the project EMP by construction supervision consultants and
contractors. This will be achieved by the PIU contracting a dedicated environmental
consultant/specialist to be responsible for the EMP implementation and overall
environmental compliance of the project. Also, in order to rectify the shortcomings of the
environmental management of the original project, the PIU has prepared a time bound
and budgeted action plan which addresses such measures (retroactive and going forward)
as: provision of on-site waste water treatment facilities in the hospitals and proper
collection and disposal of waste waters of smaller scale HFCs; follow up with contractors
on post-construction clean up of the sites; and identification of proper measures to
mitigate environmental risks at those sites where the construction is underway. The
project EMP has been updated to clarify these requirements and to reflect the scale up
activities supported by the AF.
 The project has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared to describe
the procedures to be followed if the AF activities cause any issues envisaged by the
OP/BP 4.12. . While there are no involuntary resettlement and land acquisition
anticipated, in case the need arises the client will prepare a site specific Resettlement
Action Plan in accordance with the RPF.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During the environmental assessment carried out for the original Credit, consultations
were carried out with all relevant stakeholders (local communities potentially affected by
civil works undertaken under the project, MOH staff, district level staff, hospital staff,
patients, etc.) to assess any potential adverse social effects of the proposed project. None
were identified. The original Environmental Management Plan was disclosed, both in
Azerbaijan and through the Bank information shop. The updated EMP has been re-
disclosed on MOH web-site and Bank's Infoshop. Site-specific EAs and EMPs will be
developed during AF implementation when designs for health facilities are being
finalized, and publicly disclosed and consulted prior to commencement of civil works.

 Principles for consultation with potentially affected people are outlined in the RPF for
the project and will be an integral part of RAP preparation and monitoring. The draft RPF
has been disclosed prior to the AF Appraisal.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05/22/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  05/21/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05/22/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05/22/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  05/21/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05/30/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name      Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Claudia Rokx            08/06/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva    05/30/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Joanna Peace De Berry   06/12/2012
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Daniel R. Gibson        06/12/2012
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Agnes I. Kiss           06/13/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Antonino Giuffrida      06/21/2012
  Comments:
