                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/03/2013                                    Report No.: AC6950
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P083108                  Original Project Name: RAIL TRADE
                                              AND TRANSPORT FACILITATION
Country: Azerbaijan                           Project ID: P146125
Project Name: Rail Trade and Transport Facilitation AF
Task Team Leader: Jacques Bure
Estimated Appraisal Date:                     Estimated Board Date: June 27, 2013
Managing Unit: ECSTR                          Lending Instrument:
Sector: Railways (90%);Other domestic and international trade (10%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%);Corporate
governance (25%);Trade facilitation and market access (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           220
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                       0.00
                                                                        0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to "improve railway services in Azerbaijan, as well
as the competitiveness, financial sustainability, operating and cost efficiency, and
capacity of the Azerbaijan Railways (ADY) in particular along the transport corridor
toward Georgia (east-west corridor)".

3. Project Description
The project finances some key elements of the Government's Rail Investment Program
that will improve service on the East West mainline from Baku to the Georgian border,
which carries most of ADY's traffic. The Government's Rail Investment Program
includes rehabilitation of track and replacement of signaling, electric power supply, and
locomotives for the corridor. The project also supports railway sector reforms through
financing technical assistance for modernization.

 The original project collectively financed activities under four below components while
the additional financing will finance components 1, 3 and 4:
  Component 1: Rehabilitation of East-West Main Line
  Provision of goods, works and services to: (a) rehabilitate about 240 km of mainline
track; (b) convert power supply on the East-West Main Line; and (c) upgrade signaling,
compatible with the new 25kV AC power supply system.

 Component 2: New Mainline Locomotives
 Provision of goods and services in order to provide mainline 25kV AC electric
locomotives to operate on the east-west corridor.

  Component 3: Modernization of ADY Services
  Provision of works, goods, services and training in order to: (a) support the
implementation of some activities in the framework of the Borrower's Government
Program for the Development of Azerbaijan State Railways 2008-2011, including, but
not limited to, for the transition to the International Financial Reporting Standards and
legal restructuring of the ADY; and (b) improve its oil spill prevention capacity.

 Component 4: Project Implementation
 Support of the PIU for effective implementation of the Project, through provision of
goods, consultants' services and training

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project addresses the Azerbaijan side of an Azerbaijan-Georgian transport corridor,
which is the most heavily used corridor and part of the larger corridor from Baku to
Georgian ports that carries in particular transit oil traffic.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Daniel P. Owen (ECSSO)
   Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The rehabilitation of rail track, the conversion to 25 kV power supply system and the
renewal of the signaling are the primary investments of the project covered by the EMP –
the EMP will be updated once the design for the signaling renewal is available. The
rehabilitations will allow more efficient transport of goods such as crude oil and oil
products. Impacts are expected to be temporary and related to the direct rehabilitation of
these rails tracks and set up of potential new power substation, replacement of sleepers,
reballasting replacement of tracks, including: noise in residential areas; rehabilitation of
the track; dust and exhaust emissions from equipment; vibration; and waste management,
possibly including hazardous wastes, for example when replacing old transformers. The
metal wastes and oil stained wooden bars from rail and sleeper replacement will be
collected into special containers and transported to a disposal site.

  The new power supply and locomotives will be significantly more energy efficient, and
track upgrades will significantly reduce risks of derailments related to track condition.

 No land acquisition through expropriation is anticipated, nor is loss of access to income
expected.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Long-term impacts of the project are expected to be positive due to more energy efficient
power supply system and locomotives, as well as due to the introduction of the Oil Spill
Response Plan.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The implementing agency - Azerbaijan Railways (ADY) - has been a member of the
Railway Organization for CIS Countries since 1992. This organization provides guidance
to its member countries on environmental matters, spill management and procedures for
the transport of hazardous materials. In order to analyze the potential environmental
impacts and identify mitigation measures and implementation arrangements for the
project, the ADY prepared the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) in 2007 and
updated in 2010. The identified impacts include:

 (i)    Impact on air quality: dust and exhaust emissions from operation of construction
equipment will be mitigated by using water spraying, ensuring proper ventilation of
internal areas and regular checkup of engines.
 (ii) Impact on water: contamination of water by discharge of untreated waste waters
during the construction phase will be mitigated by mechanical treatment and/or
disinfection of water prior to discharge into water reservoirs.

 (iii) Impact on land: impact caused by excavation during construction / rail and
sleepers replacement and by improper disposal of wastes, metal garbage and oil stained
wooden bars will be mitigated by taking/disposing of excavated materials from/at
approved sites; collection, transportation in covered containers and proper disposal of
wastes during and upon completion of construction phase.

 (iv) Impact of noise and vibration in residential areas, caused by operation of the
construction equipment will be mitigated by keeping noise level below maximum
permissible level for each type of equipment.

 Since the project restructuring does not envisage any changes to the nature of track
rehabilitation activities, the original EMP remains applicable for the purposes of
restructuring. The replacement of signaling system is considered by a separate specific
EMP (already envisaged by the project overall EMP and currently under preparation)
which is subject to Bank's prior review and approval.

 The Metrology, Standardization, Certification and Ecology Department of the Technical
and Production Service (TPSD) in ADY is responsible for environmental management
including the development and implementation of this EMP, and is based in Baku. TPSD
has 3 staff in the central office that has specific responsibility for environmental
management. Environmental issues are managed on a day to day basis through local
departments each having a staff member assigned to environmental matters.

 The local departments in ADY are responsible for the preparation of Ecological
Passports and action plans for each section of rail line in their district. These passports
are issued by the Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources (MENR) and include limits
for pollution. They are renewed every 3 years following MENR audit. In order to ensure
overall compliance with the passport conditions, the TPSD carries out regular inspections
of ADY operations.

  The capacity of ADY is assessed to be relatively good in relationship with the type of
works foreseen. Staff are cognizant of good practices and their responsibilities for
environmental management, emergency response and spill management as well as
transportation of dangerous goods and wastes.

 The project will provide capacity building (training, procedures, equipment) related to
the prevention and response capacity for rail related oil spills that may result from
derailment or regular operations. Training and operational budget required for ADY to
carry out its monitoring functions for this EMP are included in the project.

 The TPSD will have primary responsibility for the implementation of the EMP. The
TPSD will ensure inclusion of environmental provisions into construction / rehabilitation
and locomotive purchase contracts, and will supervise operation of contractor to ensure
compliance with the environmental provision of the contracts.

 ADY is expected to understand all the conditions under which the social safeguard
OP4.12 policy would be triggered. ADY will need to communicate to the Bank
immediately in the event this scenario arises in order that appropriate measures for
compliance be taken.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Azerbaijan State Railways (ADY), potential users / passengers of the east-west transport
corridor, local communities residing along the corridor (likely to be affected by the
project), local executive authorities and baladiyyas (municipalities) are the key
stakeholders. The preparation of the Environmental Management Plan has initiated a
process of consultations with beneficiaries and stakeholders. When the draft EMP was
available for disclosure, ADY carried out public consultations in all rayons along the
corridor, with participation of representatives of local communities, municipalities, local
governments, NGOs. During the consultations safeguard issues, measures envisaged by
the EMP to mitigate potential impacts were discussed, and all issues raised by the
audience were addressed by ADY. The EMP has been placed at the Aarhus Convention
Centre of the Ministry of Ecology and in executive authorities' offices along the route of
the rail corridor. Public has been informed through the local newspapers on availability of
the EMP in English and Azeri for review. The specific EMP which is being prepared for
the replacement of the signaling system will also undergo a round of public consultation
to be duly recorded.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 01/08/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             04/04/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/30/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              N/A
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          N/A
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                   Name                              Date
Task Team Leader:                      Mr Jacques Bure                                    05/28/2013
Environmental Specialist:              Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva                            05/28/2013
Social Development Specialist          Mr Daniel P. Owen                                  05/28/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Mr Daniel P. Owen                                  05/29/2013
  Comments: AF is essentially covering a financing gap and is not proposing any extension or other
  change in the nature of activities to be financed, I can confirm the ISDS is cleared as acting RSC.
Sector Manager:                          Mr Juan Gaviria                                    05/29/2013
  Comments: Per acting Regional Safeguards Coordinator's concurrence, I confirm this ISDS is
  cleared.
