                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/27/2011                                   Report No.: AC6219
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Azerbaijan                          Project ID: P122943
Project Name: IDP Living Standards and Livelihoods Project
Task Team Leader: Joanna Peace De Berry
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 27, 2011      Estimated Board Date: October 18, 2011
Managing Unit: ECSSD                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Other social services (25%);Public administration- Other social services
(25%);General education sector (25%);General transportation sector (25%)
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (50%);Rural non-farm
income generation (20%);Access to urban services and housing (20%);Participation and
civic engagement (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            50.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                        0.00
         Financing Gap                                                   0.00
                                                                         0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]       No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve living conditions and increase
the economic self-reliance of targeted internally displaced persons. The PDO will be
achieved through: (i) investments in infrastructure and services micro-projects, which are
identified by IDP community members as their development priorities; (ii) rehabilitation
of collective housing stock; (iii) investing in skills development and creating
opportunities for micro-enterprise for individuals and community group through
community mobilization and the provision of credit or grant start-up financing that
enhance IDP abilities to gain employment and generate their own income; and (iv)
improving counterpart project management capacity to coordinate, plan, monitor,
program and supervise a wide range of community driven activities.

3. Project Description
The project is comprised of four components.
 22. Component A: Micro-projects. Estimated Cost: $15 million equivalent. This
component will continue activities conducted under the existing IDP EDS project, with
the objective of improving the living conditions of IDPs through funding demand-driven
small scale infrastructure and service projects. An estimated 200 additional micro-
projects will be funded. Micro-projects may include (a) repair or rehabilitation of basic
infrastructure (e.g. water supply, power supply, access roads, drainage systems); and (b)
repair or rehabilitation of social infrastructure such as schools and community centers.
The component will fund an additional 200 micro-projects of average cost $70,000 with a
maximum ceiling to be determined at project appraisal. Continued communication
campaigns will ensure that IDPs across Azerbaijan are aware of the opportunity to submit
micro-project proposals and the selection criteria. The component will include ongoing
support for the design, appraisal, and implementation of the micro-projects.

 23. The criteria used to screen and prioritize micro-project proposals for approval and
the scoring metrics have been updated to ensure targeting of communities of enhanced
vulnerability, which have received fewer donor/government benefits, and have sub-
standard housing and infrastructure relative to national and IDP standards. The criteria
also include provision for funding of micro-projects that will enhance social cohesion
between IDPs and non IDPs. The new criteria are included in Annex 2. This selection
tool will be first applied to the significant backlog of proposals already received (over
150) under IDP EDS before being applied to new applications, all being evaluated and
subsequently executed in the order of receipt. Enhanced procedures for community
mobilization will ensure greater participation and accountability of micro-projects. These
procedures are discussed in greater detail in the social section of the PAD and Annex 2.

  24. Component B: Housing Renovation. Estimated Cost: $22 million equivalent.
This component involves rehabilitation of IDP collective centers in a state of disrepair,
where IDPs continue to live in poor conditions. The total number of IDP collective
centers in urgent need of rehabilitation currently exceeds 190 facilities. It is proposed that
approximately 100 of such centers are selected for renovation under the proposed project.
The project prescribes a strategic approach to selection of collective centers for
rehabilitation, so that collective centers eligible for investment under the project are
technically and socially viable and allow good economic opportunities for resident IDPs.
The procedures and criteria by which collective centers will be selected are detailed in
Annex 2.

 25. The component is expected to support the full scale repair of collective
accommodations. In addition to improvement of common space areas (bathrooms,
corridors, kitchens, etc.), the proposed scope of works under the new project will also
include enhancement of structural features (such as sewerage, roofing and water systems)
as well as improvement of conditions in individual apartments (e.g. replacement of
windows, doors, and electricity lines) that will contribute more substantially to improved
overall living conditions including safety and efficiency. The average cost of
rehabilitation works for one collective center will be $220,000.
  26. Component C: Livelihood Support. Estimated Cost: $10 million equivalent.
Activities under this component will respond to the challenges of low levels of
employment and income among IDPs and their continued high levels of dependence on
state subsidies for household income. The component aims to increase economic
opportunities and assets among IDPs and to encourage their pursuit of self-reliant
livelihood approaches. The component will comprise three sub-components: (a) Youth
Training and Business Development, (b) Income Generating Activities, (c) Provision of
Micro-Credit for IDPs.

 27. Youth Training and Business Development. The first sub-component will scale-
up activities piloted under the current IDP Youth Support Project (IDP-YSP) funded by a
Grant from the Japanese Social Fund for Development, which have proven successful in
improving the professional skills and employment prospects of young IDP people.
Approximately 1,000 young people will be supported under the sub-component. They
will receive vocational training in a chosen profession and then financial and technical
support to start up a small business in that profession.

 28. Income Generating Activities. This sub-component represents a new undertaking
for SFDI. The sub component will entail the establishment of approximately 150 small
businesses and micro-enterprises to be collectively owned and managed by IDP groups.
Target communities will be those with a high incidence of poverty, low employment
rates, and high dependence on government subsidies as their main source of income.
Within communities there will be a special focus on IDP women. Target communities
will receive intensive community mobilization facilitation and be encouraged to form
small self-help groups (SHG) to identify possible income generating activities (IGA).
Selected SHGs with a viable business plan for an IGA will register as local organizations
and will open bank accounts, into which they will contribute savings worth 5% of the
overall grant size. SHGs who have reached a required savings threshold will be supported
with financial grants of not more than $12,000 to start a new micro-enterprise. SHGs
will continue to receive intensive technical support, particularly on the marketing of
products from the micro-enterprise.

 29. Micro-credits. This sub-component will build upon SFDI#s existing work in
provision of micro-finance to eligible individual IDPs who wish to start or scale-up a
business. It is proposed to extend a $3million line of credit to SFDI to be disbursed
through 8 Credit Unions (CU), resulting in approximately 1500 small scale loans of
average size $1900. The CU have been pre-selected based on a due diligence assessment
that they meet the eligibility criteria established in the World Bank#s Operational Policy
OP8.30 on Intermediary Financial Institutions, and based on creating good coverage
across the IDP population. In addition, there will be arrange of capacity building
activities for CU to ensure their institutional strength and ability to meet client demand.

 30. Where possible, links will be made across the project Components to ensure that
possible livelihood opportunities afforded by activities in Components A and B are made
available to beneficiaries of Component C. For example, young people who take up
apprenticeships in vocational areas related to construction can be offered placements with
contractors undertaking works in micro-projects and housing renovation.

 31. Component D: Project Management and Capacity Building. Estimated Cost: $3
million. This component will fund all items necessary to ensure SFDI#s proper
implementation, coordination, and supervision of the project including staff positions,
staff training, and capacity building and offices assets such as vehicles and supplies.

  32. To enhance the technical quality of implementation and effectively implement
new elements of the project, SFDI will introduce a number of new positions within the
PIU, including a Community Mobilization Manager; additional community mobilization
staff, managers and assistants for the new livelihoods component; an Environmental
Specialist; and Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist. Staff capacity will also be increased
through training and study tours particularly in the areas of community mobilization,
livelihoods support and the proper supervision of CU activities.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will operate in all regions of Azerbaijan where IDPs are located. IDPs live in
all 76 districts of Azerbaijan, with 40 percent of the IDP population settled in Baku and
Fuzuli regions. The majority (86 percent) of IDPs reside in urban settings particularly in
the major urban centers of Baku and Sumgayit. The project will particularly prioritize
IDP communities that are the most vulnerable and demonstrate the highest poverty levels,
for example those IDP living in the worse conditions in small towns and rural areas.
 The project will not target IDPs who have not been the subject of Government funded
relocation programs into new settlements.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSS3)
   Mr Aly Zulficar Rahim (YPP)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Assessment OP 4.01: Due to the scale and nature of the eligible
investments, the project is not expected to result in significant environmental impacts.
Instead, the experience with the activities under the original project indicates that many
of the micro-projects produced environmental benefits (improved water supply, improved
sewage collection system etc.) Because the investments for the second project are not
pre-identified, specific environmental impacts will only be identified in the course of
project implementation. Therefore, a framework mechanism for screening environmental
impacts, developing mitigation plans and monitoring environmental progress is required.
The Environmental Management Plan Framework used under the current project has
been revised by the Borrower for the purposes of the new project. Environmental
screening criteria are specified by the updated EMPF to determine micro-projects
eligibility for financing under the project so that activities which may potentially entail
significant environmental impacts are not allowed for financing under the project. These
criteria will be applied to micro-projects under Component A, the housing renovation
under Component B, and the activities funded by micro-credits and community income
generating small grants under Component C, which are not pre-determined and will be
identified during project implementation based on community priorities. Examples of
potential environmental impacts include excessive dust or noise during
construction/rehabilitation, waste disposal, and aesthetic degradation of a landscape. Such
impacts will be temporary, occuring during implementation of micro-projects, and
manageable.

 International Waterways OP7.50: The project will support implementation of micro-
projects on water supply and sanitation systems for proponent communities. However,
the scale of the investments will be rather small and will occur in a form of rehabilitation
and repair of the existing infrastructure (ongoing schemes), and will not support new
constructions. Thus, such interventations will not have adverse impacts on the quality and
quantity of water flows to the riparian states. Due to this, an exception from OP 7.50 has
been issued from the VP’s office for the new project, as was the case for the original
project.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
As the project interventations will be focused on improvement of social, economic and
sanitation infrastructure of IDP settlements, long-term impacts in the project area are
assessed to be generally positive. In the long-term perspective the participating
communities are expected to benefit from improved water supply and sanitation,
rehabilitated roads, improved medical services etc.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Over the last 12 years of implementing Bank funded projects, SFDI staff have
demonstrated satisfactory safeguard performance and developed strong capacity in Bank
safeguard policies and procedures. The Project will build upon this existing
implementation experience, and sufficient project resources will be allocated to SFDI
staff to maintain and enhance skills in safeguard actions. SFDI will continue to use the
existing safeguard guidelines and manuals including the Environmental Management
Plan Framework (EMPF) and relevant sections of the Operational Manual (OM), which
were developed under IDP-EDS. These are being updated as necessary to accommodate
extended scope of the new project compared to the original project. In order to enhance
in-house capacity to deal with more diverse micro-projects, SFDI will recruit a dedicated
environmental specialist to oversee EMPF compliance.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
IDP communities over the country, local governments, municipalities, NGOs, local
environmental authorities are considered the key stakeholders for the project. After the
EMPF was updated, SFDI facilitated public consultation meetings with stakeholders in
selected districts of the projects area to familiarize the stakeholders with the World Bank
safeguards policies, disclose the EMPF provisions and obtain public feedback and
comments. The records of these meetings have been enclosed to the EMPF and made
publicly available as part of the document.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 06/22/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/20/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/22/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         N/A
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           Yes
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        Yes
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Joanna Peace De Berry   06/23/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva    06/22/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Aly Zulficar Rahim      06/23/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                    Ms Carolyn Turk             06/27/2011
  Comments: Carolyn Turk is acting Sector Manager.
