                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/12/2013                                     Report No.: AC6878
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P110679                 Original Project Name: ARP/II-Integrated
                                             Solid Waste Management
Country: Azerbaijan                          Project ID: P144279
Project Name: AZ Integrated Solid Waste Management Project (AF)
Task Team Leader: Bjorn Philipp
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 14, 2013 Estimated Board Date: May 30, 2013
Managing Unit: ECSUW                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Solid waste management (100%)
Theme: City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (60%);Pollution management and
environmental health (40%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            40
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
A revision to the original PDO to support the reform of the Greater Baku solid waste
collection and disposal operations into an effective and sustainable system in the fields of
(i) improving environmental conditions at the existing waste disposal sites, (ii) building-
up operational, management and communication capabilities, (iii) rollout of collection
services, and (iv) data collection and planning' would be proposed to improve its clarity.

 The revised project objective would be to support (i) improving solid waste disposal
management; (ii) increasing waste collection coverage; and (iii) enhancing waste data
information and financial management capacity in the Greater Baku area.

3. Project Description
The overall original project design has proven to be adequate. No additional components
will be introduced and the scaling-up will not trigger new safeguard policies. The
Additional Financing (AF) will finance costs associated with additional activities under
Component B "Balakhani Landfill Rehabilitation and Management", Component E
"Technical Preparation of Future Investment", and Component A "Institutional Reform,
Capacity Building and Project Management", but would not require significant changes
to the project design. Additional activities under Component B include (i) the full
remediation and closure of the old waste disposal parts of the site; (ii) installation of
water and leachate controls; (iii) opening of new waste cells by an upward expansion of
waste disposal by increasing the "upper plateau" by an additional 50 meter; and (iv)
introduction of a methane gas capture system. In addition, Component E would be
revised to explicitly include activities for preparation of a national waste management
and implementation roll-out plan and other national-level technical assistance to support
improving SWM sector performance. Additional funds would also be allocated to
Component A to cover additional expenses for project management required by the
Project Management Team (PMT).

 The original project and additional financing would finance activities under the
following five components:

 a.     Component A: Institutional Reform, Capacity Building and Project Management
(USD9.5 million). The component supports completion of strategic planning and
establishment, operationalization and capacity building of the joint stock Solid Waste
Management Company 'Tamiz Shaher'(TS) expected to consolidate the fragmented waste
collection and disposal systems under one new entity.

  b.      Component B: Balakhani Landfill Rehabilitation and Management (USD53.4
million). The component finances rehabilitation of the Balakhani landfill site, including
(i) full remediation and closure of the old waste disposal parts of the site; (ii) installation
of water and leachate controls; (iii) opening of new waste cells at the existing site; and
(iv) introduction of a methane gas capture system.

 c.    Component C: Closure and Management of Informal Dumps (USD 7.6 million).
This component finances closure and cleanup of informal dumps and management
improvements at formal sites.

 d.     Component D: Urgent Collection Equipment (USD 5.9 million). This component
supports to increase service quality and availability throughout the region by financing
urgently needed equipment to improve solid waste collection coverage and service
efficiency in the most acutely underserved areas of Greater Baku.

 e.     Component E: Technical Preparation for Future Investment (USD 5.7 million).
The component finances feasibility studies and environmental impact assessments needed
to develop landfill capacity; introduce transfer stations to maintain an enhanced
collection system; preparation of a national waste management and implementation roll-
out plan; and other national-level technical assistance to support improving SWM sector
performance.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The proposed interventions under the Additional Financing will be implemented at the
Balakhani waste management site in the Baku area.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSEN)
   Ms Joanna Peace De Berry (ECSSO)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) Safeguard and Involuntary Resettlement
(OP/BP 4.12) Safeguard are triggered under the project.

 The environmental impacts of activities to be supported under the Additional Financing
will be temporary and likely to occur during the implementation of civil works, and are
mitigatable. The following impacts have been considered in the Environmental Impact
Assessment:

 •     Landscape degradation;
 •     Loss of habitat;
 •     Loss of topsoil;
 •     Erosion of slopes and sedimentation of water streams;
 •     Pollution of soil and water due to improper fuelling and maintenance operations;
 •     Vehicle emissions and dust;
 •     Noise associated with the construction operations;
 •     Damage of infrastructure;
 •     Impacts on quarries and borrow areas.

 In order to address the impacts above, an Environmental Management Plan has been
developed which identifies relevant mitigation measures which will be the responsibility
of the Project Management Unit (PMU)/ contractor. The proposed civil works will be
implemented within the existing footprint of the Balakhani waste management site which
is fenced and not used for any other purposes.

  The original project triggered OP/BP 4.12 in response to the presence of 'waste-pickers'
earning an income from waste collection at the Balakhani site. An RPF was prepared
under the original project. There was a need for relocation of 6 families (14 persons) of
waste pickers resident at the site, for which a RAP was prepared. To date, all resettlement
issues have been solved satisfactorily in line with the project's Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) and a Resettlement Action Plan. Monitoring shows that resettlement
actions have mitigated the effects of relocation on those affected. No detrimental impacts
have been identified for the approximately 144 non-resident waste pickers who continue
to access waste at the site and have benefitted from improved conditions and employment
opportunities at the site. No further resettlement and relocation issues are expected under
the Additional Financing. However, the RPF has been updated and disclosed in country
and through Infoshop prior to Appraisal to guide any further resettlement issues, which
may arise in the course of project implementation.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The long term environmental impact of the improved operation of the Balakhani waste
management site is expected to be highly positive. This will include: (i) improved water
and soil quality due to decrease in the quantity of leachate; (ii) improved air quality due
to reduction of dust, odor and gas emissions; (iii) reduced public health risks due to
elimination of inappropriately handled wastes in the project area; (iv) improved
landscape after remediation. The project will also contribute to the overall strengthening
of the solid waste management system of the Absheron Peninsula.

 The activities to be financed the Additional Financing are expected to have no negative
impacts on waste pickers at the Balakhani site. They will retain access to waste, from
which they earn a livelihood, and their conditions are expected to continue to improve
with increased work opportunities in recycling and waste management.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
For the rehabilitation of the Balakahni waste management site, two possible scenarios
were considered: (i) rehabilitation of the existing facility for limited disposal capacity (4-
5 years) and identification of new landfill site; or (ii) rehabilitation of the site for long-
term disposal capacity (up to 20 years). Due to the increased amount of wastes generated
in the Greater Baku area (rapid population growth, trend towards general urbanization
etc), and due to the lack of sufficient waste management facilities, it is decided to
rehabilitate the existing area for long-term disposal. Rehabilitation of the sanitary landfill
for long-term disposal together with the composting plant and the recently opened
Materials Recovery Facility (MRF) will also allow for reselling recyclable materials and
compost. Furthermore, establishing of a new landfill at green-field sites will be avoided.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The PMT established for the implementation of the original project and now operated
under the 'Temiz Shahar' JSC, the Ministry of Economic Development (MED), has an
Environmental Specialist and Social and Communications Specialist in the team. The
PMU's environmental and social performance was satisfactory under the original project.
In-house environmental expertise allowed for the timely development of good quality
EIAs for the rehabilitation of Balakahni as well as for the closure of several other dumps
in the Baku area. The PMU enlisted the services of a social consultancy firm to assist in
the preparation, implementation and monitoring of a Resettlement Action Plan and this
arrangement has been satisfactory.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The stakeholders include the Ministry of Economic Development, Ministry of Ecology
and Natural Resources, local executive authorities, local municipalities, local
communities. The EIA has been duly disclosed and discussed at a series of public
consultation meetings held in Balakhani and other neighboring settlements in the period
of February through April 2011, and in Baku in May 2012, with communal service
providers, local communities, representatives of relevant government agencies and other
stakeholders. The updated RPF was disclosed and discussed in country prior to Appraisal
with special attention given to sharing the document and requesting feedback from the
waste pickers at the Balakhai site.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    04/06/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                05/01/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 08/09/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    03/10/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                03/12/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 03/12/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Bjorn Philipp              03/12/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva       03/12/2013
Social Development Specialist       Ms Joanna Peace De Berry      03/10/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Agnes I. Kiss              03/12/2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Pier Francesco Mantovani   03/12/2013
  Comments:
