                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/06/2011                                      Report No.: AC6371
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Bangladesh                           Project ID: P123457
Project Name: Bangladesh Integrated Agricultural Productivity Project
Task Team Leader: Animesh Shrivastava
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 6, 2011        Estimated Board Date: October 26, 2010
Managing Unit: SASDA                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (30%);Irrigation and drainage (25%);Crops
(20%);Animal production (15%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%)
Theme: Other rural development (50%);Rural policies and institutions (15%);Rural
services and infrastructure (15%);Nutrition and food security (10%);Global food crisis
response (10%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                       17.50
         Global Agriculture and Food Security Program                   50.00
                                                                        67.50
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Integrated Agricultural
Development Project is to enhance the productivity of agriculture (crops, livestock and
fisheries) in pilot areas. These areas lie in Rangpur, Kurigram, Nilfamari and Lalmonirhat
districts in the North and Barisal, Patuakhali, Barguna and Jhalokathi districts in the
South.

3. Project Description
Project Beneficiaries: The primary beneficiaries will be farmers, predominantly small and
marginal, in the selected project districts (about 175,000 crop farmers, 60,000 livestock
farmers and 60,000 fish farmers; and about 20% of beneficiaries being women farmers).

 PDO Level Results Indicators: Key expected outcomes from the project are: (i)
productivity of rice (as representative of crops sub-sector); (ii) productivity of milk (as
representative of livestock sub-sector); (iii) productivity of fish; and (ii) number of
farmers whose productivity has increaed in crops and/or livestock and/or fisheries.
 Component 1: Technology Generation and Adaptation (US $8.03 million)

  This component will support the PDO by adapting and making available for project
farmers#, the technologies and management practices that will increase yields and
production intensities of crops and fish. It will address one of the major constraints to
agricultural growth in the project area which is insufficient #supply# of relevant
technologies and practices. There are three sub-components: (i) technology
generation/adaptation for rice; (ii) technology generation/adaptation for #other# crops
(viz,. wheat, maize, pulses and oilseeds); and (iii) technology generation/adaptation for
fish. Activities to be financed under this component include: evaluation and release of
new/improved crop varieties; brood stock improvement and development of pure breed
lines in fish; development/refinement of location-specific crop husbandry practices;
adaptive trials of aquaculture technologies; and training and capacity building.

 Component 2: Technology Adoption (US $ 37.34 million)

  This component will support the PDO by enabling farmers in the project area to
sustainably adopt improved agricultural (crops, livestock and fisheries) production
technologies and management practices. This will enable them to increase productivity as
well as intensify and diversify agricultural production. The component will do so by
enhancing farmers# knowledge and skills base, improving availability of quality
seed/breed at farmers# level, strengthening extension-farmer linkages and augmenting #
as appropriate - their productive assets and social capital base.

  The component has five sub-components: (i) crop production; (ii) fish production; (iii)
livestock production; (iv) enhancement of seed availability; and (v) community
mobilization and extension. Crop production sub-component will comprise support for
community seed production and for adoption of improved agronomic practices. Fish
production will comprise activities related to fish nursery, carp polyculture, fish
monoculture and cage culture. Livestock production will comprise activities related to
poultry, goat and dairy This component will support the PDO by enabling farmers in the
project area to sustainably adopt improved agricultural (crops, livestock and fisheries)
production technologies and management practices. This will enable them to increase
productivity as well as intensify and diversify agricultural production. The component
will do so by enhancing farmers# knowledge and skills base, improving availability of
quality seed/breed at farmers# level, strengthening extension-farmer linkages and
augmenting # as appropriate - their productive assets and social capital base.

  The component has five sub-components: (i) crop production; (ii) fish production; (iii)
livestock production; (iv) enhancement of seed availability; and (v) community
mobilization and extension. Crop production sub-component will comprise support for
community seed production and for adoption of improved agronomic practices. Fish
production will comprise activities related to fish nursery, carppoly culture, fish
monoculture and cage culture. Livestock production will comprise activities related to
poultry, goat and dairy production as well as animal health campaigns. Enhancement of
seed availability will comprise activities related to seed certification and enhancement of
seed distribution capacities. Community mobilization and extension will comprise
activities relating to supporting farmers# groups in adopting project disseminated
technologies and practices, and enabling them to further spread them through farmer-to-
farmer interactions. Therefore, activities to be financed under this component include
demonstrations, provision of seeds and inputs, community productive assets, mobilization
and back-stopping of farmers# groups, trainings and exposure visits, and facilities for
seed testing, processing and storage.

 The expected outputs from this component are: adoption of improved varieties and
production practices for rice and other main crops; greater availability of quality seed at
farmers# level through community seed production; adoption of improved fish culture
practices; adoption of improved livestock husbandry practices along with improved breed
where feasible; and expansion of availability of certified seeds through formal channels
in the project area and beyond.


 Component 3: Water Management (US $12.89 million)

  This component will support the PDO by improving availability of irrigation water and
efficiency of its use. It will thus enable farmers to increase cropping intensity, improve
cropping patterns and reduce irrigation related risk/variability in crop production that can
inhibit investments in other modern technologies/inputs. There are two sub-components:
(i) conservation and utilization of surface water (including rain-water harvesting); and (ii)
enhancement of irrigation efficiency. Conservation and utilization of surface water will
comprise the following activities: (i) rehabilitation of (existing) natural water bodies,
canals and ponds for better conservation of surface water; (ii) (in the south) rehabilitation
of existing natural channels to facilitate water conservation by entry of tidal sweet water;
(iii) harvesting rain-water in rehabilitated natural water bodies and creeks with clay cover
to prevent loss; and (iv) harvesting rain-water at homestead level for household
consumption, livestock and kitchen garden use. Enhancement of irrigation efficiency will
comprise (i) installation of buried pipe network connections to deep tube wells (DTWs)
or Low-Lift Pumps (LLPs) on canals in appropriate locations to enhance field irrigation
efficiency; (ii) enhancing pump efficiency (of LLPs and shallow tube wells or STWs);
and (ii) repair of selected existing (non-functional) DTWs in the project area. In the
context of these two sub-components, a variety of training activities will also be
supported. The outputs of this component will be expansion in irrigated area and increase
in irrigation efficiency.

 Component 4: Project Management (US $5.11 million)

 This component will support the realization of the PDO by ensuring that (i)
interventions undertaken under the project are appropriately planned, coordinated and
aligned with project design and development objectives; (ii) implementation
arrangements and activities are in line with relevant fiduciary and safeguards policies,
procedures and standards; and (iii) there is due monitoring, oversight and reporting of
project implementation and the resulting outputs and outcomes. This component will
finance the establishment and operation of (i) a Project Management Unit (PMU) in
Dhaka and (ii) two Regional Project Implementation Units (RPIUs) - in Rangpur (North)
and Barisal (South). The PMU and RPMUs will coordinate, at their respective levels, the
activities of various implementing agencies, including the research institutions, the line
departments for extension, BADC (seeds and inputs supply), community level service
providers and any CSO/NGO. Activities to be financed under this component include: (i)
establishing and supporting project units at the overall and regional levels; (ii) specialized
support services relating to key activities such as independent external M&E, external
audit, financial accounting and procurement; and (iii) training of staff involved in project
implementation.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will specifically cover four districts in the North (Rangpur, Nilphamari,
Kurigram and Lalmonirhat) and four in the South (Barisal, Barguna, Jhalokhati and
Patuakhali). These include the salt-affected tidal surge areas in the south (near the Bay of
Bengal) and flash-flood prone and drought-prone areas in the North.

 The main thrust of the project will be on the (i) the southern tidal salt affected areas, (ii)
drought prone areas and the flash flood prone areas in the northern region of the country.
The second component will be aligned to focus on these areas and to cover some other
districts in medium flat plain lands. The third component, by nature of the interventions
involved, will focus on the south and north part of the country and the Greater Sylhet
region. The fourth component on Project Management, which includes capacity and
institutional development, will focus on supporting project interventions in the particular
agro-ecological zones being targeted under the project.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Nicole Andrea Maywah (SASDI)
   Mr Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                 Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                            X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                    X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                        X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                  X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                            X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                 X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                      X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
IADP project activities with environmental implications include: promotion of increased
production of select annual crops and livestock with associated pesticide use and waste
management issues, water management activities and minor construction/refurbishing.
Project environmental impacts may include soil and water quality changes from use of
agrochemicals and production (i.e. fertilizer and pesticides leading to eutrophication);
changes to aquatic ecosystems from excavation/desiltation activities, increased usage of
surface water; and minor construction impacts, among others. The project is classified as
Category B because although it may have some impacts, its activities are not expected to
cause any significant negative or irreversible changes in the environment. While the
Project is expected to benefit the communities, the inadequate or inappropriate
implementation might lead to adverse impacts on people and local land resources. Such
potential social impacts during the implementation phase include loss of land or
structures, loss of access to areas for livelihood support, and exclusion of vulnerable from
the beneficiary list. Selection for pilot plots needs to be managed to ensure the selection
process is locally acceptable and that rehabilitation of any existing canal or any other
water body does not result in any loss of livelihood or source of livelihood. These
potential social impacts can be grouped into three categories: (i) direct loss of properties,
income or livelihood; (ii) indirect loss of access and disruption to life during
implementation; and (iii) elite capture of beneficiary selection process. Avoidance and
minimization of each of these potential direct and indirect impacts is the basis on which
the SMF had been prepared.

 The Project triggers Environmental Assessment 4.01, Natural Habitats 4.04 and Pest
Management 4.09, International Waterways 7.50, Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12 and
Indigenous Peoples OP 4.10 Safeguard Policies. Since by design, exact project sites
have not yet been identified, an environmental assessment study has been undertaken and
an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been drafted in order to manage
impacts. The EMF will contain measures to manage impacts from the use of pesticides in
the Project. Finally, appropriate arrangements will be established for monitoring EMP
implementation.

 Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10): Three out of six IADP districts (Patuakhali, Barguna
and Rangpur) have just one percent tribal population. Other three districts have little or
no tribal settlement. In Patuakhali and Barguna districts, tribal presence is in the southern
Upazila viz., Kalapara and Amtoli. Tribal population of Patuakhali and Barguna, belongs
to Rakhain group those who came from Myanmar (Burma) about 150 to 200 years ago
and settled in the forested area. The Rakhains have maintained a distinct cultural
heritage, still weave handloom fabric and celebrate their religious festivals while
maintaining their religious education and community temples. According to the 2001
Census, tribal population in Patuakhali district is 526 (117 households) of which 474 are
in Kalapara Upazila. In Barguna district, the tribal population in Barguna district is about
667 (156 households) of which 460 are in Amtali Upazila. Highest concentration is found
in Boro Bogi Union of Amtali Upazila with a tribal population is 450. Another area of
concentration is Dautola Union of Bamna Upazila with 183 tribal population. In Rangpur
district, the total population is 1290 of which 990 are in Mithapukur Upazila. As part of
the ESMF a Tribal Management Framework (TMF) has been prepared by the Project.
Implementation of the TMF will ensure that (a) participation of the scheduled tribes will
be effectively promoted in preparation and implementation; (b) inclusion of the
neighboring scheduled tribe communities in the process to achieve the maximum possible
positive impact of such communities; (c) that all executing agencies engage with
communities through a consultation process appropriate to the local cultural context and
local decision-making processes; and (d) the activities requiring resettlement action
plans, wherever relevant, establish appropriate information, communication, and
inclusion measures targeted at the tribes and other vulnerable sections of the
communities.

 Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): According to an examination of the proposed
subprojects, there may not be a need for private land acquisition. Nonetheless, there could
be removal of squatters and encroachers on canal alignments or public water bodies that
will be considered for rehabilitation under water management component. To cope with
such possibilities, the Project has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF),
included in the SMF.

 The screening of the social issues described in the SMF will identify the nature of
analyses to be included during the implementation of the interventions. Wherever
possibilities of land taking and any chances of displacement of an individual and / or
group are found, the RPF will be fully applied. The RPF specifies procedures to be
followed in the event that resettlement or land taking is required for any subproject,
including procedures for identification of persons entitled, their entitlement for
compensation and/or resettlement assistance, and the consultation and grievance redress
mechanisms. All resettlement action plans will be reviewed by the executing agencies
before it is forwarded to Bank for its clearance.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Potential long-term impacts may include more surface water (from rainwater harvesting)
made available for irrigation for longer periods of time. Potential long-term indirect
impacts may include conversion of non-farm land to agricultural use, loss of native
biodiversity and increased or diminished use of pesticides. By virtue of this very
objective, the social impacts of the project are expected to be positive, beneficial, and
aimed towards long term sustainability. The project is also expected to improve, the
overall economic profile of the community.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
None, not applicable for this Category B project.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower has prepared an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) to manage
safeguard policy issues. It contains screening mechanisms and checklists to identify and
manage site-specific safeguard concerns once sub-projects are identified and selected.
The project will have sufficient capacity to plan and implement the EMF. Environmental
staff in the project management unit (PMU) and in the regional project implementation
units will oversee and implement the EMF. Additionally, extension teams from the
implementing agencies (such as Department of Fisheries, Bangladesh Agricultural
Development Corporation, etc.) will be trained and supplied with environmental good
practices (in, for example, safe pesticide storage and handling) to assist farmers on-the-
ground at the Upazilla (similar to a county in Western countries) level. Farmers and other
project implementing entities will be trained or informed as necessary on environmental
safeguards related aspects of the project. Annual reviews of safeguard performance will
be conducted and changes instituted as necessary. The overall project monitoring
information system (MIS) will also capture information on safeguards implementation.

 The project objective is to achieve greater agricultural productivity through improved
agriculture support services. Expected social outcomes include empowering and
strengthening vulnerable sections (landless, marginal and small farmers, women, tribes),
who constitute an overwhelming proportion of the project communities, will have easy
access to the opportunities under the project and benefit the most from the project. The
core principles in the implementation of the project are that (i) project communities play
an active role in planning and implementing project interventions; (ii) vulnerable sections
among project communities have equal opportunities to participate in the process of
planning and implementing project activities; and (iii) individuals, if adversely affected
by the project interventions will be supported under the project. Given the distributed
nature of the proposed interventions Social Management Framework (SMF), has been
developed to ensure management of social issues in the project.

 The SMF supports the three important goals of the project: (a) to ensure the social
sustainability of the subprojects, (b) to comply with the national social legislation, and (c)
to comply with the World Bank Social Safeguards Policies. The SMF details out the
policies, procedures and institutional responsibilities for assessing and managing the
potential social risks and impacts that may come up throughout the project cycle, and is
intended for use and application by the agencies responsible for the execution of the
interventions under each component. The SMF includes (i) Screening criteria for adverse
social issues; (ii) Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF); (iii) Tribal Management
Framework (TMF); (iv) Grievance Redress through the projects monitoring mechanism;
and (v) Specific procedures on public consultation and disclosure.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public consultations on the project (including environmental impacts) were held with
affected stakeholders at local, regional and national levels in April 2011. A draft EMF
and SMF were developed and disclosed on May 27 in-country in Bangla on the Ministry
of Agriculture website. These have also been submitted to World Bank#s InfoShop for
disclosure. The client will publish a newspaper advertisement requesting public
comments on both the environment and social management frameworks and provide the
website address in two newspapers (one in Bangla and another in English).



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/30/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/27/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/01/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/31/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/27/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/01/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/31/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/27/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/01/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/30/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/30/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/01/2011
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?           Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)       Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the       Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                      Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                     No
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or    N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                   Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed    Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                          No
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification            Yes
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                         No
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                             Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Animesh Shrivastava                          06/05/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Nicole Andrea Maywah                         06/03/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Parthapriya Ghosh                            06/03/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Sanjay Srivastava                              06/06/2011
  Comments: cleared on understanding that comments to improve presentation and clarity will be
  considered during appraisal.
Sector Manager:                    Mr Simeon Kacou Ehui                              06/06/2011
  Comments:
