                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/24/2013                                   Report No.: AC6972
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P106161                 Original Project Name: Bangladesh -
                                             Secondary Education Quality and Access
                                             Improvement
Country: Bangladesh                          Project ID: P146255
Project Name: Secondary Education Quality and Access Enhancement Project - AF
Task Team Leader: Dilip Parajuli
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 12,      Estimated Board Date: December 3, 2013
2013
Managing Unit: SASED                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Secondary education (92%);Public administration- Education (8%)
Theme: Education for all (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            250
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                           15.00
                                                                      15.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective of the proposed Additional Financing (AF) project
will remain unchanged from the original project and will continue to be "to improve the
quality of secondary education, systematically monitor learning outcomes, and to
increase access and equity in project upazilas".

3. Project Description
SEQAEP AF will finance activities to: (i) continue and enhance coverage to support
students and institutions in 125 project upazilas; and (ii) scale up SEQAEP interventions
in 90 new upazilas. The four components of the original project will remain the same: (i)
improving quality, (ii) improving equitable access, (iii) strengthening institutional
capacity, and (iv) establishing an effective monitoring and evaluation system. The first
three components will be transaction-based and the component 4 (M&E) will be results-
based. The total project cost for SEQAEP AF is estimated to be US$265 million. The
total IDA credit would be US$250 million, of which US$200 million would be
transaction-based and US$50 million would be reimbursed on the basis of achievement of
the agreed performance targets (DLIs).

 Component 1 – Improving Education Quality and Monitoring Learning Levels
(Original: US$ 37.4 million, AF: US$ 70.1 million)

 Sub-Component 1.1: Incentive Awards to Students, Teachers and Institutions
 This sub-component focuses on providing monetary incentives to encourage rural
students, teachers and institutions to reach and maintain higher levels of achievement.
Incentives to be provided include Best Student Achievement Award to the best
performing girl and boy student in the final examination in Grades 6, 7, 8 and 9; PMT
SSC Pass Award to All Proxy Means Test (PMT) stipend recipient students who have
passed the SSC or equivalent examination and Institution Achievement Award to two
best performing schools and one best Madrasa in each Upazila of the country every year.

 Sub-component 1.2: Support for English Language and Mathematics and Science
 This sub-component aims to: (a) improve classroom teaching-learning process in
English Language (EL), Mathematics (Math) and Science in targeted project institutions;
and (b) assist targeted students in improving their performance in EL, Math and Science.
This sub-component will finance provision EL, Math and Science AC teachers to
beneficiary institutions selected on the basis of poverty and low-performance criteria.

  Sub-Component 1.3: Developing the Reading Habit
  The objective of the sub-component is to help students develop the reading habit, with
focus on Bangla and English, using a participatory approach through establishment of
library systems and comprehensive reading programs. The project will provide: (i)
beneficiary institutions with age-and-ability appropriate program books (85 titles) in
Bangla and English to readers in classes 6-10; (ii) high performing student readers with
award books; (iii) grants to institutions to finance incentive for librarian/teacher-
coordinators to maintain the institution's library and reading program as a whole; and (b)
management, technical and supervisory services associated with the DRH schemes
including annual students reading tests. BSK will continue as service agency.

 Sub-component 1.4: Assessment of Education Quality
 This sub-component aims to systematically measure the quality of learning in Bangla,
English and Mathematics by administering competency-based learning assessment on a
sample basis. The results of these independent assessments will be fed back to
policymakers and stakeholders to raise their awareness about the quality of education,
and adjust quality-related policies and interventions accordingly. MEW will be the focal
agency to carry out this activity with technical assistance from international and national
specialized agencies. AF will finance at least two additional round of assessment, with
nationally representative samples.

 Component 2 – Improving Equity and Access (Original: US$ 106.7 million, AF: US$
168.3 million)
  Sub-component 2.1: PMT-based Stipends and Tuition to the Poor
  This sub-component aims to increase access and retention of poor girls and boys, based
on pro-poor targeting and educational criteria. This sub-component finances stipends and
tuition to girls and boys from poor households in project Upazilas, identified using
Proxy-Means Testing (PMT). The AF project will support the PMT stipends and tuition
program in current 125 project upazilas from second semester of AY2013 and in 90 new
upazilas from AY2015. All students from households in the bottom 4 deciles of welfare
distribution (as bottom 40 percent in per capita household's consumption) would receive
the stipend benefit. Current PMT beneficiaries in 125 upazilas will continue to receive
stipends upon a full and independent validation of the fulfillment of education
compliance criteria: (a) maintaining 75 percent average attendance; (b) successful
promotion to next grade; and (c) remaining unmarried till completion of secondary school
(grade 10). New PMT beneficiary students will be selected following criteria
(identification of poor boys and girls using updated PMT formula) and procedures
(invitation of PMT applications, PMT booth operations to collect filled applications,
sample validation through household visit surveys, processing of application data,
publication of draft beneficiary list, enrolment confirmation, processing of appeals, and
Award Confirmation Form (ACF) preparation). Tuition support will be provided directly
to eligible educational institutions on behalf of all PMT stipend students. The services of
LGED as PMT Administrator will continue until project ends.

  Sub-component 2.2: General Stipends and Tuition Program
  This program was phased out in 2010 academic year, after the PMT based stipend and
tuition program was introduced in 125 project Upazilas. In new 90 upazilas, the cost of
government implementing general stipends (non-PMT stipends and tuition) for AY2014
is included in the SEQAEP AF project cost.

 Sub-component 2.3: Improving School Facilities
 This sub-component is intended to attract and retain girls and boys in schools, through
the provision (using community participation) of safe drinking water and sanitation
facilities to selective schools based on needs assessment. This component will finance the
provision of safe drinking water and twin latrine facilities, based on agreed guidelines.

 Component 3 – Institutional Capacity Strengthening (Original: US$ 9.9 million, AF:
US$ 19.9 million)

 Sub-component 3.1: Project Management
 In order to ensure smooth project implementation, the project management structure will
be strengthened. The overall responsibility for the project lies with the Directorate of
Secondary and Higher Education (DSHE), as the implementing agency. It will be assisted
by two units: DSHE/SEQAEP Unit, led by a Project Director and DSHE/Monitoring and
Evaluation Wing (MEW), led by a Director. SEQAEP Unit's main functions will be to
plan, manage, implement and coordinate project activities. In addition, project
management and implementation capacity will be augmented through the use of several
government and private specialized partner agencies.
 Sub-Component 3.2: Institutional Capacity Building
 The objective is to strengthen the capacity of MoE to provide services at central,
upazila, and community levels through focused training. This sub-component will finance
orientation/workshops, and in-country and international training. In-country training will
be implemented based on agreed plan and international training will be carried out on
selective basis (with prior concurrence from IDA).

 Sub-Component 3.3: School Management Accountability
 The objective is to support MoE's efforts to increase accountability and transparency at
the school level through the strengthening of School Management Committees (SMCs)
and Madrasah Management Committee (MMCs) and Parent Teacher Associations
(PTAs). Under this sub-component, AF project will provide the following school grants:
(a) ICT support grant to all SMC/MMCs for use of internet in monitoring and
communication; (b) EACM grant to all PTAs to carry out community/school
mobilization activities including campaign against girls eve teasing and for bringing
dropouts back to school; and (c) Social Audit grant to all PTAs to organize parent
assembly and disseminate school performance information through school report card.

 Sub-Component 3.4: Education Awareness and Community Mobilization
 The objective is to build and increase awareness among all key stakeholders, with
emphasis on the community and beneficiaries. Since the project places greater focus on
quality, due diligence in management and administration of incentives and grants and
pro-poor targeting based on proxy means testing, it is important that these messages are
effectively communicated to all stakeholders.

 Component 4 - Monitoring and Evaluation (Original: US$ 1.7 million, AF: US$ 7.0
million)

  The objective of this component is to: (a) systematically document all project input,
process, output, and outcomes; and (b) link project interventions with outcomes. This
component is the DLI-based. Monitoring (4.1) and Evaluation (4.2): The objective of
sub-component 4.1 is to strengthen capacity to monitor inputs, processes, outputs, and
outcomes. This sub-component will finance: (a) Results monitoring (KPIs and
intermediate indicators); (b) System monitoring (EMIS) through annual census of all
project institutions; (c) PMT sample validation survey (to check accuracy of PMT
application information); and (d) Compliance sample monitoring survey (compliance of
criteria and procedures of all activities). The sub-component 4.2 aims at carrying out
rigorous impact evaluation of key project interventions.

 All activities under this component will be part of the results-based disbursement
modality and managed by DSHE. Monitoring and Evaluation Wing (MEW) will serve as
the focal agency for overall supervision of M&E activities so as to strengthen the
capacity of DSHE to monitor, review and evaluate the project regularly; and coordinate
the dissemination of national assessment of learning achievement, and maintain a
repository of integrated databases, relevant reports and studies. MEW will be brought
under the revenue budget by 2018 and AF will provide incentive in the form of results-
based disbursement linked to achievement of MEW transfer to revenue budget. This
component will be implemented by MEW with support from project MIS cell at
BANBEIS and other specialized agencies.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
In terms of coverage, SEQAEP AF will finance activities in the current 125 project
upazilas, and scale up SEQAEP interventions in 90 new upazilas. The selection of 90
additional most deprived upazilas (not supported by other development partners) is based
on their ranking on the human opportunity index (HOI) which combines the school
participation rate and completion rate in the respective age-group and the factors
associated with schooling opportunity in each upazilas.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Sabah Moyeen (SASDS)
   Ms Nadia Sharmin (SASDC)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                  X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                             X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                      X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Since there will be no new safeguards triggers raised, existing legal covenants will
continue to apply. The Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and the Social
Inclusion and Management Framework (SIMF) will be updated to reflect expansion into
new upazilas and disclosed through appropriate channels. The updated EMF will address
the lessons learned and recommendation for ensuring environmental safeguards.

 Environment issues: As in the original project, operational policy OP/BP 4.01 will
continue to be triggered and the current Environmental category B will remain the same
under the AF. The main activity in the AF project that triggers environmental issue is
"improving school facilities" sub-component that finances provisions of safe drinking
water (tube-wells, shallow tube-wells and other alternative sources) and sanitation
facilities (twin latrines for boys and girls with running water facilities) to targeted schools
based on agreed guidelines and provisions in the EMF. Beneficiary institutions for
tubewells and toilets will be selected on need-basis. On a pilot basis, the activities will
include WASH block with modern amenities to the best performing schools of the
targeted upazila. Arsenic content is also challenge in the project areas and so is the
potential issue with adjacent location of toilets to tube-wells leading to groundwater
contamination, and lack of proper design, construction and maintenance of tube well and
toilet. Considering the nature and magnitude of potential environmental impacts from
installation of sanitation facilities and safe drinking water and scope for successful
implementation of mitigation measure, the proposed operation would be classified as
category 'B' for AF.Status of the current project: In accordance to the participation
agreement signed between DSHE and DPHE is responsible for conducting arsenic testing
during operation of wells. According to the MoU, DPHE is responsible for endorsing the
tubewell operation by endorsing physical need and chemical testing. DSHE informed that
DPHE conducted Arsenic tests in 6035, 6178, 6252 and 5094 respectively in the year of
2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012. The testing was performed by Arsenic Field test kit by
DPHE Upazlilla level offices. Laboratory testing was conducted for 5% of the sample.
The arsenic testing only once was shared with World Bank for the first round. It was
found that the arrangement proposed in the EMF was not observed with due diligence
due to lack of monitoring capacity on the environmental safeguard at the PMU level.
Recently PMU hired an Environmental Specialist who is currently dedicated for ensuring
environmental safeguard. The PMU is currently demonstrating due diligence in
environmental monitoring The environmental specialist of the PMU will continue to
ensure that
  •      Environmental Management Framework are applied in due diligence and regular
monitoring should be carried out
  •      DPHE is conducting arsenic testing before and during operation of tubewells
  •      PMU should ensure regular reporting is performed and the annual arsenic testing
report and environmental monitoring report shoul be shared with World Bank

 Social issues: The main activity that triggers OP 4.10 Indigenous People (IP) is the
provision of stipends to beneficiary students including those from tribal population. The
project will be operational in areas where concentrations of Indigenous People may live.
The project ensures inclusion of all tribal students, regardless of poverty status, who
apply under the targeted PMT stipend scheme. The PMT MIS would continue to maintain
database on tribal students' enrolment, retention and education achievement and
periodically provide summary analysis. The process of collecting and maintaining data by
the PMT has been assessed during the previous mission and found to be satisfactory.
Similarly, the project extends stipend support to all disabled students.
 During the last mission the team raised the issue of eve-teasing of young girls as a
potential factor hindering girls from attending schools. The AF project would introduce
grants to schools to incentivize Parent Teacher Associations (PTAs) to carry out
community campaigns against girls eve teasing and encourage safe movement of girls
between homes and schools. Since the AF project extends to new upazilas, the education
awareness and community mobilization sub-component will also focus on the social
safeguards aspects. The SIMF will be updated accordingly to include gender and
inclusion aspects The social mobilization and awareness raising campaign will also be
strengthened in this regard.

 Assessment of social safeguards implementation of the current project
 Out of the 121 upazilas in the project area, only 19 upazilas have significant indigenous
households: 7.6% of children in those 19 upazilas come from indigenous households.
The overall indigenous population in the 121 project upazilas is less than 2%.

  Inclusion: A detailed Social Assessment was carried out for the project in 2008 by the
General Secretary of the Indigenous Peoples Forum for the project. Based on its findings
the project decided to make the stipend program to all IP students who apply without
considering any other criteria for eligibility. The Local Government Engineering
Department is responsible for the Proxy Means Testing Administration (PMTA) of the
poverty targeted stipend program under the project. While mainstream students are
considered against merit and other objective criteria, all IP students who apply are
automatically considered eligible for enrollment by the project regardless of other
criteria. The same applies to all disabled students as well. The LGED has been
maintaining a rigorously updated MIS especially for the PMTA, with a gender
disaggregated database for IP and disabled students. The database has been frequently
checked by the Bank team. LGED has also regularly submitted reports on IP and disabled
students on a yearly basis based on updated data and analysis. There is adequate
demonstration in the reports that the project is inclusive towards and beneficial for IP
students and disabled applicants. There is also satisfactory demonstration that LGED has
rigorously and seriously followed up on reporting and documenting requirements of the
Bank. The database in fact provides a rich avenue for other studies and research on IP
youth beyond the project.
  Awareness Raising and Consultation: From the time of project effectiveness the
implementing agency hired an NGO to carry out a General Awareness Raising Campaign
to include a) specific messages about the inclusion of indigenous children addressed to
the indigenous community, b) sensitizing campaign aimed at the general local population
to exercise acceptance and reduce discriminatory activities. In addition a Targeted
Consultation/Awareness raising campaign was also designed for holding information
dissemination and discussions with elders, and parents of prospective indigenous students
to inform them of project benefits and allay fears of discrimination, discuss how this
would lead to higher education opportunities, as well as assess their needs. Women and
mothers of prospective students, were targeted to demonstrate successful case studies as
testament to the empowering elements of secondary education. Female indigenous
teachers were included in the campaign. Social and religious leaders of the IP
communities were also addressed to build consensus. The campaign has used various
consultative methods – workshops, focus groups, townhalls, etc and used tools such as
posters, banners, leaflets, etc. These have been shared with the Bank regularly.
  The project does not trigger OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement since there is no
requirement for private land acquisition, displacement of people from public or private
lands or adverse impact on livelihoods. Construction activities, installation of tube-wells
and latrines are carried out strictly within school premises.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The activities that trigger both IP and environment are not expected to create any adverse
in the long-term. If anything, project activities (both school facilities and stipends) are
expected to provide positive impacts to student beneficiaries while in school.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environment: To address potential environmental safeguard issues, the AF will
strengthen monitoring aspects of the ISF sub-component that finances construction work
of water supply and sanitation facilities. It will also include regular reporting on arsenic
test and efficient database management. A part time Environmental Specialist is deployed
in the project and the performance of environmental management is expected to continue
improving under the AF.
  Activities would include testing of existing and new project schools tube-wells for
arsenic, and manganese contamination, bacteriological tests for alternative sources of
water and distribution of awareness and communication materials. Given the scope of the
additional financing II, the Environmental Management Framework (EMF) adopted for
the original SEQAEP project adopted by the implementing agency will also be applicable
to the Additional Financing. The EMF outlines the environmental management
procedures that already practiced in original project during the construction period and
also in the operation & maintenance period to minimize the negative impacts and
implementation of enhancement measures. An Additional Director will be responsible for
the overall ISF sub-component. SEQEP will continue the MoU signed with DPHE to
obtain technical services for safe water testing of tube-wells and other activities. Besides
the routine monitoring by field test kits, SEQAEP will hire the services of quality lab to
collect and test 5% of total sample by laboratory analysis method. The annual Arsenic
test report and monitoring report should be shared with World Bank with due diligence.
To record and the water quality testing, project will take the support of DPHE and
BANBEIS. DPHE Upazilla level Sub-Assistant Engineer will also support the School
Management Committee in supervision of construction work of water supply and
sanitation facilities.
  Social Inclusion: The existing legal covenants on the social safeguards would continue
to apply. The updated Social Inclusion and Management Framework (SIMF) reflects
lessons learned from the ongoing project. Like the original project, the AF will deem all
indigenous children in the project area eligible for the stipend program, regardless of their
individual poverty status. The project adopts a similar policy towards disabled children as
well. The Local Government Engineering Department (LGED) has maintained and would
continue to maintain a database on the enrollment of tribal children, their retention rates
and academic progression.
  In terms of gender, the AF would enhance the safety of adolescent girls traveling
between schools and homes given the propensity for eave-teasing. At the community
level, AF project will provide the Parent Teacher Associations of each school with PTA
grants towards education awareness and community mobilization to address and alleviate
the issue. Besides, PTA grants can support school level community outreach on general
issues affecting the student populations.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The updated SIMF and EMF for the AF will be publicly disclosed as was the case with
the ongoing project. These will be closely monitored by the implementing agency as well
the Bank task team on a regular basis.

 As for consultations, pre-appraisal mission carried out consulations with stakeholders at
all levels including those at the beneficiary level (schools, parents and children) to
educate and receive feedback on the AF project that includes activities that positively
affect on environmental aspects (provisions of drinking water and sanitation facilities)
and on social aspects (provision of stipends to IP children irrespective of poverty status,
focus on education campaigns against girls eve-teasing, and on community participation
for social accountability.)



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     09/08/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 09/15/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  09/24/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     09/08/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 09/15/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  09/24/2013
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name     Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Dilip Parajuli          09/09/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Nadia Sharmin           09/09/2013
Social Development Specialist       Ms Sabah Moyeen            09/09/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Francis V. Fragano      09/09/2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Yoko Nagashima          09/09/2013
  Comments:
