                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/17/2013                                   Report No.: AC6883
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P098146                 Original Project Name: Public Procurement
                                             Reform Project II
Country: Bangladesh                          Project ID: P132743
Project Name: Additional Finaning of Public Procurement Reform Project II
Task Team Leader: Zafrul Islam
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 4, 2013      Estimated Board Date: May 9, 2013
Managing Unit: SARPS                         Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance
                                             Loan
Sector: Central government administration (80%);Sub-national government
administration (10%);Other social services (5%);General information and
communications sector (5%)
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (55%);Other public
sector governance (15%);Other accountability/anti-corruption (15%);Participation and
civic engagement (10%);Administrative and civil service reform (5%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             38
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             2.00
                                                                        2.00
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to improve performance of the public procurement
system progressively in Bangladesh, focusing largely on the four target agencies

3. Project Description
a.       Component 1: Furthering Policy Reform and Institutionalizing Capacity
Development: The component will now expand the scope of the capacity development
program to about 20 additional agencies, beyond the four target agencies, with greater
institutionalization. The key activities include: procurement compliance training,
procurement core competence course along with Masters in procurement, and further
institutionalization of capacity in Bangladesh. Twinning arrangement between the
Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply/UK and Engineering Staff College
Bangladesh will continue.
 b.     Component 2: Strengthening Procurement Management at Sector Level &
CPTU/IMED: This component will further strengthen the organizational capacity for
procurement performance management. Key activities will include: full implementation
of on-line procurement performance monitoring (PROMIS) using a set of indicators,
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework, and strengthening capacity of CPTU, and
four target agencies.

 c.       Component 3: Introducing e-Government Procurement- e-GP: This component is
to make the e-GP system self-sustainable by substantially increasing transaction level of
the four target agencies and initiating the e-GP network to about 20 additional agencies.
The four target agencies will have 100% e-GP within the next three years up to the
district level.

 d.     Component 4: Behavioral Change Communication and Social Accountability-
BCC & SAc: This component will further strengthen efforts in behavioral change and
communicating the reform and e-GP message across public sector organizations, the
bidding community, and other stakeholders. It will include awareness about e-GP at the
local level in reference to the reform agenda, and possible third party monitoring.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The technical assistance of the project will help the overall capacity enhancement of the
targeted agencies in all over the country. However, the additional financing has provision
to support the vertical extension of the CPTU building (one floor), which is located at the
planning commission office complex in Dhaka.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                    X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
No significant and irreversible environmental impacts are expected to arise as a result of
project implementation, subject to proper adoption of environmental code of practice
(ECoP) including occupational health and safety.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Not Applicable

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not Applicable

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
For the proposed vertical extension of the CPTU building (one floor), proper
environmental code of practice (ECoP) including occupational health and safety issues
will be adopted. The bidding document will include the environmental clauses and keep
provision of better occupational health and safety for the workers. The Public Works
Department (PWD) will supervise the construction activities and has long experience for
similar kind of works. They are familiar with the occupational health and safety issues
and other environmental aspects of the construction related works. It may be noted that
the bidding document of the construction of the CPTU building in earlier phase included
the environmental and occupational health and safety guidelines.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Not Applicable


 B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: Not Applicable
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
 Date of submission to InfoShop
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the
Executive Directors
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: Not Applicable
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
 Date of submission to InfoShop
 Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: Not Applicable
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
 Date of submission to InfoShop
 Pest Management Plan: Not Applicable
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
 Date of submission to InfoShop
 * If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain
why: Since the project has been categorized as 'C', no framework document has been
prepared at preparation stage.



 C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?
       No
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local
NGOs?No



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                 Name                              Date
Task Team Leader:                     Mr Zafrul Islam                                   03/14/2013
Environmental Specialist:             Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi                          03/14/2013
Social Development Specialist         Ms Sabah Moyeen                                   03/14/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:      Mr Sanjay Srivastava                               03/14/2013
  Comments: cleared on understanding that AF will not finance any activities that are likely to have
  an environment or social impacts on ground.
Sector Manager:                       Mr Felipe Goya                                     03/14/2013
  Comments:
