                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/12/2013                                    Report No.: AC6934
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P090807                 Original Project Name: Bangladesh - Skills
                                             and Training Enhancement Project
Country: Bangladesh                          Project ID: P145118
Project Name: Additional Financing: Skills and Training Enhancement Project
Task Team Leader: Md. Mokhlesur Rahman
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 19,       Estimated Board Date: July 15, 2013
2013
Managing Unit: SASED                         Lending Instrument:
Sector: Vocational training (100%)
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (75%);Technology diffusion
(10%);Export development and competitiveness (10%);Decentralization (5%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
         Free-standing TFs for SARVP                                  16.71
                                                                      16.71
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to strengthen selected public and private training
institutions to improve training quality and employability of trainees, including those
from disadvantaged socio-economic backgrounds.

3. Project Description
The proposed additional grant would help finance the costs associated with further
support to more public and private training institutions. The project components are as
follows.

 Component 1- Improve the Quality and Relevance of Training (US$10.6 million). This
component has two subcomponents: (i) Window I- Support to Public and Private
Institutions Offering Diploma Programs, (ii) Window II- Support To Public and Private
Institutions Offering Short-Term Programs. Window I supports about 25-30 public and
private institutions offering diploma level programs. These institutions are chosen on the
basis of well defined eligibility and selection criteria. Window II supports about 40-50
public and private institutions providing short-term vocational and technical training.
Eligibility and selection criteria similar to those employed under Window I, are employed
to identify institutions that receive financing under this project.

 Additional US$ 10.6 million will be added to this component. This component will
continue to be implemented through two windows. Under Window I, the AF will support
about 3 additional private institutions offering diploma level programs. These institutions
will be chosen on the basis of well-defined eligibility and selection criteria. Under
Window II, the AF will support about 10 additional institutions (5 public and 5 private)
providing short-term vocational and technical training. Eligibility and selection criteria
similar to those employed under Window I, will be used to identify institutions that will
receive financing under this project

 Component 2: Pilots in TVET (US$ 1 million). The AF will continue to support pilots
in the Technical and Vocational Education Training (TVET)sector. These pilots are
aimed at strengthening the overall TVET system through direct start-up and operational
support to Industry Skills Councils (ISC) and to the National Skills Development Council
(NSDC). This component aims to provide one time grant financing and operational cost
support on a declining basis until the project end. The project has already established four
ISCs and an additional four will be financed through AF - whose role is to guide the
overall regulatory and legislative framework for TVET and skills development in
Bangladesh – in addition to all the outreach activities expected of the industry skills
councils.


 Component 3: Institutional Capacity Development (US$ 3.7 million)
 This component focuses on strengthening the capacity of the government to manage the
TVET sector as a whole by way of institutional capacity development of the Directorate
of Technical Education (DTE), the Bangladesh Technical Education Board (BTEB)
under the Ministry of Education (MOE), and the Bureau of Manpower Employment and
Training (BMET) under the Ministry of Expatriate Welfare and Overseas Employment
(MOEWOE). The AF with US$ 3.7 million will support the development of Recognition
of Prior Learning (RPL) programs by establishing about 10 small skills testing centers
and providing some initial operating costs until the end of the project life.

 Component 4: Project Management, Communications, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$
1.4 million). The AF will continue to support project management and implementation,
and will help in supporting the improvement of system management and implementation
of reforms through training of policy planners, managers, and administrators, and
enhance communications with and between key stakeholders. The Skills and Training
Enhancement Project (STEP) Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be adequately
staffed with qualified and experienced staff to manage, coordinate, and monitor the
project activities and build capacity of all implementing entities on the agreed fiduciary
and safeguard arrangements and other elements of the project. The proposed AF will help
in enhancing project capacity to undertake more communication and mobilization
activities including enhancement of the social profile of technical and vocational
education and training.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The program will be implemented nationwide as functions of both the location of training
institutions and as a function of the origin area of a student. The project will continue to
support small civil works, rehabilitation of existing schools, and construction of
additional training rooms or laboratories. As activities supported by this project are
limited to rehabilitation works, it is expected that no land acquisition and/or resettlement
will be caused by civil works. In addition, the exact location of training centers supported
by this project will only be known during project implementation. For that reason, a
Framework approach has been taken to mitigate potential negative impacts, and an
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been prepared

  From an environmental perspective, the most important issues to address include: (i)
rehabilitation and renovation of existing buildings, classrooms, workshops and libraries,
(ii) introduction of environmental, occupational health and safety curricula in training
institutions, and (iii) safe disposal of waste generated from laboratories and workshops.

 The project will not trigger OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. A mandatory
requirement for eligibility is that no land acquisition is necessary to implement civil
works. Furthermore, all project civil works will be carried out in existing infrastructure or
on land that is already the property of the institutes concerned.

 The project triggers OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples (or Adivasis as they are referred
to in Bangladesh), since the location of training institutions to be selected for financing
under the project is not known ex-ante and some may be in areas inhabited by Indigenous
Peoples. The project will make best efforts to include Indigenous groups and other
marginalized or disadvantaged people as project beneficiaries, through appropriate
consultation, outreach and targeting strategies. The project will undertake and document
that free prior and informed consultation have been held and that broad community
support exists for the project.

  To comply with World Bank social safeguards policies and to ensure inclusiveness of
approaches, the GOB has prepared a Social Management Framework. Beyond
compliance with safeguards measures, the GOB and the Bank team have agreed to target
scholarships using means testing so that children from marginalized and disadvantaged
groups will be able to participate as program beneficiaries. Finally, gender-equity is an
issue that the GOB has paid tremendous attention to and has achieved gender parity in
both primary and secondary education. Record keeping for vocational and technical
programs is poor, and we do not have a clear understanding of the proportion of
girls/women in such programs, though anecdotal figures suggest that the proportion is
quite low. The SMF will include a Tribal Peoples Development Framework, appropriate
assessment tools to demonstrate inclusion, participation and accountability. The SMF will
also include a checklist to document that no land acquisition is triggered and no
communities/people are displaced either physically or economically from either private
or public lands and there is no adverse impact on livelihoods. A stand-alone report on
Gender Assessment will be prepared and tailored to the scope of the project.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Sabah Moyeen (SASDS)
   Ms Nadia Sharmin (SASDC)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                 X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The two major tasks with environmental issues involved in the project are: (1)
rehabilitation/ renovation/refurbishment of existing building, classrooms, workshops, and
library, and (2) enhancement of workshop and laboratory facilities. These tasks are under
Windows I and II of Component 1. The expected activities under these windows include
inter alia rehabilitation/renovation/ refurbishment of existing building, classrooms,
workshops, and library. Component 3 will support vertical expansion of the new
Directorate of Technical Education (DTE) and Bureau of Manpower Employment and
Training (BMET) building according to the original component. The task is underway.
Component 1 will support upgrading workshops and laboratories. The chemical
constituents of the raw materials may require special disposal unit. To ensure limited
environmental impact due to the expansion of the existing building to accommodate the
workshop/laboratories for new trade courses, and offices for BMET and BTEB, if
necessary, World Bank OP 4.01 for Environmental Assessment Policy will be followed.

  However, given that the nature of all the above referenced activities are small and
highly localized in nature, there are no large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts
associated with STEP. Only minor and localized impacts are expected to arise from such
construction and/or upgrading of existing infrastructure. Others issues that will be
addressed through the project will be to ensure that institutions that receive project
financing have appropriate classroom and laboratory conditions (e.g., light, ventilation,
temperature and noise), students have access to adequate protective gear (e.g., helmets,
goggles, gloves, boots, etc.), proper sanitation (latrines and waste-management), and
appropriate means of disposing waste materials generated through the training program.
Furthermore, all institutes will be required to offer as part of the training, courses on
occupational safety as it pertains to the specific trades being covered by the institute.

 The STEP triggers OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous People (IP). The selection of institutes to
receive project financing will reveal the exact location of the institutes that will be part of
the program. Since this is not known ex-ante, it is difficult to determine whether program
sites coincide with those districts where there is a significant presence of IP groups. If
this does happen, the GOB has prepared a Social Assessment and a Social Management
Framework (SMF) which will come into effect and will be used to guide the preparation
of site specific Tribal Peoples Development Plans. The SMF will also include appropriate
assessment tools to demonstrate inclusion, participation and accountability; a checklist to
document that no land acquisition is triggered and no communities/people are displaced
either physically or economically from either private or public lands and there is no
adverse impact on livelihoods. A stand-alone report on Gender Assessment will be
prepared and tailored to the scope of the project. The existing SMF will be reviewed and
updated if necessary to include the above elements.

 Institute Development Plan, will be shared with IP groups and wide consultations will
be held with these groups. These consultations will be prior, free and informed so as to
ensure their compliance with the IDA's OP/BP 4.10. In addition to IP groups, the project
will also directly support gender equity in training programs and emphasize access for
marginalized groups. In particular, means-testing will be used to identify and support
potential trainees from poor and disadvantaged groups.

  Finally, STEP does not trigger OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. There will be
no land acquisition under this project. Furthermore, all institutes that will be selected to
receive financing from the project will be required to demonstrate their ownership of the
land on which the institute is established. In addition, the eligibility criteria that focuses
on the number of years the institute has been in existence and the requirement that they
have formal titles to the land on which the institute is established, will also help eliminate
the likelihood of squatters on the said institute.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
There is no expected indirect or direct long term impact of STEP after following
guidelines mentioned in the EMF.
 No adverse social impacts are expected due to the project interventions. The SMF will
guide the documentation of inclusion and participation issues, relevant gender
information and an appropriate consultation and communication strategy to implement
the Tribal Peoples Development Plans as per the Framework. Social Management Plans
(SMPs) will be prepared according to the nature and scope of each sub-project/site as and
when required.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Given the nature of STEP, no alternative proposal feasible for the small scale
infrastructure works were being considered under this project. Furthermore, the project
does address some key equity issues directly.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
During the preparation of original STEP, the DTE had very limited experience. For this
reason, the GOB has invested considerable effort in developing the Environmental
Management Framework (EMF) and Social Assessment and Management Framework
(SMF) covering environmental and social safeguards issues respectively. Considering
DTE's capacity and nature of work the EMF was developed such that it defines in a very
simplified steps, procedures and emphasizes use of guidelines or criteria and/or standards
while planning, developing and executing civil works under the project. Capacity
building of DTE remains a challenge for the proper implementation of safeguard
compliance. The DTE has appointed a focal person for ensuring the safeguard
compliance recently and agreed to ensure to provide the support of an Environmental and
Social Development Specialist who will be responsible for the environmental
management in both construction and operational stages, assisting capacity-building, and
providing subsequent guidance and review of the EMF and SMF's application, as
required. The expected cost for monitoring and supervising both EMF and SMF have
been incorporated into the project financing.

 However, as DTE's in house capacity building on environmental monitoring is far
behind due to lack of resources. DTE needs to take support of an environmental
professional for ensuring environmental compliance in the project activities. Based on the
environmental screening, budget for implementation of EMP should be allocated with
each sub-project.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
A revised EMF and SMF along with Bengali translation are re-disclosed on the DTE
website. The Ministry of Education will share the EMF and SMF with concerned
academic institutions, Department of Environment and civil society for further
comments. As no potential affected one is identified at this stage, such field level
consultation was not conducted at this stage. The EMF/SMF included number of
checklists to be filled by teachers, students and neighborhood representatives which need
to submitted with the proposals. In addition, consultations will be held by the project for
the identification of impacts and preparation of all sub-project specific safeguards
documents. The EMF and SMF will also be disclosed in World Bank Infoshop. Relevant
subproject specific safeguard documents/mitigation plans (EMPs/ SMPs) prepared
subsequently will also be disclosed to the public.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  06/19/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              06/19/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               06/20/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  06/19/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              06/19/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               07/03/2013
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
N/A


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
  If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
  and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                    Mr Md. Mokhlesur Rahman                     06/19/2013
Environmental Specialist:            Ms Nadia Sharmin                            06/19/2013
Social Development Specialist        Ms Sabah Moyeen                             06/19/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Mr Francis V. Fragano                       07/12/2013
  Comments: Cleared. Please refer to email of July 11, 2013
Sector Manager:                      Mr Amit Dar                                 06/19/2013
  Comments: cleared
