                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC6344


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/15/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Bangladesh                          Project ID: P125447
Project Name: Community Climate Change Program
Task Team Leader: Yuka Makino
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 30,      Estimated Board Date: October 16, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: SASDI                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Other social services (34%);Flood protection (33%);General agriculture, fishing
and forestry sector (33%)
Theme: Climate change (70%);Natural disaster management (15%);Other social
protection and risk management (15%)
SPF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                        0.00
        Bangladesh MDTF for Climate Change                             11.50
        Financing Gap                                                   0.00
                                                                       11.50


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The goal of the "Community Climate Change Program" project is to build the capacity of local
communities to reduce their vulnerability to climate change. The specific objective is to establish
an effective financing mechanism to channel funds to communities to increase their resilience to
the impacts of climate change.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The CCCP is a grant funding mechanism that will finance community-based adaptation projects
focusing on the six pillars identified in the BCCSAP of food security, social safety and health;
comprehensive disaster management; infrastructure; research and knowledge management;
mitigation and low carbon development; and capacity building implemented by Civil Society
Organizations (CSOs) . The CCCP will receive grant financing from the Bangladesh Climate
Change Resilience Fund (BCCRF). The project will have two main components:
 Component 1: Establish the grant funding mechanism for the "Community Climate Change
Program"

 The funding mechanism should aim to ensure maximum impact of CCCP on the ground and
effectively demonstrate community adaptation strategies that can be scaled-up. The purpose of
this component is to lay the foundation for a mechanism that will be able to leverage future funds
for adaptation to climate change.

  The guiding principles for CCCP will be (i) Targeting of priority climate change issues in line
with the six pillars of BCCSAP specific to the five agro-ecological zones in Bangladesh
(Coastal, Northwest - barind, Northeast - haor, Central - char, and Hill tracts) and urban areas;
(ii) Any organization receiving sub-grants must demonstrate how it will develop institutions,
channel investments and bring in results that would directly help communities in the target areas
of BCCSAP. Organizations requesting funds for community-based adaptation must have an
established presence in the relevant region where the project will be implemented. The climate
change program would preferably build upon the foundation and social capital of other projects
that the organization is already implementing; (iii) The projects would involve community
institutions and leadership and collaborate with local governments while ensuring gender
sensitivity; and (iv) Emphasis would be placed on ensuring transparency, information
dissemination, monitoring of inputs, outputs, and impacts, and learning opportunities to ensure
sustainability of the program and scaling-up in other parts of Bangladesh.

  Implementation Mechanism: PKSF will create a separate implementation cell. PKSF will be
responsible for the call for proposals, review, monitoring, supervision, and compliance with
fiduciary requirements. PKSF will develop the screening, reviewing, approval and
implementation procedures, such as: Operational Manual, Environmental and Social
Management Framework, Financial and Procurement guidelines etc. Rigorous eligibility and
screening criteria and stage-wise selection procedures for civil society organizations and
proposals will be developed during the program preparation. Where necessary, the procedures
will be enhanced to include additional guidelines that are relevant to the adaptation activities
under BCCSAP. All expenses for implementation of the project will be borne from project
resources. PKSF will receive all project resources as grant.

 Component 2: Impact monitoring and learning mechanism

 The impact monitoring and learning mechanism is to ensure that there is a constant feedback
process to determine whether the funding mechanism developed is effective in (i) channeling
funds to community level adaptation programs; and (ii) ensuring the reduction of vulnerability to
climate change. Monitoring will be conducted at three levels: (i) participatory monitoring at the
community level; (ii) output/milestone, results and fiduciary monitoring; and (iii) independent
third party impact monitoring. The lessons learnt will be widely disseminated to our CSO and
development partners.

D. Project location (if known)
The activities will be mainly focus in the climate vulnerable areas. The past studies indicated that
the southern coastal area is vulnerable to climate change due to the increasing sea level and more
frequent storm surges and cyclones. The North-western region is also at risk to climate change
due to the increasing droughts. The possible sub-project activities are community-based
adaptations focusing on food security, social safety and health, comprehensive disaster
management, infrastructure, knowledge management etc. from the Civil Society Organizations
(CSOs). The specific subproject locations and their physical characteristics relevant to the
safeguard analysis will be known only after selecting and accepting the climate change adaptive
measures proposed by the CSOs.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
PKSF is an apex organization established by Government of Bangladesh who disburses fund to
microfinance institutions (MFIs) who are its Partner Organizations (POs) to implement
development programs designed for the poor of Bangladesh. Although, PKSF has prior
experience to work with World Bank funding, currently PKSF has no experienced person to deal
with environmental and social safeguard issues as required by the Bank policies. In addition,
since the implementing CSOs are yet to be identified, the institutional capacity for safeguard
policies of the implementing body cannot be determined at this stage. PKSF has agreed to
establish a cell and an independent technical committee to review the CSO proposals, including
safeguard issues and will ensure safeguard practice during the project implementation by the
selected CSOs.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Nadia Sharmin (SASDI)
   Mr Md. Akhtaruzzaman (SASDT)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes          No        TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
    The possible sub-project activities are community-based adaptations focusing on food
security, social safety and health, comprehensive disaster management, infrastructure,
knowledge management etc. from the Civil Society Organizations (CSOs). No significant/long-
term environmental impacts are anticipated from the project activities. Given that the sub-project
is yet to be identified, each sub-project will be treated separately and given its own
environmental screening as per World Bank guideline.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                       X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                           X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                            X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                        X
    If the program covers the entire country, including the Chittagong Hill Tracts, which are
inhabited by the largest proportion of the country’s indigenous population, it will trigger OP 4.10
on Indigenous Peoples. In various proportions, indigenous peoples (IPs) also live in most of the
plains districts, including some areas in the coastal regions. Impacts on and benefits for IPs will
however depend upon actual adaptation measures proposed by CSOs.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                         X
    The program will finance CSO proposals focused on community-based climate change
adaptations for food security, social safety and health, comprehensive disaster management,
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes         No          TBD
infrastructure, knowledge management, etc. Whether or not the OP 4.12 on Involuntary
Resettlement would apply will eventually depend on the actual adaptive measures proposed by
CSOs. PKSF has nevertheless decided to develop a Social Management Framework (SMF),
consistent with the Bank policies OP 4.10 and OP 4.12, to address social safeguard issues as and
when they arise during implementation of any chosen adaptation measures for climate change.
With principles, policies, guidelines and procedures, the SMF will help CSOs to prepare
proposals, and PKSF to evaluate them, to ensure compliance with the Bank’s social safeguard
policies.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                    X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                           X
    To be decided
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                        X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   09/30/2011

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   September, 2011

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Ms Yuka Makino                                                 08/12/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Sanjay Srivastava                                           08/15/2011
      Comments: cleared
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Herbert Acquay                                              08/15/2011
      Comments: Approved




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
