                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 04/12/2012                                  Report No.: AC6605
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Bangladesh                          Project ID: P125447
Project Name: Community Climate Change Program
Task Team Leader: Yuka Makino
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 13,       Estimated Board Date: October 31, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: SASDI                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Other social services (34%);Flood protection (33%);General agriculture, fishing
and forestry sector (33%)
Theme: Climate change (70%);Natural disaster management (15%);Other social
protection and risk management (15%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
         Bangladesh MDTF for Climate Change                           12.50
         Financing Gap                                                 0.00
                                                                      12.50
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]        No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Development Objective of the project is to enhance the capacity of selected
communities to increase their resilience to the impacts of climate change.

  An intermediate indicator of success will be the establishment of an effective grant
financing mechanism within Palli Karma-Sahayak Foundation(PKSF) to channel funds to
NGOs to fund community-based climate change adaptation activities.

3. Project Description
The project will have 3 main components: (i) Community climate Change Fund (ii)
Knowledge Management, Monitoring and Evaluation and Capacity Building; and (iii)
Project management.

 Component 1. Community Climate Change Fund (US$10.40 million)
 This component would establish a US$10.40 million fund to finance community-based
climate change adaptation projects implemented with the assistance of NGOs. The fund
would be managed by PKSF through a separate Project Management Unit (PMU), to be
set up and supported (including staffing, equipment, and operation costs) under
Component 3.

 PKSF will invite project proposals from NGOs to address climate change impacts in (a)
salinity affected coastal areas; (b) flood affected char-lands and river basins; and (c)
drought affected or rainfall-scarce areas. Each project proposal must be located within a
vulnerable zone (a list of upazilas in these zones is provided in Annex 2), and must
address at least one of the following six pillars of the BCCSAP: (a) improve food
security, social protection and health; (b) improve disaster management capacity; (c)
climate proof existing infrastructure; (d) improve research and knowledge management to
predict the likely scale and timing of climate change in different sectors; (e) explore
mitigation and low-carbon development opportunities; and (f) focus on capacity building
and institutional strengthening. The sub-projects would range from US$20,000 to US$1
million, and all would be completed three months before the completion date of the
CCCP. The proposals would also be reviewed for social and environmental safeguards,
including gender and social inclusion, as per Bank policy.

 Component 2. Knowledge Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Capacity
building (US$ 0.44 million)

  Since community-based adaptation to climate change is an evolving field of practice,
this component would promote the sharing of lessons on best practices among the
participating NGOs, as well as in the wider NGO community and in regional and global
forums. This component would also support a structured learning process of capturing
lessons and incorporating best practices into the design and implementation of
community-based interventions, including the preparation of a toolkit and guidelines, and
visits to adaptation activities in different vulnerable zones. Technical assistance will be
provided to develop options for institutionalizing lessons learned.

  This component will also (a) build the capacity of NGOs to prepare eligible community-
based climate change adaptation sub-project proposals; (b) operationalize an M&E
system to ensure effective monitoring of project outcomes at the project and community
levels; and to enable an independent third party monitoring and impact evaluation of
financial system performance, and a comprehensive review and evaluation of outcomes at
project completion; and (c) establish a grievance redress system to handle any issues
raised by stakeholders about the implementation of the project or any sub-project. Further
details of the monitoring framework are in Annex 3.

 Component 3. Project Management (US$1.66 million)

 This component would finance technical assistance to: (a) establish a PMU within PKSF
to manage the multi-donor Climate Change Resilience Fund and monitor the
implementation of sub-projects. It would also finance the operating costs of the Fund,
including equipment, financial management, procurement, technical assistance, and
administrative expenses; and (b) build the technical capacity of PKSF to appraise sub-
project proposals submitted by NGOs; and to operationalize the procedures for Fund
management outlined in the Operational Manual (see Annex 3 for details).

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The activities will be initially focused on the climate vulnerable areas namely: (i) Salinity
affected areas; (ii) Flood affected char-lands and river basins; and (iii) Drought affected
or rainfall scarce areas. The target climate risk areas may be expanded upon successful
implementation of the project. The target Upazilas under this project were identified
based upon the degree of exposure to climate risk, and level of poverty. The project
targets the following Upazilas for implementation of sub-grants.
  Climate Risk DistrictUpazila
  Drought       Chuadanga        Damurhuda
  Jessore       Jhikargacha, Katwali, Chougacha, Monirampur, Sharsha
  Naogaon       Porsha, Naogaon Sadar, Niamatpur, Patnitala
  Rajshahi      Godagari & Tanore
  Satkhira      Assasuni & Debhata
  Natore        Lalpur & Natore Sadar
  Salinity      Satkhira         Shyamnagar, Kaliganj, Assasuni
  Khulna        Dighalia, Rupsha, Dacope, Batiaghata
  Jessore       Katwali & Jhikargacha
  Bagerhat      Sarankhola, Morrelganj, Fakirhat
  Patuakhali Kalapara, Golachipa, Dashmina
  Barguna       Amtali & Barguna Sadar
  Flood Barisal Babuganj
  Cox’s Bazar Moheskhali
  Jamalpur      Bakshiganj, Dewanganj, Islampur, Madarganj, Melandaha
  Mymensingh Gauripur, Haluaghat, Iswarganj, Nandail, Phulpur
  Bagerhat      Fakirhat
  Jessore       Jhikargacha & Katwali
  Khulna        Batiaghata, Dighalia, Rupsha
  Kurigram      Char Rajibpur, Chilmari, Raumari, Ulipur
  Nilphamari Jaldhaka, Kishoreganj & Nilphamari Sadar

 The exact locations of the sub-projects to be implemented under the project cannot be
determined at this stage. Physical characteristics will be known once the sub-grant
proposals are received and selected for CCCP funding. But it is likely that some of the
proposals may include infrastructures as a critical means for climate change adaptation
and there is potential for use and/or access of private or public lands with private users.
Sub-grants with infrastructure will use vacant public land to the extent feasible, and in
unavoidable circumstances, will not take private land through acquisition (using power of
eminent domain) but voluntary contribution or contribution against compensation
collectively by the community. CCCP will also avoid financing subgrants with adaptation
measures involving physical displacement of people and affecting the livelihood of
communities including the tribal peoples.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Nadia Sharmin (SASDI)
   Mr Md. Akhtaruzzaman (SASDS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                 X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project does not envisage any large scale, significant or irreversible environmental
impact due to the small scale interventions by the NGOs. Since the Project will be
implemented by the NGOs at a community level within a limited budget, presuming the
small scale community demand driven nature of the sub-projects, the Project is
considered as a Category “B? which appropriate with the provision of OP 4.01.

 The possible sub-project activities are community-based adaptations focusing on food
security, social protection and health, comprehensive disaster management,
infrastructure, knowledge management etc. from the NGOs. The specific sub-project
locations and their physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis will be
known only after approval of the proposal. Environmental screening will be performed
for the subgrant selection at the appraisal stage before finalizing any sub-project activity.
Any sub-project with severe environmental impact will not be funded under CCCP.

 The Project is expected to bring specific environmental benefits through promoting the
community level climate resilience adaptation approach. However, environmentally
benign projects may pose environmental damage if not properly designed from the
beginning or inadequately monitored at preparation, implementation and operational
stage.

 Social safeguards issues are anticipated only in subgrants where development of
infrastructure will be one of the critical means for climate change adaptation and where
tribal peoples will be affected. However, social screening will be conducted for each
short-listed SGP at the appraisal stages before finalizing any climate change adaptation
activity. Any sub-project with social impacts those cannot be mitigated with the current
capacity of the NGO, PKSF and the community will not be funded under CCCP.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The selected subgrants will ensure community level intervention and maximum funding
will be limited to US$ 1 million. The communities in the project area are likely to be
benefited under the subgrant with the stronger climate resilience approach at local levels.
The adverse environmental impacts of the project are likely to be minimal, owing to the
small-scale nature of community-implemented sub-projects. No long term adverse
environmental impacts are anticipated due to the possible community driven sub-project
activities. Nonetheless, actual impacts will depend on the sub-project activities actually
selected, i.e. the sub-project types or scheme types. Environmental safeguard risks for the
CCCP are the typical ones for a rural CDD project supporting small scale basic social and
economic infrastructure, and may include: (i) localized degradation or encroachment of
natural habitats and associated loss of biodiversity; (ii) top soil degradation and erosion;
(iii) decline in water quality; (iv) inappropriate waste disposal; (v) cutting of trees; and
(vi) potential public health concerns. The Environmental Management Framework has a
typical environmental screening format for identifying any potential indirect or long-
term adverse impacts and taking necessary mitigation measures to ensure minimal
impacts.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The project at this stage will not have any alternative analysis. The sub project
preparation will consider alternative options considering environmental and social
impact.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Palli Karma Shayak Foundation (PKSF) is an apex organization established by
Government of Bangladesh who disburses fund to microfinance institutions (MFIs). The
MFIs are the Partner Organizations (POs) of PKSF which implement development
programs designed for the poor of Bangladesh. Although, PKSF has prior experience to
work with World Bank funding, currently PKSF has no experienced person to deal with
environmental and social safeguard issues as required by the Bank policies. In addition,
since the implementing NGOs are yet to be identified, the institutional capacity for
safeguard policies of the implementing body cannot be determined at this stage. PKSF
has agreed to appoint a full time Program Officer (Environment) and will ensure
safeguard practice during the project implementation by the selected NGOs. However,
considering the project’s objective to promote climate resilience activities, the capacity
building initiative will be limited to the EMF/SMF implementation. PKSF will include in
its project management cell, a Program Officer (Training, Community and Social
Development) who will oversight monitoring of social issues including social safeguards.
The project staffs and NGOs will receive briefing on EMF/SMF during their orientation
for project implementation.

 The subgrants to be financed under CCCP will be identified and approved during
implementation phase of CCCP. Consequently, specific information on types of
subgrants, site/location of the sub-projects, land requirements, local communities, geo-
physical land features and nature is not available. Therefore, exact details and intensity of
environmental and social impacts and their effective mitigation cannot be determined
during project preparation. An Environmental Management Framework (EMF), a Social
Management Framework (SMF) and an Operational Manual have been prepared to
establish the mechanism to determine and assess future potential environmental and
social impacts of subgrants that are to be identified and cleared based on a community
demand driven process, and to set out mitigation, monitoring and institutional measures
to be taken during implementation and operation of the sub-projects to eliminate adverse
environmental and social impacts, offset them, or to reduce them to acceptable limit.

 The implementation experiences of CDD project of Bangladesh like Social Investment
Program Project (SIPP), Local Governance Support Project (LGSP) and Employment
Generation Program for the Poorest (EGPP) have been reviewed and the findings are
used in preparing the EMF and environmental screening format for the CCCP.The EMF
has the following features: (a) procedures for screening; (b) tools for assessment at a sub-
project level; (c) training requirements, development of communication materials; (d)
monitoring requirements; (e) and reporting procedures to be followed.

 The SMF provides guidelines and principles to ensure integration of social issues with
the possible climate change adaptation subgrants to be identified and implemented at the
community level. The SMF includes (a) procedures for screening; (b) tools for social
safeguards screening, (c) tools for assessment of impacts and mitigation measures,
documenting contribution of assets, and compensation for affected persons; (d) indicators
for monitoring impacts on tribal populations; and (e) framework for monitoring social
inclusion in identification, formation and implementation of subgrants. All shortlisted
subgrants at the appraisal stage will be screened based on the requirements of the SMF
prior to sanctioning.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The field level implementing NGO will be responsible to screen, identify, take mitigation
measures and monitor the environmental and social issues in preparation, implementation
and operation & maintenance (O&M) phase in consultation with the community. The
NGO will screen all the sub-projects for environmental and social safeguards compliance
issues and submit the screening results with the proposal. If any environmental and
social issues have been identified, NGO will propose the possible mitigation measure and
monitoring plan. The NGO will be responsible for conducting the Initial Environmental
Examination and submit the IEE report with the proposal, if necessary. NGO will submit
the quarterly monitoring report on environmental and social compliance at project
preparation, implementation and operation & maintenance phase.
 The proposal review committee at PKSF will review the mitigation and monitoring plan
submitted with the proposal. PKSF appointed Program Officer (Environment) will
monitor the environmental safeguard and Program Officer (Training, Community and
Social Development) will oversight monitoring of social safeguards issues in the sub-
projects and publish annual report on safeguards compliance for each subgrant. These
Program Officers (Environmental and Social) will maintain a database for sub-project
specific environmental and social screening, and mitigation measures. The project M&E
system will capture that information as well. In addition, the project’s third party
evaluation (reputed local think-tank) will include a brief environmental and social audit
to assess and evaluate the quality of environmental and if any, social compliance of the
subgrants.

 PKSF has prepared the EMF and SMF in consultation with some potential NGOs. In
addition, field visits were made to understand the environmental concerns of the
community due to the on-going projects of PKSF. Since the subgrants under CCCP are
yet to be identified, it was not possible to consult with the project beneficiaries or
affected persons at this stage. However, the frameworks are prepared in such way that
community consultations during the concept and appraisal stage are mandatory.

 The EMF and SMF have been posted in the website of PKSF along with a Bangla
summary version and have been kept in the PKSF offices for further comments and
inputs from non-governmental organization, civil society and general public. The EMF
and SMF will be finalized taking into consideration of the comments received on draft
version and will be available in PKSF and CCCP websites. The Project Implementation
Partners (PIPs) have to make the hardcopy available at their head and local offices. PIP
will also upload the final versions of the EMF and SMF along with the Bangla
Summaries in their website, if available.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/21/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/31/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              01/11/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  12/21/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              12/31/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               01/11/2012
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  N/A
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        N/A
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the     Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Ms Yuka Makino                      01/11/2012
Environmental Specialist:            Ms Nadia Sharmin                    01/11/2012
Social Development Specialist        Mr Md. Akhtaruzzaman                01/11/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Sanjay Srivastava                 02/09/2012
  Comments: cleared. Please email from Zia dt 12/15/2011 for details.
Sector Manager:                     Mr Herbert Acquay                    02/15/2012
  Comments:
