                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/28/2011                                     Report No.: AC6408
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Bangladesh                          Project ID: P040712
Project Name: Water Management Improvement Project
Task Team Leader: Winston Yu
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 10,       Estimated Board Date: September 18, 2007
2004
Managing Unit: SASDA                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Flood protection (64%);Irrigation and drainage (27%);Central government
administration (9%)
Theme: Water resource management (50%);Natural disaster management
(25%);Participation and civic engagement (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            102.26
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            1.00
         Local Communities                                             0.00
         NETHERLANDS: Min. of Foreign Affairs / Min. of Dev. Coop. 20.00
         Financing Gap                                                13.44
                                                                      34.44
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
Given the shift of focus to emergency rehabilitation works during the initial
implementation years and the agreed plan of action to take participatory scheme
management on a pilot-scale basis, the original Project Development Objective (PDO)
has been slightly modified. The restructuring PDO is to improve water resources
management by improving infrastructure and institutions through rehabilitating damaged
water infrastructure, piloting the role of local communities and enhancing the institutional
performance of the Country#s principal water institutions, particularly BWDB and
WARPO. It may be noted that the original project focused on an expanded role for local
communities in all stages of participatory cycle management. Given the lack of country
experience with the participatory aspects of the project, these have been scaled-back
accordingly to reflect the current operating environment since the time of project
appraisal.
3. Project Description
The original Project Description is mainly unchanged and thus the various resettlement,
social and environment issues are unchanged. The original project appraisal document
highlights the world-wide view of the importance of participatory approaches in the water
sector. However, successful approaches to such decentralized reforms require both
commitments from nascent local community institutions and traditional government
departments. Since many of these local institutions (e.g. water management
organizations) are relatively new and the BWDB has not fully operationalized the
supporting guidelines on PSM amongst its own staff, a full-scale implementation
program is not realistic. This is evidenced by the experience with PSM throughout
Bangladesh which is limited to only a few donor-supported programs. Thus, under the
restructuring fewer schemes will be taken up under components 1 and 2 to allow for
greater focus on the participatory and community mobilization aspects of system
management transfer and the involvement of communities in operations and maintenance
(O&M) management. Component 1 is reduced to cover an initial 32 schemes (25
medium schemes and 7 large schemes) for rehabilitation and Component 2 is reduced to
cover an initial 35 schemes (26 medium schemes and 9 large schemes) with routine
O&M. Medium schemes are those defined to cover on average 2500 ha while large
schemes are those defined to cover on average 8400 ha. Component 1 will also include
the provision of civil works for the construction of training centers to support the PSM
process and water management organization (WMO) mobilization.

  Finally, the project shifted its focus toward emergency repairs to damaged BWDB flood
control and drainage infrastructure (FCDI) schemes following the unforeseen floods of
2007. According to the BWDB, damages from these floods (see World Bank 2007
Damage and Needs Assessment Report) occurred to several flood control and irrigation
structures, comprising 1,592 km of embankments (147 km fully damaged), 140 km of
irrigation-drainage systems (1 km fully damaged), 282 km of riverbank protection works
(18 km fully damaged), and 279 water control structures (16 fully damaged).
Embankment and riverbank protection works account for almost 90 percent of the
damage; the remaining 10 percent comprise water control structures and irrigation-
drainage systems. In response to this, a fourth component for FDR works was added to
the WMIP and about US$32 million re-allocated (from Components 1 and 2) to
undertake critical repairs to this identified damaged infrastructure. Moreover, about
US$8.0 million equivalent was cancelled from the IDA Credit to support emergency
repairs to non-embankment infrastructure (e.g. roads, schools). An additional re-
allocation was also made to the FDR component after the 2009 Cyclone (Aila) (US$6.4
million) to address similar additional damaged infrastructure. These reallocations at the
time were deemed a priority for the Government of Bangladesh given the emergency
nature of these works.

 In summary, the types of rehabilitation works for the flood damage rehabilitation will be
similar to components 1 and 2 and since the nature of the civil works remain the same (all
improvements to existing water infrastructure and so land acquisition is not likely), the
various resettlement, social and environment issues are unchanged. That is, the existing
resettlement policy framework and environment and social management framework
remain operationally relevant and do not require any alteration for the restructuring.
Please refer to the original ISDS for more details about the remaining project
components.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The locations and salient physical characteristics of the schemes taken up under the
restructuring are the same as in the original project design. Please refer to the original
ISDS for more details about the nature of these works.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDI)
   Ms Sabah Moyeen (SASDS)
   Mr Md. Akhtaruzzaman (SASDT)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                       X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The key safeguard policies triggered are unchanged by the restructuring. In the original
project, an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was prepared which requires
an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and Environment Management Plan (EMP)
for the large-scale subprojects and environmental screening and initial environmental
examination for small FCD/FCDI schemes with participatory mitigation planning and
implementation. The environmental management is an integral part of the participatory
scheme cycle management (PSM) to ensure that the principles will be addressed
throughout the implementation process and not as a separate exercise. The Center for
Environmental and Geographic Information Services (CEGIS) is working as the
consultant to the Borrower to provide an environmental audit and screening of schemes
under the project. At present, CEGIS has conducted environmental screenings for 333
schemes and prioritized 133 of these for implementation. CEGIS has also developed an
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) report template which includes an
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for each scheme which would be used for
obtaining environmental clearance from the Department of Environment (DOE) for each
batch of works. No EMPs have yet to be completed for Component 1 and 2 schemes
which have yet to be finalized. Emergency Flood Damage Rehabilitation (FDR) schemes
were selected on the basis of having no major environmental and social issues. In the
proposed restructuring, since the types and nature of rehabilitation works for Components
1 and 2 and the Flood Damage Rehabilitation Works (FDR) remain the same (all
improvements to existing water infrastructure and so land acquisition is not likely), the
environment issues are unchanged and the original EMF will still be operationally valid.

  A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared to deal with the potential
adverse impacts of land acquisition and displacement of people for rehabilitation and
improvement of the selected schemes. According to the RPF, social impact assessment
and screening of rehabilitation works (Components 1 and 2 and FDR) will be designed
and conducted to assess project impacts including benefits and adverse impacts (e.g. land
acquisition or displacement of people). If any such adverse impacts are identified, the
Borrower will conduct a Social Impact Assessment and prepare a Resettlement Action
Plan (RAP) where requirements are scaled to the magnitude and extent of impacts. This
will include surveys of affected people, establishment of the replacement/market value
for the affected lands/property and disturbances and livelihood impacts (permanent and
temporary), following the RPF, which will be consulted and reconciled with the Water
Management Organizations (WMOs). The RAPs where relevant will include, among
other things, the scope of land acquisition and resettlement, details of impacts and
mitigation measures and budget and implementation arrangements. The design approach
is supposed to be such that land acquisition and displacement of people are avoided or
minimized. A number of participatory rapid appraisals (PRAs) have been completed so
far for components 1 & 2 which provide preliminary information on social aspects as part
of the initial screening for potential schemes. Since land acquisition or any major adverse
impacts have been avoided for FDF works, no resettlement action plans (RAPs) were
prepared or implemented. Due diligence will be taken on social safeguards for all
schemes under civil works construction as per the RPF. For Components 1 and 2, social
impact assessments will be furthered during feasibility study, design and planning. If
social safeguards compliance issues are identified, mitigation measures will be put in
place through preparing and implementing RAPs for work packages. Because the types
of works included in the restructuring are unchanged (i.e. rehabilitation of existing
FCD/FCDI schemes) the RPF remains unaffected and operationally valid.

 Please see the original ISDS for more details concerning the safeguard issues associated
with these project works.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
This is the same as the original ISDS. Original ISDS reads:
 The project is likely to have potentially positive impacts since it is designed to mitigate
past adverse environmental impacts as well as enhance the role of local communities in
the rehabilitation and O&M of FCD/FCDI schemes.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been prepared to guide scheme
(sub-project) screening, assessment (where required) and participatory mitigation
planning and implementation. The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) along with
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for larger scale sub-project and Initial
Environmental Examination with participatory mitigation planning for medium scale sub-
projects include alternative analysis during planning phase. The EA and EMP have been
made an integral part of the participatory scheme cycle management (PSM) to ensure that
the principles will be addressed throughout the implementation process and not as a
separate exercise.

  Rehabilitation and improvement works in some of the existing FCD/FCDI schemes may
require a moderate amount of private land and cause displacement of squatters, if any,
from the embankments. Although the impact details will not be known until the specific
schemes are selected, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared to deal
with the potential adverse impacts of land acquisition and displacement, by following the
Bank’s OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. While the RPF will apply to the entire
project, separate Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared for each yearly civil
works program as the selection of FCD/FCDI schemes and design of the rehabilitation
and improvements proceed. In preparing the RAPs, alternative designs will be considered
to minimize requirements for additional land and physical relocation by taking into
account direct inputs from WMOs, landowners and other stakeholders, which will be
generated through the PSM cycle.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
This is the same as the original ISDS. Original ISDS reads:

  An overall EMF has been prepared and fully integrated into the entire participatory
scheme cycle management process (PSM) both at the Government and community levels.
This will include a screening and mitigation framework and corresponding institutional
framework, to be in place during selection, implementation and monitoring and
evaluation of the diverse investments.

 The EIA guidelines prepared by WARPO for large FCDI schemes will be applied for
the rehabilitation of schemes between 5000 ha to 15,000 ha in size. EA will be conducted
for each medium sized sub-project by the WMO and BWDB and the mitigation activities
agreed upon in a MOU. Based on the EA, an EMP will be prepared and customized for
each type, location and scale of activity. The guidelines of community level EA have
been prepared by IUCN and already field tested.
 Monitoring of the impacts during the project will be conducted by a "monitoring team"
comprising of selected WMO members, officials from BWDB, DAE, DOF, DOE and
LGI. A record of the EAs will be kept in BWDB and WARPO. Training will be given to
the monitoring team members and appropriate members of their agencies to ensure the
proper implementation of the EMF, EIA and EMP. BWDB has made provisions to
increase the number of environmental staff in BWDB to ensure sustainability of the
environmental capacity of BWDB.

 With respect to actions to address specific environmental safeguard issues, any potential
cumulative impact will be addressed at the initial screening of the schemes, and any
scheme that may cause adverse impacts will not be included in the project. The potential
impact to natural habitat will be mitigated through appropriate design of the sluice gates
and management of related water infrastructure. The potential use of pesticides will be
mitigated through the already on-going Government IPM program which will also be
implemented through the PSM program.

 The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), contains a legal framework outlining the
principles and guidelines for land acquisition; impact mitigation principles and measures;
implementation mechanisms; monitoring and evaluation arrangements; and others to
provide the bases to plan and implement activities required to mitigate the project’s
adverse impacts. The RPF draws substantially on the resettlement programs executed by
BWDB under the Bank-supported River Bank Protection Project (RBPP: Cr. 2791-BD),
Coastal Embankment Rehabilitation Project (CERP: Cr.2783-BD), and several other
projects in Bangladesh. With this RPF in place and progress in design of the
rehabilitation/improvements on the selected FCD schemes, separate Resettlement Action
Plans (RAPs) will be prepared for the yearly physical works program, and will generally
contain needs for any additional land; other impact details under each scheme undertaken
for rehabilitation and improvement; implementation budget and time-schedule.

 A notification exemption has been approved by the Regional Vice President for OP/BP
7.50.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
This is the same as the original ISDS. Original ISDS reads:

  Key project objectives and activities are to increase stakeholder participation in water
resources management, including transfer of selected water management functions to
local communities. The ’Guidelines for Participatory Water Management’ provides the
operational framework to include local stakeholders in water resources management.
These Guidelines provide for participation of various categories of stakeholders (farmers,
fishermen, small traders, craftsmen, boatmen, landless people, destitute women, NGOs,
etc), including their mobilization and organization into WMOs and their constituent
management associations and groups. The focus of the Guidelines is on stakeholder
participation in the entire water management cycle (identification, planning, design,
rehabilitation/improvement of FCDs/FCDIs, O&M, and monitoring and evaluation). The
project would support implementation of participatory water management using these
Guidelines as also using the experience of several similar projects implemented by
BWDB and other GOB agencies with support from other donors, such as CIDA, ADB
and the Government of Netherlands.

 During project preparation, scoping sessions were carried out with various stakeholder
groups to better understand the users’ perspective on rehabilitation/improvement needs,
problems and potential solutions, and arrangements for project implementation, and
operation and maintenance. Consultation and discussion sessions were held during the
Environmental Assessment/Environmental Management Plan preparation process
wherein safeguard policies of the Bank relevant to the project were explicitly elaborated.
A workshop was also held to provide information to, understand views of, and discuss
collaboration arrangements with, various stakeholders on the project.

 The TOR for the EMF and EA/EMP guidelines was formulated after consultation with
various parties involved in environmental issues in Bangladesh. Extensive consultations
with stakeholders, who may be either adversely or positively impacted from an
environmental viewpoint, were held during the preparation of the EMF and EA/EMP
guidelines.

 In line with the provisions of PSM cycle, the RPF requires direct involvement of
WMOs, affected landowners and other stakeholders in all aspects of the land acquisition
and resettlement processes, including compensation, grievance redress, implementation,
and monitoring and evaluation. Yearly RAPs will likewise be prepared with direct
participation of WMOs and landowners in process tasks like census, determination of
replacement value/market prices of affected assets, and implementation and monitoring
of the mitigation measures.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     02/07/2004
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 02/08/2004
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  02/09/2004
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     02/07/2004
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 02/08/2004
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  02/09/2004
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                               N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                      Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                     N/A
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or    N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                          No
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification            Yes
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
  Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        Yes
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Winston Yu                                06/28/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi                     06/28/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Sabah Moyeen                              06/28/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Md. Akhtaruzzaman                         06/28/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Sanjay Srivastava                         06/28/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Simeon Kacou Ehui                         06/28/2011
  Comments:
