                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 02/01/2012                                   Report No.: AC6565
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Bangladesh                          Project ID: P122269
Project Name: Bangladesh Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project
Task Team Leader: Arif Ahamed
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 12,        Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: SASDU                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Water supply (80%);Sanitation (20%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (70%);Water resource management
(15%);Pollution management and environmental health (15%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             75
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                           0.00
                                                                      0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to (a) increase provision of safe water supply and
hygienic sanitation in the rural areas of Bangladesh, where shallow aquifers are highly
contaminated by arsenic and other pollutants such as salinity, iron, and bacterial
pathogens; and (b) facilitate early emergency response.

3. Project Description
The project will have the following five components:

 Component 1. Rural Piped Water Supply – US$ 40.3 m including contingencies (IDA
US$ 28.7 m) - This component will be implemented i approximately 125 locations and is
intended to further develop the public-private partnership model for the construction and
management of rural piped water schemes in areas where shallow tube-wells are highly
affected by Arsenic contamination and low water table.125 rural piped water supply
schemes will be constructed with an estimated beneficiary of 550,000. The schemes will
have on average 600-1,200 domestic connections. Each scheme may cover single or
multiple villages depending on the density and number of households as long as the
schemes are proved to be technically and financially viable in terms of the threshold for
viability with minimum mass of consumers. Private sponsors (private entrepreneurs,
NGOs, contractors, cooperatives, etc.) will be selected competitively to construct and
operate the schemes on behalf of the Union Parishads (UPs), which would own the asset.
The sponsors will invest 30% of the capital costs, while the project will provide the
remaining 70% on a grant basis.

  Sponsors will recoup their investment and management cost, through revenues from
users over the period during which they operate the schemes, estimated at between 10-12
years. The project will monitor the sponsors’ service and performance (including
financia performance) through annual audits financed under Component 4. DPHE will
provide technical support for operations and maintenance, including water safety
planning and will be responsible for project supervision with the assistance from a
consulting firm hired for design and supervision of piped water supply scheme.

 Component 2. Non-piped Rural Water Supply – US$24.9 m including contingencies
(IDA US$24.9 m)- This component builds on the successful experience of non-piped
rural water supply schemes implemented under the BWSPP and the BAMWSP. The
component will target those unions with severe safe water shortages and water quality
problems i.e. shallow aquifer contamination with a population density that may preclude
private sector interest in the provision of piped water supply. The Government aims to
build approximately 14,000 water points in arsenic hot-spot areas through community
awareness and demand responsive approach. At the same time provisions for additional
water point sources will be allocated to the disaster / flood affected areas. Non-
government Support Organizations (SOs) will be retained to help set-up Union Water and
Sanitation Committees (WATSAN) in participating Unions for the mobilization of
communities, preparation of Action Plans and train the UPs and community groups in the
selection of the sites and managing and supervising the non-piped schemes. The water
options will be implemented following DPHE’s standard procedures . DPHE will hire
contractors through open competition for the construction of the schemes.

 Bangladesh is prone to natural disasters like floods and cyclones. Therefore, this
component will also cover a standby facility by which funds will be allocated to provide
non-piped water supply options to areas that may get affected by disasters such as floods
and cyclones during the project period. These activities will also be implemented
following DPHE standard procedure.

 Component 3. Capacity Strengthening and Technical Assistance – US$19.1 m including
contingencies (IDA US$16.2 m) - This component aims to provide technical assistance
and supports on a number of areas to improve implementation activities.It would also aim
to build a knowledge base by carrying out analytical review and assessment of the
institutional framework for service provision schemes / models supported under the
project. The specific activities will include – (i) analytical and advisory activity to
promote stakeholder dialogue, build consensus and develop the longer term sector study
for institutional, management and support frameworks; (ii) capacity strengthening of
DPHE personnel and GOB officials involved in the project (including training and
exposure visits); (iii) third party technical and social monitoring and evaluation to assess
achievement of project; (iv) community mobilization and development of Action Plan for
Rural Non-piped Water Supply schemes as well as community awareness building,
hygiene promotion, capacity building for hygienic sanitation practice; (v) sanitation pilot
based on Social Marketing approach to support the Local Entrepreneurs and community
to promote supply of and demand for improved sanitation and hygiene in the rural areas;
(vi) construction of hygienic sanitation facilities for poor households in the project
intervention areas; (vii) technical assistance for financial Audit and benchmarking of
private sponsors performance; and (viii) technical assistance for characterization and
monitoring of safe groundwater resources.

  Component 4. Project Management and Support – US$6.9m including contingencies
(IDA US$4.7m) - This component will provide support to DPHE for the project
management, administration and technical assistance required for implementation of the
project. This support will include: (i) the establishment of the PMU, including office
equipment, project vehicle, information technology, financial management and
accounting systems; (ii) Project Management Support Consultancies (technical, auditing,
financial management, procurement, resettlement, reporting); (iii) water quality
monitoring and environmental management (including water quality test kits and GPS);
(iv) the operational costs of the PMU, including consultant experts; and (v) salary of the
personnel involved in the project management deputed or recruited by the government.

 Component 5. Contingency for Disaster Risk Response – US$0. This component will
provide preparedness and rapid response to disaster, emergency and/or catastrophic
events, as needed. This provisional zero amount component will allow for rapid
reallocation of credit proceeds from other components under streamlined procurement
and disbursement procedures.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The sub-projects under the project will be located all over Bangladesh focusing on the
water scarce areas (Upazilla) primarily due to deteriorating water quality from Arsenic,
iron, pathogens, salinity and others. Geographically, the highest Arsenic contamination is
observed in the central part of the country, particularly in the eastern region. Target areas
are to be determined and prioritized (for provision of safe water to mitigate arsenic and
other contamination) based on existing contamination condition and the current number
of safe water options. Public health in these areas is currently affected by the limited
coverage of the water supply and inadequate sanitation.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Dr. M. Khaliquzzaman (SASDI)
   Ms Sabah Moyeen (SASDS)
   Mr Sheikh Naveed Uddin Ahmed (SASDS)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project was reviewed and screened during preparation and designated as Category B
which is appropriate and consistent with the provisions of OP/BP 4.01, as the project
involves improvement in the sustainable access to safe water supply and improved
sanitation in the rural areas of Bangladesh, focused on supporting the Government in
mitigating against deteriorating water quality arising from arsenic, pathogens, salinity and
others. An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been prepared, focusing
on issues related to the proper organization of construction activities, compliance with
operational issues such as water quality and sludge management and compliance with
land use regulations.

 A Social Management Framework (SMF) has been prepared to address and provide
guidelines for the mitigation of any social impacts that may be identified when the project
sites are determined. The SMF contains a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), an
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF), and a Gender Action Plan (GAP). The
SMF has been assessed as satisfactory by the Bank. The minor outstanding issues have
been addressed by DPHE. The SMF has been publicly disclosed in country. Essentially
the main source of social impacts is expected from the impact of the construction
activities (piped water networks etc.) on the people in the project affected areas. It is
expected that the effect on people will be temporary in nature and minor in magnitude.
The RPF will work as a framework of reference for resettlement principles, impact
mitigation and compensation when site specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) are to
be prepared as and when required.

 Since the project will operate all over the country, it is possible that it may touch upon
areas where indigenous people live. The IPPF will provide guidelines on the development
of site specific Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) if and when required, to address the
special needs of indigenous people in the project context and design a participatory
consultation and communication campaign in keeping with their culture and customs.
  The GAP acknowledges that women are the majority of end users, especially where
domestic water usage is concerned. Although training and capacity building of local
communities is inherently a part of project components, the GAP addresses the specific
training and capacity building needs of women, with particular emphasis on efficient and
hygienic water usage.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Environmental and social screening process will allow for the application of appropriate
mitigating measures. The adverse environmental and social impacts of the project are
likely to be moderate during both the implementation and the operation stages.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not relevant

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been prepared to identify and
assess potential impacts under Components 1-2, which are the components where land
based activities are expected. Each sub-project in the component will be screened for
potential environmental and social impacts, and subjected to appropriate Environmental
and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA). Appropriate detailed design of the project
components for carrying out component specific ESIA will be available during project
implementation. The system to support the process of environmental and social impact
review, management and clearance has been defined through the Environmental
Management Framework (EMF) and the Social Management Framework (SMF)
respectively.

 A Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared to ensure that suitable mitigation
measures are applied to pipeline construction and rehabilitation where people may be
affected under Component 1-2. The RPF establishes resettlement objectives and
principles, institutional arrangements, grievance redress mechanism, monitoring, and
institutional capability. Once the locations have been decided upon and the screening
demonstrates that resettlement activities will be required, a Social Impact Assessment
(SIA) will be carried out to understand the nature and extent of displacement/other social
impacts and an appropriate Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be developed. The
scope of the RAP would depend upon the size and complexity of the resettlement. Where
less than 200 people are affected and the impacts are expected to be minor, a brief SIA
and an abbreviated RAP will be acceptable. Where the project impacts more than 200
people, a full SIA and a detailed RAP will be prepared.

 The Government of Bangladesh’s procedures with regards to the preparation of
Environmental Impact Assessment and Mitigation Plan (EIA/EMP) and Resettlement
Plans (RP) and disclosure are broadly in line with Bank guidelines. However, the
effectiveness of these processes are somewhat constrained due to a lack of transparency
and consultation, as well as the limited resources.

 DPHE possesses recent experience in implementing Bank safeguards policies. Since
1998, DPHE has implemented two Bank financed projects - Bangladesh Arsenic
Mitigation Water Supply Project (BAMWSP) and Bangladesh Water Supply Program
Project (BWSPP) involving the construction work in water supply and sanitation. During
implementation of those projects, considerable expertise has been gained by DPHE,
especially with regard to managing the water quality issues including arsenic and
microbial contamination. DPHE administers eleven laboratories throughout Bangladesh
including Rangpur, Barisal, Comilla, Mymensingh, Khulna, Sylhet, Jhenidah, Tongi,
Rajshahi, Noakhali and Bogra. Besides the eleven zonal laboratories, one central
laboratory in Dhaka acts as the reference laboratory. While the zonal laboratories are
managed by Senior Chemists/Chemists, the Chief Chemist is in charge of the Central
Laboratory. However, there is no environment or resettlement cell/unit in the DPHE
current set-up.

 Capacity building initiatives including knowledge management activities are included in
the proposed project. Technical assistance will be provisioned to strengthen the water
quality monitoring and capacity at the national (DPHE) and sub-project levels. Support to
DPHE for the characterization and monitoring of safe groundwater resources will also be
given. Capacity building training in the area of resettlement and gender planning will
also be provided to DPHE.

 The EIA/EMP documents for the sub-projects under the projects (which are expected to
be rather large in number) will be selectively post reviewed by the Bank for
environmental and involuntary resettlement compliance on random sample basis as
DPHE has in-house capacity in these respects. Resources have been earmarked to support
the implementation of environmental management and social safeguards activities,
including the provision for a program of technical assistance and training to help build
the capacity to handle environmental and social safeguards issues during the project
period.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the concerned agencies of the Government of Bangladesh (i.e.,
the Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives, Ministry of
Health and the Ministry of Environment), Local Government representatives at Union
and Upazilla levels, entrepreneurs in the water supply business, NGOs, media
representatives, as well as the members of the communities where sub-projects are likely
to be located. The EMF and SMF prepared were discussed in a half-day consultation
workshop held on October 10, 2011 with the stakeholders. These documents were
disclosed in-country by DPHE and were submitted for review and approval by the World
Bank and their subsequent disclosure at the Bank’s InfoShop. In addition, the documents
were made available at the Bank’s information center in Dhaka.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/09/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/22/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              01/23/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/02/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/22/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              01/24/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/02/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/22/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              01/24/2012
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
  and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
  Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         No
  If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           Yes
  requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
  to the RVP prepared and sent?
  Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        Yes
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name                       Date
Task Team Leader:                    Mr Arif Ahamed                              01/26/2012
Environmental Specialist:            Mr Dr. M. Khaliquzzaman                     01/26/2012
Social Development Specialist        Ms Sabah Moyeen                             01/26/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Sanjay Srivastava                          01/26/2012
  Comments: cleared.Please see email dt 01/10/2012 for details.
Sector Manager:                    Mr Ming Zhang                                 02/01/2012
  Comments: Cleared.
