                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/20/2013                                    Report No.: AC6924
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Bangladesh                          Project ID: P125302
Project Name: Bangladesh: Safe Migration for Bangladeshi Workers
Task Team Leader: Jessica Leigh Leino
Estimated Appraisal Date:                    Estimated Board Date: May 30, 2013
Managing Unit: SASSP                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Other social services (100%)
Theme: Improving labor markets (50%);Other social protection and risk management
(50%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
         Japan Social Development Fund                                 2.58
                                                                       2.58
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the project is to reduce vulnerability of migrant workers and their
families in 80 upazilas through a demonstration pilot that (i) provides better access to
accurate and timely information and services for safe migration; and (ii) establishes and
strengthens community-based organizations (CBOs) in order to reduce dependency of
migrants on middlemen.

3. Project Description
The proposed project will support an innovative pilot of significant scope and scale
which aims to address the knowledge and information needs of potential migrants in
Bangladesh. This will be accomplished by identifying or establishing community-based
organizations (CBOs) in areas with large migration populations that are not already
served by safe migration services and strengthening them to provide knowledge,
information and life skills to potential migrants to assist families of migrants in the
decision-making process as well as enhance remittance management for those who do
choose to migrate. A particular focus will also be paid to female migrants. The pilot will
thus help to support and formalize local networks used in seeking information on the
migration process. The project funding is expected to support over 800,000 potential
migrants and their families. The project includes three components:

 Component 1: Identification/establishment of community-based organizations (CBOs)
to protect migrants' rights and promote safe migration services. The objective of this
component is to develop and strengthen a local information and support system for
migrants and their families. BRAC and its implementing partners will work in 80
upazilas (sub-districts) in about 20 districts of Bangladesh to support CBOs that will
work on safe migration issues. Under the proposed project, CBOs will receive support in
starting and formalizing their operations. In the first year of the pilot, the CBOs will
concentrate on developing their organization and building up their knowledge base on
safe migration issues so that they can be an effective resource in their communities. The
CBOs will develop their capacity through an initial intensive orientation training and
Training of Trainers course and then through experience sharing as well as periodic
refresher training, including on documentation requirements for migrants and legislation
on migration. Implementation of safe migration activities will be gradually delegated to
CBOs after the first year of the project.

  Component 2: Pre-departure preparation to promote safe migration aims to promote safe
migration through information provision, training, and skills development for potential
migrants and their families. The implementing agencies and CBOs will provide
information and access to training to better prepare those who are deciding whether to
migrate to safely move through the migration process. Potential migrants and their
families will receive training that will enable them to analyze social and economic costs
and benefits of migration as well as other information needed to make an informed
decision. Potential migrants will be linked with skill development training for better
employment and wages in destination countries. Migrants and their families will also
learn about financing migration and managing remittances effectively so that migration
can serve as a productive option for livelihood development. The broader community will
also be mobilized to support migrant workers and improve awareness of migration issues
through community information and education campaigns. An Innovation Fund will also
be set up under this component which will serve to help a sample of CBOs pilot
additional services and support for migrants. Awareness and training modules will be
designed in coordination with community groups to tap into local expertise and
knowledge with support from specialists.

 Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge
Dissemination will finance the overall management of the project and establish a sound
monitoring and evaluation system to measure the program's impact and effectiveness.
Funds will also be used to carry out baseline and implementation completion surveys
using a representative sample of households in pilot and non-pilot areas. This component
will also fund financial management and reporting requirements.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
It is anticipated that the project will work in 80 upazilas, selected on the basis of having a
significant number people seeking and undertaking migration, based on data provided by
the Government of Bangladesh. The upazilas will be selected from the following
divisions and districts:

 Chittagong: Brahminbaria, Chandpur,Chittagong, Comilla, Cox's Bazar, Feni,
Lakshmipur, Noakhali

 Barisal: Barisal

 Dhaka: Dhaka, Gazipur, Kishoregonj, Manikgonj, Munshigonj, Mymensingh,
Narayangonj, Narsingdi, Rajbari, Shariatpur, Tangail

 Khulna: Jessore, Khulna, Kushtia, Magura, Narail

 Rajshahi: Sirajgonj

 Rangpur: Kurigram, Lalmonirhat, Nilphamari

 Sylhet: Hobigonj, Sunamgonj, Sylhet

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDI)
   Ms Sabah Moyeen (SASDS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                      X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project finances capacity building for CBOs and training for potential migrants and
their families. The project does not envisage any environmental impacts and the project
is does not trigger any environmental or social safeguard policies. The expected social
development outcomes are rather salutary and aimed at a number of positive social
impacts among potential migrants and their families living primarily in poor rural areas.
It will assist this group in assessing the costs and benefits of migration and navigating the
migration process safely.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No long term and indirect adverse environmental and social impacts are anticipated due
to project activities.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
    Date of "in-country" disclosure
    Date of submission to InfoShop
  * If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
  the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
  Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
  If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
  explain why:



  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
  ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       N/A
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Jessica Leigh Leino                       05/13/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi                     05/13/2013
Social Development Specialist       Ms Sabah Moyeen                              05/13/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Zia Al Jalaly                             05/16/2013
  Comments: cleared. Please follow disclosure procedures
Sector Manager:                     Mr Pablo Gottret                             05/14/2013
  Comments: Approved.
