                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                    APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/16/2011                                            Report No.: AC5967

1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P098273                    Original Project Name: Local Governance
                                                Support Project (LGSP)
Country: Bangladesh                             Project ID: P124514
Project Name: Bangladesh Local Governance Support Project II
Task Team Leader: Balakrishna Menon Parameswaran
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 8, 2011        Estimated Board Date: October 10, 2011
Managing Unit: SASDU                            Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan
Sector: Sub-national government administration (100%)
Theme: Decentralization (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            292.18
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             (US$m.): 232.4

Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                            Simple []               Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP
                                                                           Yes [ ]       No [X]
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives

The project development objective (PDO) of the Second Local Governance Support Project (LGSP II) is
to strengthen accountable local governments that can provide services which meet community priorities,
supported by an efficient and transparent intergovernmental fiscal system. The beneficiaries of the project
will be 4500 Union Parishads (UP) in Bangladesh and the population of 142 million served by them.
Other beneficiaries are nodal agencies responsible for making policy, regulating, monitoring and building
capacity of the local government system in Bangladesh. These agencies include the Local Government
Division (LGD), the Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) office and the National Institute of Local
Government (NILG).
Achievement of the PDO will be measured in terms of the following key indicators:

(i) Number of project beneficiaries of which are women
(ii) Increase in average performance score of UPs
(iii) Share of citizens that agree that UPs are meeting local priorities
(iv) Number of Basic Block Grant (BBG) tranches released by LGD on a timely basis.
      • .

3. Project Description

Component 1: Union Parishad Grants (US$491.96 million): This component will continue the
incremental trajectory of intergovernmental fiscal reforms which commenced with the first LGSP. It will
scale up and reform the basic block grants (BBGs), known as EBGs under the first LGSP, and introduce
performance based grants (PBGs). The fiscal transfers under LGSP II will increasingly enable UPs to
execute their assigned expenditure mandate as per the 2009 UP Act. They will also aim at incentivizing
own revenue mobilization, strengthening local planning and public financial management practices, and
emphasizing broader service delivery and better O&M of assets. Component 1 will comprise two sub-
components, namely:

(a) Basic Block Grants (BBGs - US$436.76 million ). The LGSP II will continue to increase the average
BBG allocation by about 10 percent per annum from Tk. 1.1 million in 2011 to about Tk. 1.61 million in
2016. The allocation to individual UPs will be determined according to a two step process. First, every
UP would automatically get a minimum flat amount, which will be equal shares of about 25 percent of the
total BBG funding pool. Second, the UPs that comply with a set of minimum conditions (MCs) would get
an allocation based on a transparent formula that takes into account population and area. The MCs would
include audit clearance, evidence of participatory planning and open budgeting, and timely submission of
biannual progress reports. As a key element of vertical revenue sharing, the transfers would be funded by
jointly by GOB and IDA, with the Government`s contribution going up from 50% under LGSP to 60% of
the total BBG funding pool by the end of LGSP II. Over the project life IDA and GOB allocations will
average out at 45% and 55% respectively. UPs would be informed of their indicative 3-year BBG
allocations in advanceand notified of their actual allocations before end-May of each year, thus bringing
greater predictability in resource allocations and aiding systematic local expenditure planning. UPs that
receive the BBGs will be able to increasingly focus on routine service delivery together with small
community schemes. With capacity support from Local Government Engineering Department (LGED),
wards would be encouraged to combine resources to undertake larger and more sustainable investments.
In addition, greater emphasis will be placed on O&M of infrastructure assets.

 (b) Performance Based Grants (PBGs) (US$ 55.2 million ). The project will introduce performance
based grants to reward UPs that demonstrate improvements in planning, budgeting, expenditure
management, revenue management, reporting and monitoring. In the first year of the project, UP officials
will be oriented on PBGs to help them get acquainted with the norms and enable a level playing field to
improve performance. In the same period relevant data to allow for establishment of appropriate
performance assessment (PA) baselines will be collected. PBGs will be introduced across the country in
the second year of the project. An annual performance assessment process will be carried to determine the
actual PA allocations for those UPs that have achieved a high performance score over a set of indicators .
The actual PA allocations will be derived based on formula that takes into account population differences
of each UP. The top 75 percent of UPs will receive PBGs on graded scale. Those UPs that do not qualify
within a particular fiscal year will continue to access capacity support to help improve their chances of
qualifying for the PBG in the subsequent years.

Component 2: - Information Flows and Accountability (US$12.4 million) This component of the project
will aim to strengthen systems of downward and upward accountability as well as improve transparency
through better information flows.

Strengthening accountability: The principal accountability mechanisms that the project will strengthen
are UP audits, the UP reporting system and transparency/disclosure. Current UP audits, especially the
assurance audits which cover about one-fourth of UPs each year, will now be upgraded into financial and
performance audits (including safeguard compliance), which will form the basis for the list of UPs
eligible for BBGs and PBGs. As in LGSP I, UPs will need a “clean? audit result in order to qualify for
full BBG allocations and PBGs.

During the first phase of the project, UPs will be audited annually by CA firms, contracted upfront for up
to three years by LGD. The audit reports will be subject to an independent review by independent CA
firms. Further quality assurance of the audit process will be undertaken by the C&AG’s office through
sample field audits and audit reviews. The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Bangladesh (ICAB),
which has been a partner in the ongoing LGSP, will continue to monitor the performance of the audit
firms and ensure that professional standards are maintained by its members. During the first phase, a
number of CA firms that meet prescribed norms and demonstrate high professional standards would be
accredited to be part of a national roster of local government auditors. In the second phase of the project,
starting from year 4, UPs will themselves contract and pay for their auditors, from the roster of accredited
CA firms. To do so, UPs in the same district will be expected to cluster together, procuring a single CA
firm to audit all the UPs in a given district. Oversight and quality assurance mechanisms will be similar to
those in the first phase.

UPs will be expected to provide six-monthly financial and narrative reports, to be submitted to their
respective Deputy Director Local Government (DDLG) and copied to Upazila Nirbahi Officer (UNO). A
simple and standardised UP reporting format will be used and will require UPs to provide information on
their activities, revenues and expenditures. DDLGs will enter information from UP reports into the
project’s web-based MIS. When necessary, DDLGs, assisted by District Facilitator Team (DFT) will
follow up on UP reports. Timely reporting on the part of UPs will be a trigger for grant disbursements by
the project.

In order to improve transparency, LGSP II will ensure that information related to UPs is made publicly
available; this will include announcing the results of annual UP audits/performance assessments and UP
grant allocations in national and local newspapers. Other methods for providing such information to
citizens will be used. In addition, UPs will be expected to publicly disclose their annual audit reports,
procurement activities, and annual financial statements. In accordance with the provisions of the Right to
Information Act (2009), UPs will also be expected to provide citizens in their jurisdictions with access to
six-monthly reports, procurement documents, and other information about UP activities. Compliance with
these disclosure requirements will be factored into the project’s performance assessment process

Finally, and in order to enhance public participation in UP activities, the project will encourage UPs to
“activate? their Standing Committees and to ensure that their Ward Shabhas are fully operational. The
functionality of UP Standing Committees and Ward Shabhas will be factored into UP performance
assessments. Social audits of UPs will be undertaken with support from other projects or programs.

Improved information flows and management: In order to improve information flows and management,
LGSP II will implement a comprehensive monitoring, evaluation and supervision strategy at both the
local (Upazila/District) and national levels. This strategy will enable LGSP II to ensure that decision-
making (e.g. grant allocations, triggering disbursements), lesson learning, and project-related monitoring
& evaluation (linked to expected results and objectives) are informed by regular flows of information. At
the district level, DDLGs (assisted by DFTs) will receive six-monthly UP reports, enter information from
them into the project’s web-based MIS, and undertake regular monitoring and supervision visits to UPs.
UP reports will provide DDLGs/DFTs with a basis upon which to follow up on activities at the UP level,
as well as for orienting capacity and institutional development activities. At the national level, the
project’s MIS (managed by the MIE Wing of LGD) will use information and data flowing in from the
districts, as well as from other key sources (UP audits, fund flow patterns, baseline surveys, etc.). On the
basis of the MIS, LGD will be able to make key decisions (about grant allocations and disbursements to
UPs, UP performance assessments), track project performance (as measured against results-based
indicators), and ensure that lessons are learned from implementation. Regular monitoring will be
complemented by updates (at mid-term and end-of-project) of the baseline survey. A Mid-Term Review
(MTR) will take place at the end of year 3 of the project. The MTR will assess project progress and make
operational recommendations for the remaining three years of the project. Finally, the project will be
subject to a final evaluation towards the end of year 5.
Component 3: Institutional Development (US$26.83 million) This Component will aim to strengthen the
institutional capacity of UPs to deliver public goods and services in efficient, effective and accountable
ways. In order to achieve this, LGSP II will start by developing an updated, simple, and user-friendly UP
Operational Manual (UP/OM) – which will provide UPs with a set of procedures to follow for purposes
of planning, budgeting, procurement, reporting, and financial management. The UP/OM will be the basis
for all UP activities and will be the main procedural instrument underlying training activities. LGSP II’s
overall approach to capacity development will encompass environmental, organizational and individual
dimensions, and rely upon a variety of capacity building instruments (policy/regulations, training,
mentoring and out-sourcing).

The project will support the roll-out of a core, supply-driven training program. This will consist of the
following elements: (i) the establishment of a group of master trainers (recruited from NILG, RDA,
BARD and other organisations); (ii) in each Upazila, an Upazila Resource Team (URT), made up of both
local officials and private sector members, to be trained by the master trainers, and responsible to then
provide UPs with training; (iii) a core curriculum, based on nationally agreed curricula and the UP/OM.
Training will be provided to UP members and staff on a regular basis. UPs will also be able to use part of
their block grants to finance demand-driven capacity building activities, subject to guidelines. These will
include: (i) training courses, which UPs will be able to obtain from NGOs accredited by NILG; (ii) peer
and horizontal learning events, which will be organised through the Horizontal Learning Center; and (iii)
hiring in technical assistance (accountants, engineers) or out-sourcing functions (e.g. revenue collection).

In addition to the above, UPs will also benefit from regular backstopping, mentoring and on-the-job
support from DDLGs and District Facilitation Teams (DFTs – managed by a private sector human
resource firm). DDLGs and DFTs will help UPs develop institutional development plans, facilitate peer
learning and networking, and facilitate linkages with similar-minded programs. Finally, and depending on
the success of a parallel pilot (to be financed out of the NLTA facility), LGSP II will establish a Help
Line for UPs. This would be managed by a private sector firm and would consist of a number of dedicated
call centers, which will respond to specific queries from all UPs and other stakeholders concerning
regulatory issues (UP Act and other regulations). Finally, at the national level, LGSP II will provide LGD
with support to strengthen its policy functions – through research, workshops, and other activities.

 Component 4: Project Management ($2.67 million). To facilitate project implementation, IDA funding
will include a budget to cover core technical assistance and support, equipment purchases and incremental
operating costs. Component resources would be used to provide technical and financial support in the
following fields: (i) financial management, (ii) procurement, (iii) safeguards, (iv) program management,
etc. All such costs will be incurred at the central level, within LGD. The Government will also make a
contribution to this, through the deputation of key staff on a full-time basis.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to safeguard analysis

The ongoing LGSP has provided direct fiscal and technical resources to over 97% of the 4498 Union
Parishads (UPs) in the country, including those in the Chittagong Hill Tracts that are heavily populated by
indigenous peoples. It is envisaged that LGSP II will, similarly, cover all eligible UPs across the country.
The UPs used the LGSP funds, which were relatively small, largely for rehabilitation/construction of
small-scale community infrastructure, including rural roads, culverts and irrigation and drainage systems.
With the restrictions placed on environmental category-A schemes/subprojects, as well as private land
acquisition and involuntary displacement from public lands, these schemes did not have major negative
social or environmental impacts. On the other hand, mid-term safeguard assessment findings suggests that
under the ongoing LGSP, UPs and communities rehabilitated/built infrastructures, especially culverts,
drainage systems that reduced environmental degradation/local pollution created by other development
projects. Under LGSP II, similar small-scale community infrastructures will be rehabilitated or built
anew. Given that the restrictions on schemes which could cause significant negative impacts will remain,
LGSP II is not expected to have irreversible or long-term environmental and social impacts.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Nilufar Ahmad (SDV)
   Shahpar Selim (consultant, SASDI)
   Teen Kari Barua (consultant, SASDS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                  Yes No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)             X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                        X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                 X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                            X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)             X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                   X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                          X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)     X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)              X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
The safeguard issues may relate to using public and private lands for the individual schemes and their
environmental impacts. Consistent with the OP/BP 4.01, OP/BP 4.10 and OP/BP 4.12, the ongoing LGSP
adopted an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) with instruments for
environmental and social screening, and to identify and mitigate with any adverse impacts as and when
they arise under the selected schemes. The UPs have been using this framework for selection and
implementation of schemes that reflect community preferences and priorities. Among other provisions,
the ESMF includes a list of schemes with significant negative environmental and social attributes, which
the UPs cannot deal with their present capacity and resources, and are thus not eligible for LGSP funding.
Among other restrictions, the UPs cannot acquire private lands and displace people, especially the
socioeconomically vulnerable, from public lands without alternative arrangements acceptable to the
displaced. Although the basic premises remain similar to those of LGSP, the ESMF for LGSP II has been
updated with the lessons learned from the ongoing project. A field assessment of the existing ESMF
implementation was undertaken during the mid-term review of LGSP, which suggested some revisions of
screening and other formats for the UP Operational Manual (UPOM) and the LGSP II Training Modules.

As to the ongoing project, the UPs used the LGSP funds mostly for rehabilitation of small scale
community infrastructures, which did not have negative social or environmental impacts. The assessment
revealed that LGSP funds were most often used to repair/resurface segments of the existing rural roads,
develop or rehabilitate drainage systems that reduced environmental/toxic pollution caused by other
projects. Under LGSP-II, scheme works are most likely to remain limited to rehabilitation of existing
small scale community infrastructures. Therefore, the project will not have irreversible or long-term
environmental impacts. In rehabilitation of rural infrastructure, sometimes, trees and/or branches need to
be cut. This will be dealt with carefully and remediation through new tree plantation will be undertaken.
Given the restriction on land acquisition, new infrastructures will be built on public lands, including UPs’
own lands that are free of encumbrances.
Consultation Strategy: The LGSP-II will be implemented by the UPs and communities in a participatory
process. Each Ward Shabha will discuss needs of the communities in open meetings, establish Ward
Committees (WC) and prioritize schemes. Later, open budget meetings will be organized by UP for
finalization of schemes and budget. Each WC will fill up the scheme screening format in open meetings,
so as to identify potential social and environmental concerns and mitigating measures. During scheme
implementation, Scheme Supervision Committee (SSC) will continue to monitor the program in a
consultative manner. LGD will also organize regular performance review meeting with communities and
disseminate information. LGD is drafting a Local Governance Communication Strategy for enhancing
citizen participation in program development, implementation and monitoring.

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

None

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:

None

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.

Not applicable

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

As noted, the ESMF being used for the ongoing LGSP has been updated for LGSP II, with
inputs/feedbacks received from the ESMF implementation assessment at mid-term and consultations with
the UP functionaries, beneficiary communities and government officials from upazila, district and LGD.
ESMF contains (a) a Negative List, indicating certain types of schemes that are likely to cause significant
negative environmental and social impacts that the UPs cannot mitigate with their present technical
capacity and resources, and hence cannot be funded by LGSP-II; (b) Guidelines for Environmental
Management that provide principles, policies and codes of practice for the mitigation of potential
environmental impacts; (c) Guidelines for Land Use: Barring private land acquisition, these guidelines are
meant for use of public and private lands and adverse impact mitigation, impact assessment procedure,
and implementation and monitoring arrangements; and (d) Guidelines for Indigenous Peoples Plan,
which provide principles and procedure to identify and deal with adverse impacts on indigenous peoples,
as well as a consultation framework for adoption of mitigation and development measures, where
schemes might adversely affect IPs. The ESMF has also adopted a Grievance Redress Mechanism to
address grievances and complaints not only about implementation of the ESMF provisions, but also about
other issues (like procurement, financial management, etc) relating to overall scheme implementation.
The implementing agency, the LGD of the Ministry of Local Government Rural Development &
Cooperatives, along with its allied agencies like the Local Government Engineering Department, has been
implementing large scale infrastructure programs financed by the World Bank and other development
partners, and has the knowledge and capacity to implement the ESMF guidelines on environmental and
social safeguards under LGSP II. The UPs who received LGSP funds were trained on existing UPOM,
which also included the ESMF guidelines. The UPOM/ESMF training modules have been enhanced by
adding revised screening instruments and clarifications, which will help strengthen UP training on
environmental and social safeguards under LGSP II. Furthermore, LGD is drafting a series of Pictorial
Handbook on the Good and the Bad of Community Infrastructure, which will be used in UP training and
circulated widely, so that UPs and communities are able to develop environmentally and socially
sustainable schemes.

One of the key agencies for LGSP II is the NILG, which developed standard UP Training Modules and
coordinated UP training. The capacity of NILG will be strengthened so that it can develop and implement
safeguard training modules in keeping with ESMF provisions. Under LGSP II, capacity building and
monitoring will be further decentralized, a decentralized monitoring matrix has been established under the
ESMF As part of this, Schemes Supervision Committees (SSC) at UP and ward levels will trained in
safeguards and will review all the screening, implementation and completion forms, and suggested
remedial actions to Ward Committees (WC), if necessary. The office of the DDLG at the district level
will be strengthened by providing District Facilitator Teams (DFT). These DFTs will be trained in
environmental and social safeguards and will provide training and monitoring support to the UPs. The
DDLG, with support from DFTs will review 10% of screening and implementation forms on a six-
monthly basis, and communicate remedial actions to UPs if necessary. LGD will also appoint a safeguard
consultant in the technical team for monitoring support. She/he will undertake an Annual Review of all
Limited Environmental Assessments, and of 10% random sample of Screening, Implementation and
Completion Reports, and will undertake field visits to see whether these were done according to the
ESMF guidelines. The LGD will contract several Chartered Accounting firms to conduct Annual
Performance Audits that will include 100% financial management, procurement and safeguard
compliance, with field visits. The C&AG office will also conduct 10% spot checks of audits. At project
Mid Term and Project Completion, independent Third Party Safeguards reviews will also be done.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

The key stakeholders are the residents of the unions receiving the LGSP II funds; the persons who might
contribute lands for the selected scheme and those who might be displaced from public lands; the elected
UP functionaries and Secretary; the members of the URT; and officials from the NILG and the LGD.
Other important stakeholders are the chartered accounting firms who will conduct the performance audit
of the UPs, including the ESMF implementation. While conducting the performance audit, these
accounting firms will discuss with communities, UPs, Ward Committees (WCs) and Scheme Supervision
Committees (SSCs), and visit schemes.

For preparation of the LGSP-II, LGD conducted regional consultations with various stakeholders,
including UP functionaries, local communities, government officials from upazilas, districts, and relevant
central ministries. Most of all, it is mandatory for the WCs to extensively consult the communities in open
meetings while selecting and prioritizing the infrastructure schemes. Under LGSP-II, partnership with
civil society organizations (CSO) will be strengthened, social accountability measures and various
communication activities will be expanded for enhancing transparency of UPs and deeper engagement
between UPs and the union residents.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: ESMF with environmental and social
guidelines screening, mitigation, monitoring and GRM was prepared and disclosed1.
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                            Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                            07/28/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        08/14/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                         08/16/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of
  the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: Not applicable

  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: ESMF was prepared and disclosed
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                             Yes,
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                             07/28/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                         08/14/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                          08/16/2011
Pest Management Plan: Not applicable
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized
by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                   Yes,
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language           Yes,
that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the    Yes,
implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                   Yes,
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard         Yes,
impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same             Yes,
been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?


1
 An ESMF was prepared by Bangladesh Government and cleared by SAR RSA. The ESMF includes Guidelines for
environmental and social screening, mitigation, monitoring and GRM. Specific EMP or IPDP were not prepared as
sub-project specific locations are not known.
D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name              Date
Task Team Leader:                   Balakrishna Menon Parameswaran   08/02/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Shahpar Selim                    08/02/2011
Social Development Specialist       Nilufar Ahmad                    08/02/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Teen Kari Barua                  08/02/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Sanjay Srivastava                08/09/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ming Zhang                       08/02/2011
  Comments:
