                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/22/2011                                    Report No.: AC5743
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Bangladesh                          Project ID: P114841
Project Name: Northern Areas Reduction-of-Poverty Initiative Project -- Women’s
Economic Empowerment Project
Task Team Leader: Bhuvan Bhatnagar
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 30, 2011      Estimated Board Date: September 12, 2011
Managing Unit: SASDS                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Other industry (50%);Other social services (50%)
Theme: Other social development (67%);Improving labor markets (33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             29.29
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             7.00
         Miscellaneous 1                                                3.50
                                                                      10.50
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The northern areas of Bangladesh are lagging particularly far behind the rest of the
country. The extreme poverty rate is 43 percent in this region, compared to a national rate
of 25 percent (GOB 2008b). On the other hand, garment sector which is a major engine
for economic growth of Bangladesh, needs a large number of skilled workers. The
development objective of the project is to facilitate access to employment opportunities in
the garment sector for poor and vulnerable women from lagging areas by providing
information, technical and life skills training, transitional housing, and other support to
adjust to urban life and formal sector employment.

3. Project Description
The project consists of four main components as described below:

 Component 1: Raising awareness and selecting candidates in the monga-prone districts
of northern Bangladesh (estimated cost: US$0.92 million; IDA financing US$0.92
million). This component aims to share information about the project with the people of
the five monga-prone districts of northern Bangladesh-namely, Gaibandha, Kurigram,
Lalmonirhat, Nilphamari, and Rangpur-and select beneficiaries from among these
populations. Component 1 is made up of four sub-components, in sequence: (1A) an IEC
campaign in the five districts; (IB) targeting of intended populations and screening of
applicants; (1C) an orientation program for the candidates and selection of project
beneficiaries; and (ID) transportation of the beneficiaries from the source areas (the
monga-prone districts of northern Bangladesh) to the receiving areas (the EPZs in Dhaka,
Ishwardi, and Karnaphuli).

 Component 2: Establishing training centers with dormitories in the EPZs located in
Dhaka, Ishwardi, and Karnaphuli (estimated cost: US$32.53 million; IDA financing
US$23.64 million, BEPZA contributing US$6.7 million in land and some supporting
infrastructure, and employers and beneficiaries contributing US$2.19 million). This
component will support the establishment of the project’s training centers and transitional
accommodation facilities. Component 2 includes two sub-components: (2A) the
construction of the facilities on the three project sites and (2B) the provision of furniture,
equipment, and management services for the facilities.

  Component 3: Providing initial training and on-going support to beneficiaries (estimated
cost: US$2.04 million; IDA financing US$0.73 million and employers contributions
US$1.31 million). This component will finance initial training and ongoing support to
project beneficiaries in their transition to formal employment in the garment factories and
life in the areas surrounding the EPZs. Component 3 will include four sub-components:
(3A) the delivery of a technical training curriculum for garments industry work; (3B) the
delivery of a life skills curriculum to adapt to the factory and the city; (3C) placement
services fo0r on-the-job training and employment in EPZ garment factories; and (3D)
self-help and counceling services for trainees and graduates. Training and support will
start after the first year of project implementation once the facilities are operational.

 Component 4: Supporting coordination, M&E , and program for expansion (estimated
cost: US$4.30 million; IDA financing US$4.00 million, MOLE financing US$0.1 million
in kind, BEPZA financing US$0.2 million in kind). Component 4 aims to support
implementation of project activities. As a pilot, this project requires special care and
supervision. To this end, this component has three specific sub-components: (i) the
management and coordination of the project; (ii) the M&E of the project; and (iii) the
preparation of an expansion program.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will initially intervene in three known areas, i.e. within and around the
existing Export Processing Zones of Dhaka, Karnaphuli (in Chittagong) and Iswardi.
BEPZA owns the land at the three sites, adjacent to the EPZs. These sites are located
within built-in environment and do not have significant environmental resources that will
require special attention. Two of the sites are flat barren land. Site proposed in
Karnaphuli is a low-lying area previously used for agriculture, which will require
reclamation.
 No land acquisition or resettlement will be required in these sites and thus the World
Bank policy of avoiding involuntary resettlement insofar as possible of is met. However,
during the expansion phase of the project, the need for land and the possibility for
resettlement cannot be excluded. Therefore, the client prepared a Resettlement Policy
Framework that will be applied in case land acquisition and/or resettlement becomes
necessary for the project in later phases.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Sabah Moyeen (SASDS)
   Ms Darshani De Silva (SASDI)
   Ms Nadia Sharmin (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
It is anticipated that the construction of training centers and dormitories in the EPZs
located in Dhaka, Ishwardi, and Karnaphuli has the potential for adverse environmental
impacts-albeit minimal-due to siting, construction and operation. Each EPZ will include a
two-story training center with sufficient sewing machines to train 300 women and four-
story dormitories to house 600 women. The main social and environmental issues relate
to their construction and the traffic associated with their construction. These include air
and water quality, waste disposal, the impact of traffic, and the health and safety of
construction workers and local residents. Construction and traffic will cause noise, dust,
pollution and congestion impacts which will need mitigation. The proposed sites will
neither consume nor alter significant land and water resources or affect any historical and
cultural sites. They will not generate other significant demands on natural resources in the
immediate or surrounding area. All construction materials will be supplied by existing
sources and are expected to have no significant additional impacts.

 No land acquisition or involuntary resettlement will be triggered in the initial phase of
the project, as all three project sites where the training and dormitory facilities will be
built belong to BEPZA, are well demarcated and free from all
encumbrances/encroachments. There are no indigenous populations present at the project
sites.

 The project was reviewed during preparation and designated as environmental Category
B which is appropriate and consistent with the provisions of OP/BP 4.01. The following
account presents some site specific safeguards issues and impacts associated with the
project:

 Dhaka EPZ. The selected 5 acre site is flat, level barren land. There are no bodies of
water near the site. The water table is 1.5-2 meters deep and good quality potable ground
water is available at a depth of 200-300 feet. Due to heavy build-up west and south of the
site, the area is faced with severe drainage congestion. Since the unpaved 1.5 kilometer
(km) access road is prone to inundation during monsoon rains, drainage facilities need to
be improved.

 The site has a power line running across it. BEPZA has given assurance that they have
an agreement with the Rural Electrification Board and will not face any issues in shifting
the line outside the site. The access road leading to the site is 5.5 meters wide. It is of
sufficient width to allow for one-way traffic of trucks carrying construction material. The
SIA has been prepared and shows that road widening will not be required. Some traffic
control may be necessary to ease congestion and for the enforcement of safety measures
during the construction phase.

  Given that the narrow access road to the site already has heavy traffic, construction
vehicles will exacerbate congestion, noise, dust and so on. The road has many shops
lining it and is in a heavily inhabited area. Therefore construction vehicle traffic should
be limited to nighttime to minimize disruptions. Paving the road may lead to temporary
impacts on these businesses, so these should be minimized. Measures should be taken to
ensure the noise levels are maintained within standard levels applicable for such an area.

 Atomic Energy Research Establishment: In addition, approximately 1 km from the
proposed dormitory site in Dhaka is the Atomic Energy Research Establishment (AERE).
This is a research facility of the Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission (BAEC)
situated at Ganakbari, Savar. The AERE’s main function is to undertake scientific
research and development for peaceful application of nuclear energy in various fields of
physical, biological and engineering sciences. The AERE comprises of ten individual
research institutes/units, including the Institute of Nuclear Science and Technology; the
Institute of Food and Radiation Biology; the Institute of Electronics; the Institute of
Computer Science; the Reactor Operations and Maintenance Unit; the Nuclear Minerals
Unit; the Tissue Banking and Bio material Research Unit; the Energy Institute; the
Central Engineering facilities; and the Scientific Information Unit. The AERE campus
also includes community resources, such as a residential colony, cafeteria, school,
mosque, club, clinic, guest house, etc.

 Given its proximity to the proposed NARI dormitory site, and the potential risk of an
accident due to the activities of the AERE, the Bank asked the local consulting firm
which conducted the EA and the SIA to undertake a rapid assessment of the AERE and
submit a report focusing on safety aspects surrounding the AERE and the vicinity. The
field work, which included consultations with officials of the AERE and local
stakeholders residing in the area close to the AERE, took place on 13 February, 2011.
The consultations indicated that the activities in the AERE are research and training
oriented; managed well; and have non significant hazardous activities with extremely low
potential for environmental accidents.

  The AERE campus has the presence of the Training Research Isotope Production
General Atomics (TRIGA) Research Reactor, which was installed in 1980 and
commissioned in 1986. Although, the reactor is used solely for research and uses low
enriched uranium as fuel, the extent of health impacts due to a potentially rare nuclear
reactor explosion cannot be determined beforehand. It may be mentioned that the
Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission (BAEC) has a number of agreements with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) like (i) Additional Protocol to Safeguards
Agreement (30 March, 2001), (ii) Improved Procedures of Designation of Safeguards
Inspectors (25 April, 1995), (iii) Regional Cooperative Agreement (24 August, 1987),
(iv) Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty related Safeguards Agreement (11 June, 1982) and
(v) Supplementary Agreement of Provision of Technical Assistance by the IAEA (31
December, 1979). In compliance with these agreements, due diligence and monitoring is
carried out thoroughly and regularly by a team of professionals. Pre-and post operational
monitoring of air, water, soil, grass and food samples from within the campus and the
surrounding areas; radiation monitoring services for the area and personnel; and routine
radiation surveys in and around the nuclear facilities are carried out.

 Consultations with local stakeholders indicated no accidents or environmental impacts
due to the facility to date. Based on the due diligence of available information, site visit
and consultations with local people, the Bank team determined that the probability of
accidents related to the activities of the AERE is extremely low and, therefore, the
environment risks due to the presence of the AERE are assessed to be also extremely low.

 Karnaphuli EPZ. The land will require 5-7 feet of landfill. There are no bodies of water
near the site. The water table is about 7 feet deep and the ground water is contaminated
with iron.

 Part of the proposed 5 acre site is used for agriculture purposes. The site was leased to
one farmer for small patches of vegetables. The lease is a written agreement which
expired on June 30, 2010. BEPZA will provide appropriate documentation to confirm
this. The SIA documents consultation with the farmer and shows that he is fully aware of
the terms and conditions of the lease.

  The site does not have a proper access road. There will likely be traffic congestion due
to construction vehicles as the road is only 3.5-4 meters wide. However the SIA shows
that this will be sufficient for one-way truck traffic carrying construction material. There
is a large drain on one side of the road that can be covered with concrete slabs to increase
the width of the road without causing any major disruptions. Presently the road ends at a
walled-up dead end. The wall will be pulled down and an extension built up to the
dormitory and training facility site. The entire extension work will take place on BEPZA
owned land which is vacant. No private land acquisition will be required for this purpose.
Construction traffic should be minimized during the day and should avoid times when
factory shifts change. Because the site is located adjacent to private property,
construction activities should be restricted to daytime operations to maintain reasonable
noise levels.

 Ishwardi EPZ. The site is about 5 acres of flat land without any existing vegetation.
There is a one acre pond about 15 meters outside the boundary of the site. EPZ
employees practice aquaculture in the pond. The SIA shows that this activity will not be
affected by construction at the site.

  An access road will be required. There is an existing road belonging to the Local
Government Engineering Department (LGED) which will need to be upgraded and
connected to the site via the construction of a box culvert. An earthen drainage canal runs
parallel to the LGED road and boundary wall of the site. This proposed box culvert will
connect the site with the LGED road and will provide entry access for the site. The road
is sufficiently wide, so it can be upgraded. No private land acquisition will be required
for this purpose.

 There is very little traffic on the road at present and the nearest residential area is not
close enough to the site for noise to be an issue. While dust and noise from traffic needs
to be minimized (e.g., by watering the road until it is paved), no special traffic measures
(e.g., restricted hours, traffic management) will be needed as for the urban sites at the
Dhaka and Karnaphuli EPZs.

 The ESIA consultants have prepared a RPF to address and mitigate adverse impacts
caused by land acquisition and/or displacement of people should these occur during the
expansion phase of the project.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The project impacts in the long term are all expected to be positive. For example, growth
of new businesses (tailoring shops, grocery stores, road-side restaurants etc.) in the
vicinity of the training and dormitory facilities is a probability. Increased security
introduced via the project facilities will have positive spill-over effects. Transport may be
eased due to improvements in the condition of access roads. In the short term, traffic
congestion and management will be an issue. Some temporary impacts may occur due to
upgrading access roads. These impacts have been fully identified and discussed in the
ESIA. Mitigation measures for these have been proposed in the Environmental and Social
Management Plans (EMP and SMP) which are included in the EA and SIA reports
respectively. There will not be any long-term or indirect environmental impacts due to
project interventions.
 Land Acquisition and involuntary resettlement may be triggered in the expansion phase
of the project. The ESIA consultants have prepare an RPF upfront for this purpose. The
RPF lays out the key principles of the national Acquisition and Requisition of Immovable
Property Ordinance 1982, World Bank OP 4.12, and a strategy to fulfill the policy’s
requirements that are mutually agreed upon. Site-specific SIAs and Resettlement Action
Plans (RAP), if and when required, will be prepared when the specific project sites can be
identified. The RPF provides guidelines on how to mitigate adverse impacts of land
acquisition and/or displacement. The RPF contains, inter alia: the project background and
a description of project components; applicable laws, policies and procedures for land
acquisition; procedures for the identification and mitigation of impacts; an entitlement
matrix; institutional mechanisms for the implementation of the RAP (e.g., establishment
of grievance committees, monitoring and evaluation); an estimated budget and disclosure
procedures for the RPF and the RAP.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
For the initial phase of the project, the project sites at all three locations where the
training and dormitory facilities will be built belong to BEPZA and are free of all
encumbrances and encroachments. No land acquisition and/or resettlement will be
required for carrying out the proposed infrastructure developments at these sites. The
sites are strategically placed to be accessible to the EPZ easily and quickly. According to
BEPZA’s assessments, these provide the most economical and socially feasible option for
the project. The area surrounding Dhaka and Karnaphuli EPZs are highly congested
without significant environmentally sensitive areas in the vicinity and alternative sites at
any of the three locations would necessitate land acquisition (at very high prices) and lead
to involuntary resettlement at high social costs.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The EA and SIA have been prepared by BEPZA and include an EMP and an SMP.
Additionally, in anticipation of expected land acquisition and resettlement issues being
triggered during the expansion phase of the project, an RPF has been prepared alongside
the EA and SIA.

 The RPF lays out the key principles of the national Acquisition and Requisition of
Immovable Property Ordinance 1982, World Bank OP 4.12, and a strategy to fulfill the
policy’s requirements that are mutually agreed upon. Site-specific SIAs and Resettlement
Action Plans (RAP), if and when required, will be prepared when the specific project
sites can be identified. The RPF provides guidelines on how to mitigate adverse impacts
of land acquisition and/or displacement. The RPF contains, inter alia: the project
background and a description of project components; applicable laws, policies and
procedures for land acquisition; procedures for the identification and mitigation of
impacts; an entitlement matrix; institutional mechanisms for the implementation of the
RAP (e.g., establishment of grievance committees, monitoring and evaluation); an
estimated budget and disclosure procedures for the RPF and the RAP.
 BEPZA, the project implementation agency, has participated in a number of capacity
building events organized by the Bank safeguards team in Dhaka that included seminars,
safeguards training sessions, and exposure visits to other countries on issues of land
acquisition and resettlement. BEPZA has worked with the World Bank over the past
several years in the context of the Enterprise Growth and Bank Modernization Project
(EGBMP) and the Private Sector Development Support Project (PSDSP) and has
successfully implemented environmental and social safeguards requirements of these
projects. The proposed project will continue capacity development support to BEPZA on
safeguard issues. BEPZA will be responsible for supervising the implementation of site-
specific EMPs by the contractors and monitoring environmental compliance. The project
coordinating agency, MOLE, will conduct overall M&E for the project, including on
safeguards issues.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The proposed project involves two government agencies. The Ministry of Labor and
Employment (MOLE), assigned by the Government as the Administrative Ministry, will
act as the Coordinating Agency of the project. BEPZA will act as the Implementing
Agency of the project.

 BEPZA will be responsible for the implementation of the following three substantive
components:

 Component 1: Raising awareness and selecting candidates in monga-prone districts in
northern Bangladesh;
 Component 2: Establishing training centers with dormitories in the EPZs located in
Dhaka, Ishwardi, and Karnaphuli; and,
 Component 3: Providing initial training and on-going support to beneficiaries. MOLE
will be responsible for the implementation of the integrated administrative component:
 Component 4: Supporting coordination, M&E and program for expansion.

  The reason why the proposed institutional arrangements include a coordinating agency
in addition to an implementing agency is that the managed system of transition to
employment developed in this pilot project is being undertaken with a view to replication
in the longer term with other, different implementing agencies. Therefore, there is a
strong argument for having an agency mandated to provide oversight and coordination
from the inception of the pilot, through to the expansion phase. Following completion of
the pilot, expansion could encompass partnerships with the trade associations of the
garment industry that are mostly active outside the EPZs (and where BEPZA would have
no role). BEPZA is the logical implementing agency in the pilot because most of the
project activities will be executed inside the EPZs.

 The purpose of the EA and the SIA, is to identify potential environmental and social
impacts based on consultation with communities which stand to be impacted by the
project via the construction activities proposed for the dormitories and training facilities,
associated upgrading of access roads, traffic congestion due to transport of construction
material etc. The general public and residents near the sites has been consulted,
particularly in reference to changes to the access roads, proposed drainage systems, and
potential short-term inconveniences during construction. The process of preparing the EA
and the SIA included communication and consultation with local communities, and
mitigation measures proposed in the EMP and the SMP incorporates the feedback derived
from the consultation process. The consultation strategy and process are documented in
detail in the EA and SIA reports.

  The RPF, which will be relevant for the expansion phase, also includes guidelines for
the consultation and communication strategies to be applied during the preparation of
site-specific SIAs and RAPs, when those sites are identified. The draft EA and SIA was
made available for public consultation by BEPZA with key portions translated in Bengali
and posted on BEPZA’s website and at places accessible to the public on January 16,
2011. Notices were be published in both English and Bengali newspapers announcing the
disclosure of the documents and the appropriate websites and localities where they can be
found on January 20, 2011. The final cleared version of the safeguards documents has
been made publicly available through the Bank’s Infoshop and in easily accessible places
including the project sites. The RPF was disclosed on the website of MOLE (which is
expected to remain as the coordinating agency in the expansion phase of the project) on
May 03, 2011. BEPZA will also disclose the RPF on their website (although there is no
land acquisition required in this phase, the RPF can provide guidance should the need
arise to make compensation for non-land related losses such as those concerning
livelihoods). The RPF may be advertised in newspapers during project implementation. If
site-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) are prepared during the expansion phase
of the project, these too will be disclosed publicly following the same process.

 BEPZA will be responsible for supervising the implementation of site-specific EMPs by
the contractors and monitoring environmental compliance. As the project coordinating
agency, MOLE will conduct overall M&E for the project, including on safeguards issues.
An environmental focal person from BEPZA will be assigned to ensure safeguard
compliances in civil works and project related all activities.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                 01/25/2011
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                             01/16/2011
 Date of submission to InfoShop                              01/27/2011
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name     Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Bhuvan Bhatnagar      01/26/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Darshani De Silva     01/26/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Sabah Moyeen          01/26/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms Nadia Sharmin         06/06/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Sanjay Srivastava     06/14/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Maria C. Correia      06/21/2011
  Comments: Cleared
