                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 01/25/2012                                    Report No.: AC6620
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P113202                 Original Project Name: Health System
                                             Performance
Country: Benin                               Project ID: P129024
Project Name: Benin - Health System Performance Project - Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Christophe Lemiere
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 13,        Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: AFTHE                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Health (100%)
Theme: Malaria (60%);Health system performance (20%);Child health (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             10
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The overall project supports the longer term objective of reducing maternal and neonatal
mortality and would, as a result, contribute to reach the MDG No. 5.

 The first PDO seeks to increase the coverage of quality maternal services. The PDO is
broken down in two intermediate outcomes: (i) improving the quality of maternal health
services for the whole population, and (ii) enhancing the utilization of these services by
the poorest. Although the project reinforces the health system as a whole and has an
impact on several MDGs, this PDO is - conservatively - limited to maternal care, as this
MDG would be most directly influenced by such a Health System Strengthening (HSS)
project.

 To reflect the present Additional Financing, the first PDO would be amended to take
into account the new activities and would read as follows: “The first PDO consists in
increasing the coverage of quality maternal and neonatal and child services in 8 targeted
districts. “ The remainder of the PDO would stay unchanged, as well as the second PDO.
 The second PDO is to strengthen the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Health.
This PDO is also composed of two intermediate outcomes: (i) improving the
geographical allocation of Government health funding and (ii) preparing for SWAp
implementation.

3. Project Description
The first component aims to (i) improve performance of health facilities through a
Result-Based Financing (RBF) mechanism, (ii) will strengthen capacities of the Ministry
of Health to facilitate and to monitor the implementation of this RBF mechanism, and
(iii) support the recruitment of specialist doctors in the target districts.

  The second component aims to increase financial accessibility of health care services,
by (i) strengthening the existing process for identifying the poorest and for exempting
them from health user fees, (ii) strengthening health services in 4 of the target districts,
(iii) funding free malaria care for pregnant women and under five children (iv) supporting
the development of a universal health care insurance system.

 The third component is to strengthen capacities of the Ministry of Health in planning,
budgeting, management and monitoring and evaluation.

 New activities to be added to support the FMCI would be under Component 1 and 2 of
the parent project:

 Component 1: Improvement of health facilities performance through Result-Based
Financing (additional USD 2.7 million)

 Reimbursement of non procurable costs associated with the four packages of the FMCI
in the eight health districts targeted by the HSSP. These non-procurable costs include
medical services and top-ups for health workers. Estimated costs are USD 2.7 million.
Disbursements for this activity follow an output-based disbursement mechanism: after
going through a verification process, the health facilities assigned to RBF and contracted
by the MoH will be reimbursed on the basis of number of (fee exempted) malaria
services they have provided. The AF will follow the same mechanism but with four
additional indicators added to the existing RBF design to ensure provision of services
related to FMCI.

 Component 2: Support to improved financial accessibility (additional USD 7.3 million)

 Procurement of the procurable items (i.e. goods) included in the four packages of the
FMCI in the eight health districts targeted by the HSSP, including Artemisinin
Combination Therapy (ACT), Rapid Diagnostic Tests (RDTs) and treatment kits. Overall
cost is estimated at USD 6.3 million. Procurement procedures will be launched well in
advance and will be organized in such way so as to allow for ACT treatment to take place
in parallel to the rolling out of RDTs, in order to reduce misuse of ACTs for fever not
attributable to malaria, as well as to avoid inefficiencies and high costs. Required
quantities have been reflected in the procurement plan.


 Communication, information and training activities (USD 1 million) as described in the
strategic FMCI document including community mobilization about the Free Malaria
Care, media communication to communities, information and communication to local
authorities, health district teams and health workers, training for health workers on the
diagnostic and treatment of malaria cases.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Benin ( urban and rural)

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Additional Financing like the parent project is classified as B indicating that
environmental and social impacts will not be adverse; as they are likely to be small-scale,
site-specific and thus manageable at an acceptable level. With this Additional Financing,
no new safeguards policies are triggered. As with the parent Project, the provision of
malaria care services might entail an increased production of medical waste, especially in
relation to planned procurement of goods such as ACTs, RDTs and lab reagents. This
project is not expected to generate any major adverse environmental impacts. Possible
environmental risks include the inappropriate handling and disposal of hazardous medical
waste, including sharp needles, and especially the inadequate management of disposal
sites in urban or peri-urban areas, where domestic and medical waste may be mixed and
where scavenging is common. The types of activities in the Additional Financing are
covered by the Medical Waste Management Plan of the parent project prepared and
disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop respectively on December 17, 2009 and January
4, 2010

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be small-scale, site-specific
and thus easily mitigated. There are no indirect or long term adverse impacts expected
during project implementation. Clear cut procedures and mitigation measures are well
specified in the parent MWMP which is also applicable to this Additional Financing

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Safeguards implementation of the parent project is satisfactory. The institution
responsible for implementing the MWMP is the Department of Hygiene and Basic
Sanitation of the Ministry of Health known by its French acronym DHAB. They have
ensured that there has been increased training to health care providers and health care
personel agents on medical waste management procedures and practices. Further, some
MWMP equipment such as waste bins, handgloves and needle cutters have been
purchased and are in the process of being distributed to the regional and local health
centers. Under the Additional Financing this institutional arrangement for implementing
the MWMP will be maintained.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Key stakeholders are the Ministry of Health, DHAB, municipalities and communes.
 The project will continue the dialogue with key stakeholders and the project will rely on
the rigorous implementation of MWMP to ensure that the appropriate mitigation
measures are taken into account in accordance with the Benin and the Bank's safeguards
policies in active consultation with key stakeholders. This participatory approach will be
carried on throughout implementation, maintenance, supervision and evaluation of the
project activities with the support DHAB which is saddled with the responsibility of
implementing the MWMP.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/24/2009
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/17/2009
 Date of submission to InfoShop                              01/04/2010
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          No
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          No
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Christophe Lemiere                       01/19/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba                   01/22/2012
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                    01/25/2012
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Jean J. De St Antoine                    01/25/2012
  Comments:
