                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC6267


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/16/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Benin                              Project ID: P117764
Project Name: Decentralized Community Driven Services Project
Task Team Leader: John Van Dyck
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 5,       Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: AFTSP                        Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                            Loan
Sector: Sub-national government administration (30%);Other social services
(30%);Primary education (30%);Health (5%);Water supply (5%)
Theme: Other human development (40%);Decentralization (40%);Social safety nets
(20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):          37.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                       0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The Project Development Objective is to improve the access of the population to basic social
services, to increase the amount and improve the predictability of transfers to communes, and to
support the delegation of responsibility for execution of small-scale basic infrastructure to
communities through the CDD approach. This phase will also pilot a safety net intervention that
will leverage the community structures created in the CDD activities.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
This project's predecessor, the Projet National d'appui au Developpement Conduit par les
Communautes (PNDCC), has proven to be an efficient and effective structure to finance and
implement local development projects and to foster community participation. However, as a
parallel structure operating outside of normal government systems, the PNDCC was conceived
even at its inception in 2004 as a transitional structure, which would fade away as its mission of
mainstreaming community-driven approaches in Benin's decentralized structure was fulfilled.
  This project, as the successor to the PNDCC, will end the parallel approach of the previous
project and aim to reinforce country systems while building on the gains of the PNDCC. The
implementation of the project will be organized around four key principles, called the "FAST"
principles: Fiduciary (funds are used for their intended purpose), additionality and predictability
(resources for local service delivery must grow and be predictable), subsidiarity (the lowest
competent body should be responsible for an activity), and transparency and accountability
(citizens' access to information and ability to hold their elected representatives accountable).

 The project is envisaged as having three components:

 Component 1: Service Delivery Grants to Communes ($30.0 million).

  This component will aim to strengthen the delivery of basic services at the decentralized level
in line with the objectives of Benin's SCRP-3 and PONDAEC. It will support increased levels of
fiscal transfers to local government to be used for investments that are included in their
Commune Development Plans. Eligible expenditures will include investment projects in the
areas of education, health, water, and commerce (public markets). Whereas under the PNDCC
IDA funds flowing to sub-projects went directly from the PIU to communes or communities, the
project resources would transferred to communes periodically during the year through the
FADeC intergovernmental fiscal transfer system, in the same manner as GoB and donor
resources.

 Project resources transferred to communes would be eligible to be spent on eligible capital
expenditures in their Communal Development Plans (PDCs) in the areas of education, health,
water, and commerce (public markets). For relatively simple investments serving only one
community, communes would be encouraged to carry out the investment project through the
CDD approach by delegating responsibility for implementation to communities. For more
complex investments with a multi-village scale, communes would retain responsibility for
implementation. Investments at the commune level with the largest scale and highest level of
complexity, while not eligible under this project, are normally implemented by Contract
Management Agencies. The receipt of each tranche of project funding by communes will be
conditioned on fulfillment of certain criteria, such as accurate and timely financial reporting,
auditing, participatory preparation of PDCs, and others that will be determined. Ideally, these
criteria will mirror those used for release of Government and donor funds through FADeC.

 Component 2: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building ($5.0 million)

 This component will support technical assistance and capacity building at three levels. At the
central level, the component will provide (i) support to the MDGLAAT and CONAFIL to
strengthen administration of the FADeC, including improving the transparency of the calculation
of allocations, fiduciary controls, and monitoring and evaluation, and (ii) support to key sectoral
and cross-cutting Ministries for the further integration of CDD into their operations. At the level
of the communes, and building on the capacity building in communes supported under PNDCC
1, the component will strengthen communes' capacity for (i) participatory preparation of PDCs
and for (ii) the integration of the CDD approach into the implementation of local investment
projects. The technical assistance will be coordinated with other IDA and donor activities to
ensure complementarity and avoid overlap.

 Capacity building of communities to participate in the communes' development planning
process and to take on the responsibility for implementing development projects is a key element
of the CDD approach. At the community level, grassroots management training (GMT), which
has already been conducted in 1,518 communities, will be expanded to cover the large majority
of communities in Benin--i.e. all of those who will implement a project through the CDD
approach. Refresher training will be offered in communities already reached. The GMT
modules comprise: (i) information and communication; (ii) community organization and
dynamics; (iii) participatory poverty and needs assessments; (iv) participatory planning; (v)
participatory monitoring and evaluation; (vi) community procurement; (vii) community financial
management; and (viii) maintenance of infrastructure assets.

 Component 3: Pilot Social Safety Net Program (US$ 2.0 million)

  The July 2010 PNDCC Additional Financing set aside financing for technical assistance to help
Benin strengthen its social safety net system, which was not sufficiently developed to permit
significant scaling-up to mitigate the impact on the poor and vulnerable of the global food,
financial, and fuel shocks experienced from 2008 to 2010. The first phase of the technical
assistance, a review of Benin's existing social safety net programs including recommendations
for strengthening safety nets, is near completion. The second phase, a feasibility analysis for a
safety net pilot, is expected to be launched in April 2011 and completed by October 2011.

 Until the technical assistance supported by PNDCC is further advanced, the details of the pilot
to be financed under this component cannot be defined. However, the expectation is that the
pilot would involve a conditional or unconditional cash transfer to targeted poor and vulnerable
persons. It would likely cover only certain regions of the country as opposed to the entire
country. Given the pilot nature of the component, provision for robust impact evaluations will be
made to ensure the possibility of statistically informed analysis on the program's impact on
different subsets of beneficiaries, and any modifications that might be required to scale up the
program.

 The progress on the pilot program will be measured against a set of indicators that will assess
the performance of the targeting system, the extent to which beneficiaries have benefitted from
the program in terms of income and through the conditionality of the transfer, and whether
knowledge and lessons learned on the effectiveness and scalability of the pilot social safety net
program have been generated, among others.

D. Project location (if known)
The physical project activities would be carried out in all communes and over a thousand local
communities in Benin. Subprojects would include construction of schools, health clinics, small
water supply systems, latrines, rural roads, and market stalls/hangars. Other expected activities
such as social safety nets (cash transfers), capacity building and technical assistance are not
expected to have adverse social or environmental impacts.
E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
This project's predecessor, the PNDCC, developed effective policies to mitigate environmental
and social risks associated with small-scale construction and possible land acquisition.
Implementation of the environmental and social safeguards throughout the PNDCC has been
consistently satisfactory. The PNDCC safeguard framework will be adopted by this project,
including the (i) an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); and (ii) a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to address potential issues that might arise due to the
need for land acquisition. As the oversight for the implementation of safeguards will pass from
the PNDCC PIU to a mainstreamed government ministry (ministry to be confirmed), safeguards
training will be provided under the project for the implementing Ministry. The lessons from the
soon to be finalized PNDCC Environmental and Social Audit will also be integrated in to the
safeguards framework for the new project.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS)
   Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes         No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
    Subprojects would include construction of schools, health clinics, small water supply
systems, latrines, rural roads, and market stalls/hangars. This could trigger small-scale and site
specific environmental impacts typical of category B projects. The PNDCC Environmental and
Social Management Framework will be revised and updated for this project and would disclosed
in-country and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                     X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                          X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                   X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
    Land take or restriction of access to sources of livelihoods is not envisaged, but as due
diligence the PNDCC Resettlement Policy Framework will also be revised and adapted for this
project; and would be disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop before appraisal
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                  X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 09/21/2011
B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Preparation of required safeguards documents will be launched before the QER, and would
   be completed, reviewed, approved and disclosed (in-country and at the Infoshop) prior to the
   Appraisal mission.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                 Mr John Van Dyck                                                            04/18/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                                                    09/15/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                   Mr Marito H. Garcia                                                         07/25/2011
      Comments: Acting Sector Manager




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
