                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/06/2012                                   Report No.: AC6761
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P083979                  Original Project Name: Bolivia Urban
                                              Infrastructure Project
Country: Bolivia                              Project ID: P130528
Project Name: BO Urban Infrastructure Project (II) Additional Finance
Task Team Leader: Angelica Nunez del Campo
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 30, 2012       Estimated Board Date: August 30, 2012
Managing Unit: LCSDU                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Sub-national government administration (50%);Public administration-
Transportation (50%)
Theme: Urban services and housing for the poor (70%);Municipal governance and
institution building (15%);Municipal finance (15%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             24
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
         Financing Gap                                                    0.00
                                                                          0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []            Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                     Yes [ ]   No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective of the Bolivia Urban Infrastructure (or Parent Project)
is to improve the access to basic services to the urban poor in Bolivia's major cities
through targeted infrastructure investments and the provision of technical assistance to
municipalities in the planning, expansion, and sustainability of urban service delivery.
Specific objectives per component are:
  i)Component 1- Urban upgrading in the Municipality of La Paz. To achieve sustainable
improvements in the urban infrastructure and living standards in the poorest
neighborhoods of La Paz through comprehensive urban upgrading and neighborhood
participation in project implementation;
  ii)Component 2 – Urban transport in the Municipality of El Alto. To enhance mobility
in the city o f El Alto, removing infrastructure bottlenecks and introducing measures to
modernize public transport services and urban transport management; and
 iii)Component 3 – Sewerage and Wastewater Treatment in the Municipality of Santa
Cruz: To expand sewerage coverage in poor areas o Santa Cruz de la Sierra.

3. Project Description
The Bolivia Urban Infrastructure Additional Finance (AF) will finance the scaling up of
Components 1 and 2 as described below;
  Component 1: Expanding Urban Upgrading in La Paz (US$20.4 million, of which US$
12 million Bank financing). This component will finance: (i) the provision of
infrastructure services in 24 neighborhoods under the Barrios y Comunidades de Verdad
Program (BCdV). The BCdV program supports packages of demand-driven local
investments in poor neighborhoods; including basic access to municipal services, street
lighting, drainage infrastructure, sanitation facilities, disaster risk mitigation works, and
community recreation facilities; (ii) strengthening community organization and
participation during the entire project cycle, (iii) regularization of land tenure rights, and
(iv) capacity building for the municipality of La Paz.
  Component 2: Expanding Urban Transport in El Alto ((US$12 million, of which US$12
million Bank financing). This component will finance: (i) construction of trunk
infrastructure; (ii) construction or improvement of non-motorized transport solutions
(pedestrian sidewalks and crossings, bicycle lanes), and (iii) capacity building and
institutional strengthening for the municipality of El Alto.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The municipality of La Paz occupies a total of 2,012 km2 of which 1,832 km2 are
classified as rural and 180 km2 as urban. Urban La Paz has a total population of 800,000
inhabitants (compared with only about 3,700 inhabitants in rural areas), and is situated
inside 5 major and some 200 minor drainage basins. About 35% of La Paz's population is
classified as poor and is concentrated on the northern, eastern and western slopes of the
city where a lack of physical infrastructure compounds the risks associated with steep
gradients. About 32% of the population living in these areas resides on slopes in excess
of 45 degrees where frequent mud slides result in significant loss of life and property.
Overall, about one quarter of La Paz's urban population (almost 200,000) live in risk-
prone areas, with very limited access to basic services.

  Within the same metropolitan region, the municipality of El Alto is adjacent to La Paz.
Its current population totals 650,000, 81% of whom identify themselves as indigenous of
predominantly Aymara origin. It is one of the fastest growing areas in the southern
hemisphere, with an average yearly growth rate of 6.7%. Given its flat topography and
due to deficient land-management policies, rapid and uncontrolled urban sprawl in El
Alto has been a constant over the last decades. As a result, El Alto is facing strong
pressures and demands for the provision of public services, including transport services
and road infrastructure. Towering 3,962 meters above sea level, El Alto also controls the
slopes and the access into the capital, which is located at 3,597 meters in a deep
depression. Thus it is naturally a vital transport hub that features an international airport
within its city limits (serving La Paz), and connects via four highways with important
regions of the country (La Paz, Desaguadero and Copacabana on the border with Peru,
Oruro, Cochabamba and Santa Cruz and the municipality of Viacha). The entire urban
transport metropolitan system relies on the municipal urban road network which has been
poorly planned and developed.

 El Alto urban transport system is characterized by chaotic traffic flows and congestion
in the main arteries, with pedestrians, hucksters and vehicles sharing the roads in many
critical points (La Ceja for instance, which concentrates most of the economic activity of
the city and is the main entry point from La Paz). Contributing factors to this situation
are: (i) inadequate infrastructure; (ii) increasing vehicle motorization; (iii) an over-supply
of small capacity public vehicles: (iii) a business scheme in the public transport industry
that promotes competition in the market and not for the market; (iv) lack of adequate
infrastructure for non-motorized transport; (v) inadequate institutional management of the
public transport system including weak enforcement of transit laws and a lack of
coordination mechanisms among different jurisdictions.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Gabriela Arcos (LCSEN)
   Ms Kimberly Vilar (LCSSO)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                        X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
With regard to the implementation of Bank environmental and social safeguards, the
Additional Financing has been classified as Category B and triggers the same three
policies as the Parent Project: (i) OP / BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment ; (ii) OP / BP
4.11 Physical Cultural Resources; (iii) OP / BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. The
Parent Project followed a framework approach for the treatment of safeguard issues.
Environmental Management Frameworks (EMFs) and Resettlement Policy Frameworks
were prepared (RPF) for all components.

 Project preparation is at different levels of progress for Components 1 and 2. In the case
of Component 1 (La Paz), all sub-projects have been identified in the 24 selected
neighborhoods and designs have been finalized. The implementing unit has finalized the
specific safeguards instruments (environmental licenses and abbreviated resettlement
plan). In the case of Component 2 (El Alto), the GMAEA has selected a list of potential
projects to be financed by the Project, from which two will be selected based on
readiness. As consequence, the project will use a framework approach in the case of
Component 2. For the AF, the main safeguard issues and instruments are described below
.

 Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01).
 The AF will finance very similar infrastructure to the one financed by the PP. Despite
the short-term negative effects during the construction process the project will primarily
have positive environmental impacts.

  For Component 1 (La Paz), Barrios y Comunidades de Verdad has already obtained the
environmental licenses from the relevant authorities for all the sub-projects to be financed
by the AF . The environmental licenses did not identify any major impacts or associated
considerable mitigation actions. Given that most adverse impacts are expected to occur at
construction stage, the Operational Manual and EMF for the project have been updated to
include mechanisms to mitigate noise, suspended particles and increase safety measures.
Specifically, two new parameters to measure and monitor air quality (solid particles in
suspension) and levels of noise have been included in a new Annex. The Operational
Manual has also been updated to describe the procedures to monitor these variables by
contractors and supervision firms . The updates will be applicable to the sub-projects
financed under the proposed AF. In particular, the air quality and the levels of noise will
be measured and monitor during project implementation through quarterly reports to be
submitted by contractors and reviewed by the GAMLP.

 In the case of Component 2 (El Alto) the original EMF prepared under the PP was
reviewed by the Bank and found satisfactory, as such no adjustments were made. The
EMF identified potential negative impacts of civil works interventions (atmospheric
emissions, noise emission, disposal of solid waste and others), that are likely to be
generated under the AF activities and mitigation measures that have been assessed as
adequate to be applied for the AF activities. Any EAs and management plans to be
developed in the implementation phase will strictly follow the procedures of the updated
EMF. Bidding documents for all contractors will include the obligation to develop and
implement the management plans and these will be closely supervised.

 Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11).
 Based on existing knowledge and experience, it is not expected that cultural property
will be found in the project areas; however, because of the nature of the works
envisioned, the EMFs set forth "chance find" or equivalent procedures in case such
property is encountered.

 Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12).
 For Component 1 (La Paz), given that all sub-projects have been identified, the
implementing unit prepared an Abbreviated Resettlement Plan (Plan Abreviado de
Reasentamiento Involuntario) following the updated Resettlement Policy Framework
methodology and including all neighborhoods to be upgraded by the AF. The Plan
describes the impacts of the works to be implemented, identifies 8 affected parties and
establishes the mitigation measures as the in-kind replacement of their perimeter walls.
These measures reflect the methodology the GAMLP developed during the parent project
to classify types of impacts with the objective of minimizing partial involuntary
resettlement by intervening only when the housing units have perimeter walls within the
newly enforced municipal right-of-way. Up to one hundred residents with more
consolidated construction (houses, shops) within the newly enforced right-of-way will be
permitted to remain as is and will not be required to take any compulsory action. No total
impacts or economic displacement will take place.

 In the case of Component 2, since the specific sub-projects have not yet been identified
a framework approach will be applied. The original Involuntary Resettlement Policy
Framework has been updated by the GAMEA. No major changes were included, only
modifications to align the project description and design with the proposed AF. The
updated RPF has been reviewed and disclosed by the Bank and the GAMEA.

  Finally, the Bank's social specialist has reviewed the applicability of the OP 4.10 on
Indigenous Peoples and found that this policy is not triggered since the target population
does not meet the four identification criteria. Although the beneficiary population is of
Aymara origin, they have settled in the cities of La Paz and El Alto as urban economic
migrants. As such they do not have collective attachment to geographically distinct
habitats or ancestral territories in the project area. Also, the governance structure in
which they actively participate is common to urban areas in the country and not distinct
from those of the dominant society. Nevertheless, the spirit of the policy is upheld, as
both components 1 and 2 will ensure that the social specialists under the implementation
units provide culturally appropriate support and communicate with beneficiaries in their
preferred language.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
From the environmental point of view, all the envisioned works are substantially similar
to those undertaken for the Original Project. The potential impacts identified are: i) air
pollution due to soil movements; ii) increased solid wastes that could lead to a potentially
hazardous contamination of soil during the construction stage and could take place while
installing camps and moving soil; iii) increased noise levels due to machinery used at
different stages of construction; iv) air pollution due to increase atmospheric emissions
and v) accidental oil spill form heavy machinery.

 As described before, the social impacts for Component 1 have already been identified
and compensations (reposition of perimeter walls for the 8 affected properties) agreed
with the affected parties on the Abbreviated Resettlement Plan.

  In the case of Component 2, the social impacts associated with the proposed additional
financing would potentially be very similar to the ones experienced and properly
managed by the implementing agency during the Parent Project. Expected impacts
include affecting privately owned or held land in urban areas that lie partially in the right-
of-way to be rehabilitated. Impacts during the parent project, in the El Alto urban road
rehabilitation and expansion works, did not imply any total loss of housing units or
businesses. The same kind of partial impacts of businesses and/or housing units on the
sides of the urban streets to be rehabilitated or paved are also envisaged for the new
additional works. In this sense mitigation measures may include land acquisition,
monetary compensation, in-kind exchange for works or services and reconstruction of
walls.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The Project's Environmental Management Frameworks have identified the following
mitigation measures that have been implemented by the Municipalities of La Paz and El
Alto through specific management plans: i) use household waste bins, reuse of material
dug up during excavations and disposal of excess waste; ii) excavation materials should
be removed and disposed immediately; iii) accidental oil spills from heavy machinery
should be cleaned with appropriate materials; iv) occasionally humidify internal
pathways within the site to avoid air pollution; v) transport excavation material on
established pathways; vi) carry out excavation and tube installation tasks during daylight
hours and keep machinery in optimum working conditions; vii) carry out maintenance of
heavy machinery outside the construction sites; viii) install adequate signing to avoid
accidents and ix) incorporate hygiene, industrial security and occupational health
measures

 To avoid or minimize adverse impacts on private land, once specific investments are
confirmed, the team will strongly encourage the use of project design to avoid impacts on
third parties. In La Paz this strategy has already been successfully implemented for both
the Parent Project and the designs prepared for the AF. Designs have also worked
around existing structures to avoid impacts. In the El Alto urban transport component,
the spaces being considered for potential road works generally have ample space to
design roads that will not require acquiring any additional land. In other words avoiding
resettlement impacts through the design of physical works will be highly prioritized.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental Safeguards
 The Municipalities of La Paz and El Alto are responsible for applying and monitoring
the Project's EMF under Components 1 and 2. These municipalities differ in their
capacity and degree of institutionalization of environmental management. The
Municipality of La Paz has a specific unit of Environmental Control within the Planning
office, adequately staffed with approximately six professionals in different aspects of
environmental management. Among other relevant issues, this unit is responsible for
reviewing and approving environmental assessments and management plans, and for
processing the environmental licenses. There is an adequate level of coordination with
contractors to comply with environmental management aspects. Also, the Project has a
solid team composed of professionals from different disciplines, who are responsible for
implementing the evaluation and monitoring process and project management. The
Project team closely coordinates its activities with the Municipality's environmental unit.

 The Municipality of El Alto has a works and environment unit within its institutional
structure, but only one professional is assigned to carry out environmental management
actions with limited collaboration from other professionals that make other relevant units.
While this professional is capable of meeting the requirements to obtain the
environmental licenses, it is not fully prepared to apply the safeguard instruments and to
monitor compliance with the management plans in coordination with contractors. In this
sense, the project team is also weak, currently lacking an environmental specialist and
fully relying on the Municipality's capacity to carry out overall environmental
management. Specific actions have been recommended to improve the Municipality's
capacity to deal with the implementation of safeguard instruments, including: i)
application of the EMF and related instruments at various stages of the project cycle; ii)
monitoring of the environmental management plans and mitigation measures; iii)
organization of dissemination processes and community involvement; iv) strengthening
the environmental and social recommendations included in the bidding documents for
contractors and v) improving the monitoring instruments to secure compliance with
management plans and mitigation measures. This action plan should be implemented on a
short-term period.

 Social Safeguards
 In terms of capacity to apply social safeguards, during the Parent Project, Barrios y
Comunidades de Verdad effectively and proactively acquired the skills they required to
apply the project's resettlement policy framework once the impacts were identified during
preparation. Their community development team worked closely with their in-house
architects and lawyers to devise the resettlement plan, carry out consultations and
disclosure and reach their proposed results. This capacity remains within the program
and will serve the additional financing phase well.

  GCA's capacity (Grupo de Coordinacion y Asesoramiento) in El Alto, the Project's
implementing agency for Component 2) to apply social safeguards is in the process of
being strengthened. . During the implementation of the Parent Project, the unit hired a
temporary consultant to assist with legal aspects of their abbreviated resettlement plan,
however the process was much longer and staggered due to the lack of in-house
professionals to implement the plan. For the Additional Financing, the unit is in the
process of hiring a consultant with a social science background to assist with the planning
and implementation of involuntary resettlement plan, as needed. The specialist will be
hired by project effectiveness.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The potentially affected people in both components would be the neighbors who live
alongside the proposed works. In both cases they would also be project beneficiaries of
the works. Mechanisms for consultation would include both individual and representative
organizations. For instance, one-on-one visits to commercial establishments and/or
residential neighborhoods that will benefit from road works or more integrated upgrading
would be complemented by consultations with community-based organizations, and
neighborhood committees who are very well organized, vocal and prominent in both
cities. The Parent Project has a very positive experience with local monitoring of the
urban upgrading works in La Paz. Neighborhood works committees kept a close check
on technical progress of the works, the proper use of materials and the conformity to
original designs and location of works that were informed by community consensus in
each case. Grievance redressal mechanisms also worked effectively in voicing concerns
and receiving a prompt and satisfactory reply from works supervisors and/or contractors.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  07/20/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              08/06/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               07/31/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  07/25/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              08/06/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               08/01/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          N/A
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name           Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Angelica Nunez del Campo   08/06/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Gabriela Arcos             07/31/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Kimberly Vilar             08/06/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Niels B. Holm-Nielsen
  Comments:
