                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/13/2012                                  Report No.: AC6666
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P111780                 Original Project Name: Enhancing SME
                                             Access to Finance
Country: Bosnia and Herzegovina              Project ID: P129914
Project Name: Bosnia and Herzegovina Small and Medium Enterprises ACCESS TO
FINANCE Additional Finance
Task Team Leader: Isfandyar Zaman Khan
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 20, 2012 Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2012
Managing Unit: ECSPF                         Lending Instrument: Financial
                                             Intermediary Loan
Sector: SME Finance (100%)
Theme: Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           120
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to enhance access to finance for small and medium
enterprises in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the context of global financial crisis.

3. Project Description
The existing project is financed by a US$70 million equivalent (€47.8 million) IBRD
flexible loan with a 25 year maturity and a 10 year grace period. The project was
approved by the Board on December 15th, 2009 and became effective on July 18th, 2010.
The project development objective is to enhance access to finance for small and medium
enterprises in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the context of the global financial crisis.

 The project has two components: i) a credit line component of €46,972,200 extended
through qualified Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) to creditworthy private
enterprises for viable projects; ii) a project management component in the amount of
€408,300 for the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. There are also contingency
funds in the amount of €300,000 for component II. There are no changes to the original
project objectives, design or scope.

 The additional finance is requested only for the credit line component. The reason for
the additional finance is that as of February 6th, 2012, less than 18 months since project
effectiveness, 79.36 percent of the funds have been disbursed into the special account out
of which 69.80 percent has been on lent to final beneficiaries. No additional project
management funds are needed since there were additional unallocated funds for this
component, which can be utilized for continued project management activities. It is
expected that by June 30th, 2012 all funds under the credit line component of the project
will be disbursed. Given the success of the project additional funds are requested to
enhance the development impact.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will target Small and Medium Enterprises of both Entities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Esma Kreso (ECSS3)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Under a sub-loans program financed by the project, small and medium enterprises will be
able to obtain credits to establish or expand activities in the sectors of manufacturing,
food-production or agro-processing. An environmental screening process supervised by
the PIUs will ensure that only low to medium risks (2 lower categories out of 4) are
eligible for financing. The environmental impacts from these low category projects (Cat 1
and 2) are expected to be overall minor and result mainly from emissions (noise, dust)
and waste and waste-water generation. For these impacts mitigation and management
measures are readily available and will be put in place during preparation of individual
projects. The Category - Financial Intermediary Assessment - of the project addresses
these minor environmental issues by triggering the requirement to produce environmental
management plans (EMPs) to mitigate any environmental impacts identified with
individual projects.

 A mechanism is in place through the environmental screening that is mandatory for each
sub-project application to exclude activities corresponding to a Category A, or projects
which may be triggering other safeguard policies, through a continuously revised
exclusion list.

 No social safeguards are triggered by the project. No activities are planned in disputed
areas. The project will not finance any investments involving land acquisition or
involuntary resettlement.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
None are expected, but this issue will be addressed in EMPs as appropriate.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Limiting financing to Category I (low risk) and Category 2 (medium risk) sub-projects
was selected as an important mechanism to reduce potential negative environmental
impacts.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Environmental Safeguard Review Framework which describes procedures to be
undertaken by Participating Financial Intermediaries (PFIs) and Project Implementation
Units (PIUs) will apply to sub-projects to be financed under the Project with regard to
Environmental Assessment (EA). These procedures will include eight elements: (i)
Compliance with FBiH/RS EA requirements; (ii) Screening; (iii) Documentation; (iv)
Public Consultation; (v) Disclosure; (vi)Review and Approval; (vii)Conditionality; and
(viii)Monitoring and Reporting. Sub-projects will be divided into four categories. From
Low Risk (Category i) to sub-projects or enterprises involved in the manufacture or use
of dangerous or illegal materials (Category IV). Only Category I (low risk) or Category II
(medium risk) Sub-Projects would be eligible for financing under the World Bank
project.

 With an increase in the portfolio through the Additional Financing, the PIUs will seek to
employ a part-time environmental specialist to decrease risks associated with adequate
screening and EMP preparation.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The draft Environmental Safeguard Framework document along with an announcement
of the public consultation workshop was disclosed on the web-pages of the Entity
Ministries of Finance in mid-August 2009. The draft document, along with individual
invitations was sent out to the key stakeholders in the project. The Public Consultations
Workshop was held at the premises of the World Bank Country Office in Sarajevo, on
September 10, 2009, and was very well attended. The final Environmental Safeguard
Review Framework was posted on the BiH MoF's web-site on September 18, 2009.

 As per the Environmental Framework document, the Client (SME) is responsible for
preparing and disclosing the EMP with public consultations. These shall specifically
target, apart from a general public audience, institutions dealing with commerce, trade
and SMEs, local NGOs and interested groups.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 09/18/2009
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             09/18/2009
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              09/18/2009
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
  ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

  OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
  review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
  credit/loan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                            Name                           Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Isfandyar Zaman Khan                      03/13/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Esma Kreso                                03/13/2012
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                    Mr Donato De Rosa                             03/13/2012
  Comments: Acting for SM - Lalit Raina.
