                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/19/2011                                    Report No.: AC6376
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P006553                  Original Project Name: BR - Integrated
                                              Water Management In Metropolitan Sao
                                              Paulo
Country: Brazil                               Project ID: P125829
Project Name: Sao Bernardo Integrated Water Management in Sao Paulo Program
Task Team Leader: Oscar E. Alvarado
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 7,         Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2012
2010
Managing Unit: LCSUW                          Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                              Loan
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (89%);Public
administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (11%)
Theme: Urban services and housing for the poor (37%);Pollution management and
environmental health (27%);Water resource management (23%);Land administration and
management (7%);Other urban development (6%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            20.82
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                       20.58
                                                                        20.58
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []           Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The overall objectives of the Mananciais Horizontal APL Program are (i) to protect and
maintain the quality and reliability of MRSPs water resources and potable water sources;
(ii) to improve the quality of life of the poor populations residing in key targeted urban
river basins in MRSP; and (iii) to strengthen institutional capacity and improve
metropolitan management and coordination in MRSP in water resources management,
water pollution control, land-use policy and basic service provision.

3. Project Description
The Mananciais Horizontal APL Program is designed to respond to the land-use, water
resources, environmental and social challenges described above by providing a vehicle
which brings together State and municipal government interventions designed to reverse
the deterioration in the headwaters (mananciais) water bodies, improve land-use planning
and control, increase the living conditions of the peri-urban poor residing in the reservoir
basins, and strengthen and consolidate metropolitan institutional capacity in these fields.
It will do so by building on the experience and the lessons learned from the predecessor
Bank-financed Guarapiranga Program.

  The strategy adopted for the design of the Mananciais Horizontal APL Program and the
content of its components considered the following design aspects: (i) the need for an
integrated approach involving a number of public entities from both the State and
municipal governments in the metropolitan region, as well as involving the Alto Tiete
river basin committee and its respective sub-basin committees; (ii) the importance of
institutional capacity building, of the refining of public policies, and of overarching
coordination, in order to deal with metropolitan wide challenges; (iii) the prioritization of
investments in basic urban environmental infrastructure such as water supply and
wastewater systems, and the management of drainage and solid waste; (iv) the
urbanization of informal/irregular settlements and slums in MRSP s key river basins; and
(v) the importance of investments in water quality monitoring and evaluation, in research
and diagnoses of tropical reservoir behavior and other key questions addressed by the
Program, and in improving the technology and processes in water treatment plants.

 The interventions under the respective components of the Program, described in more
detail in Annex 4 of the PAD, were identified by adopting the following analytical
methodology: the current land-use patterns in the two mostly highly urbanized reservoir
basins, Guarapiranga and Billings (where three-quarters of the Program's resources will
be invested), were mapped and loaded into a land-use/water quality computer-based
mathematical model (MQUAL 2.0). This model was then used to identify the major
pollution sources in the two reservoirs. There was a very strong correlation identified
between the highly urbanized areas of the basins, in general, and pollution load and
between the informal and densely occupied areas of the basin, more specifically, and the
pollution rates. The mapping also identified the pockets of poverty in these two basins
and established their correlation with pollution loads. This mapping and modeling
exercise of land-use, pollution loads and poverty rates was then used as a basis to identify
and prioritize the types of physical intervention to be undertaken in the two basins: water
supply; wastewater collection and treatment; solid waste management and disposal;
drainage; urban upgrading; social inclusion interventions; and leisure areas and parks.

 As identified under the mapping and modeling exercise, the Program will undertake
physical interventions in urban environmental infrastructure and urban upgrading with a
prioritization of activities in those MRSP river basins that are already heavily urbanized
and degraded (Guarapiranga and Billings), as well as initiating actions in those basins
that are further from the city center but also witnessing similar pressure of informal
urbanization (in order to help them get - ahead of the curve- with regard to land-use
planning and water pollution control and thus not become the Guarapiranga and Billings
of the next generation) - namely, the Alto Tiete-Cabeceiras, the Juqueri-Cantareira, and
the Alto and Baixo Cotia basins. Under the leadership of GESP, the Program will also
support strategic activities to promote the sustainability of the interventions as well as to
promote metropolitan wide management and coordination.

 The Horizontal APL has been organized into four components: (i) Institutional Capacity
Building; (ii) Urban Integration; (iii) Environmental Protection and Recovery; and (iv)
Integrated Water Supply and Sanitation. The last component incorporates activities
related to a broader concept of integrated water supply and sanitation, as described in the
recently-approved Federal WSS Law (11.445/2007), namely: water supply, sanitation,
drainage, and solid waste management. A summary of the Program s description and
costs by component is given below.

 Component 1 - Institutional Capacity Building (US$ 35.09 million total, US$16.97
million loan). To achieve the objectives of the Mananciais Horizontal APL Program and
to ensure its long term sustainability, an Institutional Capacity Building component has
been designed to support GESP and the other executing agencies by strengthening their
institutional capacity and promoting improved metropolitan management and
coordination with regard to the key metropolitan challenges of water resources
management, water pollution control, land-use policy, and basic service provision. The
component will support the following activities: (i) improved integrated land-use and
water resources management; (ii) environmental and water quality monitoring; (iii)
environmental education and social outreach; and (iv) Program management, monitoring,
evaluation and dissemination.

 Component 2 - Urban Integration (US$ 62.89 million total, US$ 13.80 million loan).
The component's objectives are to improve the standards and layouts of urban occupation
in the targeted basins and improve the quality of life of the residents of these basins,
especially the low-income communities living in informal settlements. Component 2 will
support the following activities: (i) Urbanization of slums and irregular settlements; (ii)
Recuperation of high-risk and degraded areas; (iii) Involuntary resettlement; (iv)
Preparation of housing plans; (v) Environmental and urban layout standardization of
settlements; and (vi) Socio-environmental supervision for urban upgrading and housing
interventions.

  Component 3 - Environmental Protection and Recovery (US$ 19.71 million total, US$
11.73 million loan). The component's objectives are to protect and recover natural
habitats and environmentally sensitive and degraded areas in the sub-basins with a view
to improving environmental quality. Component 3 will support the following activities:
(i) Revegetation and reforestation; (ii) Urbanization of public areas with creation of green
and leisure spaces for common use; (iii) Establishment of environmentally protected
areas; (iv) Rehabilitation and protection of reservoirs and water production systems; and
(iv) Control of the transportation of hazardous substances in the region.

 Component 4 - Integrated Water Supply and Sanitation (US$ 119.41 million total, US$
88.07 million loan). The component's objectives are to reverse the main factors that
contribute to the pollution of the reservoirs and to provide integrated WSS services to the
poor. Component 4 will support the following activities: (i) Wastewater management
improvements; (ii) Water supply system improvements; and (iii) Solid waste
management improvements.

 The proposed Program will be implemented as a series of projects and their
corresponding loans under a Horizontal APL, implemented over a six-year period. The
participants under the APL will be: the State Government of São Paulo (GESP); the State
Water Utility (SABESP); and the municipal governments of São Bernardo do Campo
(PMSBC) and Guarulhos (PMG), under four individual Specific Investment Loans. The
APL Program represents a whole that is greater than the sum of its parts and the
cumulative impacts of the Program interventions will be more than the sum of the
individual impact of each loan. Nevertheless, each eligible borrower can commence its
interventions without having to wait for the other loans to be initiated. Given delays in
approving individual loan packages, all four borrowers were not given simultaneous
clearance to negotiate. The Horizontal APL structure is designed to allow subsequent
loans to be presented to the Bank once they have been given the requisite clearance to
negotiate.

 The GESP project, which is designed to provide for the coordination of all other
Program activities, and SABESP's project, which represents the largest loan and the
Program's major driver, are part of the package approved with the APL Program PAD
Report No 47493-BR by the Board on July 9, 2009; became effective on December 21,
2010 and March 24, 2010, respectively. The PMSBC and PMG projects are presented as
Annexes 16 and 17 respectively of the original Program PAD.

 The Municipality of São Bernardo do Campo will undertake activities under three of the
components of the Mananciais Horizontal APL Program. The interventions envisaged
under Component 2 - Urban Integration - include engineering designs and
implementation of civil works needed for urban upgrading of poor neighborhoods (inter
alia infrastructure for water and sanitation , drainage, paving, social equipment, etc.),
complemented by the evacuation of risk areas and resettlement of families with the
provision of housing units.

 Guarulhos Municipality would undertake activities under two of the components
comprising water and sanitation works in the neighborhood named Bairro ?gua Azul.
The main justification for the prioritization of these investments is the current inadequate
conditions of service provided and the commitment with the Public Hearing Ministry for
making the investments (existing TAC - Termo de Ajustamento de Conduta).

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The areas of intervention of the Program are the reservoirs/sub-basins located within the
Sao Paulo Metropolitan Region, in the Alto Tiete river basin, that are used for providing
public water supply to the city, namely: Billings, Guarapiranga, Alto Tiete-Cabeceiras,
Juqueri-Cantareira and Alto and Baixo Cotia. The entire surface area of the Alto Tiete
basin - 5985 km2 - virtually coincides with the physical limits of the Sao Paulo
Metropolitan Region; it is a heavily urbanized river basin, comprising 35 municipalities
containing 17.7 million people.

 In São Bernardo do Campo the choice of the selected area for investments is justified by
the following criteria: (i) the area is within the headwater-reservoir systems
(#mananciais#); (ii) it has a strategic environmental condition, close to the inflow to the
SABESP water intake for its water supply system (Sistema Rio Grande); (iii) it contains
precarious at-risk settlements lacking of infrastructure, demanding complex and
comprehensive civil works solution and a significant percentage of resettlement; (iv) it
contains aggregated areas that concentrate deficient and inadequate housing and social
vulnerability; (v) it has active social organizations; (vi) there is potential for integrated
solutions to the existing sewage infrastructure operated by SABESP and (vii) it takes into
account a detailed review of the local legislation context to comply with the State Law
13.579/2009 regarding the Billings reservoir protected areas , changes already in course
for the Municipal Master Plan and development of the PLHIS (Local Housing Plan
focused on Poor Population).

  In Guarulhos the works for the implementation of the water supply system will demand
land acquisition, to ensure an area near the Bairro ?gua Azul. The track record shows
that the SAAE (the Municipal Water and Sanitation Utility, and project's implementing
agency) has experience conducting land acquisitions procedures with friendly agreement
resolutions. The Municipality highlighted the existence of a local law that restricts the
execution of paving works in urban areas unless there are water supply and sewage
systems.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Jose Alexandre Monteiro Fortes (LCSUW)
   Ms Clarisse Torrens Borges Dall Acqua (LCSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                    X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
  1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
  The proposed Program has received Environmental Category "A" rating in accordance
with the corresponding safeguard policies. The Mananciais Horizontal APL Program
triggers the following safeguards: OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment); OP 4.04
(Natural Habitats); OP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources), OP 4.12 (Involuntary
Resettlements); and OP 4.37 (Safety of Dams). These policies are addressed in detail in
the Program#s Environmental and Social Impacts Assessment Report and in the ISDS
submitted for the Program's first and second phases (ISDS No.- AC2966). The PMG and
PMSBC subprojects trigger all of these policies except for OP 4.37 on Safety of Dams, as
no activities involving reservoirs that depend on the operation of existing dams are
planned for phases three and four of the Program. Consequently, this policy is not
included in the subproject-specific discussion of applicable safeguards that follows."

 Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01): A regional strategic environmental assessment
was prepared by the Borrower in conjunction with the State Secretariat for the
Environment. The Environmental and Social Impacts Assessment (ESIA) Program
reports were worked out and updated by Sao Bernardo do Campo and Guarulhos
municipalities for its specifics annexes. The infrastructure interventions will generate
temporary negative environmental impacts during their respective construction periods,
even in those cases where the interventions are intended to mitigate existing areas of
degradation and risk. It will therefore be necessary to adhere to the appropriate criteria
and procedures in the ESIA report's Environmental Manual for Construction (EMC) to be
handled with suitable construction techniques and procedures. The EMC will be included
in the bidding documents (civil works). The environmental impacts of the Program works
interventions are duly described in the ESIA report and summarized in Annex 10 of the
PAD for each executing agency. The list includes a group of activities, studies and
programs to mitigate, attenuate and/or counteract the negative impacts caused by the
implementation of the civil works, as well as highlighting the expected positive effects of
the interventions. These activities are also presented in the annexes of the ESIA report, in
the Environmental Management Plans of each executing agency and in the updated ESIA
annexes prepared by each municipality. Environmental assessments and management
plans of associated works such as the main sewerage lines have also been reviewed.

 Natural Habitats (OP 4.04): Category 1 and Permanent Preservation Areas (APPs) are
located along the banks of the reservoirs and the watercourses which are targeted under
the Program. These areas include stretches that have been degraded by irregular urban
occupation, including poorly-constructed dwellings. They also contain conservation areas
and other areas that could be recuperated. The interventions in these areas will focus on
relocating families, and subsequent environmental and landscape restoration of the
degraded area in question. In the case of partially degraded areas or those that are still
preserved, the strategy will be to protect and preserve them with actions to recuperate and
establish a number of parks (including linear parks on the banks of the Billings
Reservoir). Long-term management of these areas will be provided for by the
Municipality's environmental secretaries with/without support from local NGOs.

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12): A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for
guiding the involuntary resettlement to be carried out under the Program has been
prepared in accordance with Bank guidelines and safeguards. The Resettlement Action
Plans (RAPs) for each sub-project that entails resettlement will be prepared along with
the engineering designs during Program implementation. Each RAP will be sent to the
Bank for review and clearance before the associated civil works contract is signed and
thereafter implemented. The work plans designed for Sao Bernardo do Campo describe a
set of interventions in precarious settlements, including housing upgrading and new
housing units, provision of infrastructure and social equipment, recreational areas,
strategy for land regularization, participation and social inclusion actions and an ex-post
evaluation. Multiples alternatives for resettlement will be offered, such as external
resettlement in a new area in the same neighborhood, internal resettlement and
regularization of urban land tenure, internal transfer and also guaranteed credit for
another option of housing acquisition. The eligibility criteria are well described and
complete, removing units from protected areas (e.g. APP (Area de Preservação
Permanente) and/or located in risk areas, as well as houses with poor construction
standard. For Guarulhos municipality, the demand already identified is restricted to land
acquisition for the construction of a pumping station. There are two ways in which land is
likely to be needed: (i) permanent land acquisition; and (ii) permission on the part of a
landowner to guarantee permanent access to a portion of this area for maintenance
purposes. In the second case, only involuntary easements are to be covered by a RAP.

 Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11): The Project is not expected to impact historic
and cultural heritage areas of Sao Bernardo do Campo e Guarulhos. However, since the
intervention will include construction and excavation activities to expand and replace
infrastructure, the ESIA included screening for any known cultural property in the
Program area and incorporated "chance find" procedures in the event that culturally
significant resources are discovered during implementation. In addition, Brazil has a
well-developed legislative and normative framework, which is under the oversight of the
National Institute for Protection of Historical and Archeological Sites (IPHAN) and that
will be followed during implementation.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
- To maintain operational control of the reservoirs. The main positive environmental
impact expected is the maintenance of the operational control of the potable water
reservoirs, by countering the further deterioration of the present water quality of the
reservoirs and thus ensuring the continued use of the waters as potable supplies for the
residents of the Sao Paulo Metropolitan Region (MRSP). By way of example, the chart in
Annex 10 illustrates the expected results of the Program interventions designed to
preserve and improve the water quality of the Guarapiranga reservoir by controlling the
phosphorus loads entering it. The non-execution of the Guarapiranga Program would
almost certainly have led to a substantially more deleterious situation with regards to
water quality than exists today; to not implement the Mananciais Program would allow
for the continued deterioration of water quality of Guarapiranga and MRSP s other
mananciais and associated reservoirs.

  - To improve the water quality of the watercourses that presently contribute significantly
to impairing the quality of the reservoirs. Extending the coverage of the wastewater
collection system in the Guarapiranga and Billings catchment areas will result in
improved water quality in the watercourses which flow to the respective reservoirs. The
Program activities to contribute to this goal include: (i) slum and irregular settlements
urbanization which will contribute decisively to improving the water quality in these
watercourses by tying these informal areas into the wastewater, drainage and solid waste
infrastructure; (ii) urbanization and the resettlement of families living in at-risk homes
from landslides and flooding will also contribute to improving the quality of the urban
and social occupation in the headwaters basins, and hence the quality of the surrounding
water bodies; (iii) recuperation of degraded areas that will contribute to improving water
quality and to reducing the transportation of sediments and the consequent silting-up of
the watercourses and thence the reservoirs themselves.

 - To control irregular occupation of the reservoir areas and improve urban land use. The
Program will achieve this through activities including: (i) the implementation of urban
parks and the recovery of degraded areas which will help to discourage new irregular
land occupations, enhance orderly land occupation, and afford better leisure facilities for
the population; (ii) the implementation of new public spaces and leisure areas which will
also improve the opportunities for recreation and leisure activities in the urbanized slums,
the irregular settlements, and along the banks of the reservoirs; (iii) actions targeted at
institutional strengthening, technical and technological capacity-building and
management training, together with improved environmental monitoring and inspection,
as well as the monitoring of land use and occupation, that will contribute to better
management of the human occupation of the basin, focused especially on increasing the
control of irregular occupation; and (iv) environmental and sanitary promotion campaigns
that will contribute to awareness building within the communities with regard to
appropriate land-use development, the importance of connecting to sewer systems,
appropriate community behavior with regard to solid waste disposal and the use of
drainage and sewer systems, etc.

 The Program consists of a group of activities targeted at social-environmental
improvements and the correction and mitigation of the problematic and vulnerable
environmental and social situations that have been identified in the sub-basins. The
Program will directly benefit approximately 3,000 families with slum urbanization, out
of which 1,200 families with new housing units, and around 3,500 inhabitants that will
receive improved WSS services (850 housing units). In addition, the Program will
indirectly benefit a wider population residing in the Alto Tiete basin with improved water
supply quality and improved environmental conditions of the region s water resources.
 The negative impacts of São Bernardo do Campo and Guarulhos project interventions
could arise from the civil works and therefore need to be handled with suitable
construction techniques and procedures. The ESIA contains the Environmental
Construction Manual for inclusion in the bidding documents (civil works).

 The most relevant impacts are positive; Project interventions will generate widespread
and significant positive environmental impacts. Furthermore, the interventions could well
encroach on the permanent preservation strip of the reservoirs and water courses and in
the event that this takes place, appropriate landscape and environmental recovery
measures must be taken. The interventions will therefore require upgrading housing,
relocation and resettlement of around 3,000 families in São Bernardo do Campo and also
850 housing units (3,500 inhabitants) with new WSS services in Guarulhos.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Among the pressing problems facing MRSP, the region s water supply and demand
balance is a critical issue for the city s competitiveness and economic growth. MRSP s
extremely low per capita water availability is comparable to that prevailing in the driest
areas of the Brazilian Northeast. Half of the city s potable supply is imported from
neighboring river systems, which is contentious given the demands of other conurbations
vying for the same water. The remainder comes from headwater-reservoir systems
(mananciais) within MRSP itself. The Guarapiranga and Billings reservoirs make crucial
contributions, together providing potable water for some 25 percent of MRSP s
population (or some 4.8 million people). Recent forecasts for the metropolitan region
indicate that by 2015 there will be a serious risk of demand outstripping supply - with
such projections assuming that MRSP's currently operational mananciais (Guarapiranga,
Billings and other systems) will remain fully utilized or further expanded. Should
Guarapiranga and Billings be lost as raw water bodies for the city supply, the next-
nearest sources to replace them are at great distance and could only be brought to MRSP
at multi-billion Real costs, and with considerable environmental impact concerns for the
development and transmission of these alternative water supplies.

 During program preparation, two main evaluations were carried out. The economic
analysis explored the benefits of the intervention on the water bodies by estimating the
opportunity cost of the water sources. To determine the net incremental costs and
benefits, with and without program scenarios were constructed. In the without program
scenario, increasing operation costs related to the use of additional chemical reagents, and
to the development of alternative potable sources in the future (including their
incremental operational costs for electricity, chemicals, etc), were compared with the
with program scenario which involves considerable investment costs in the first five
years but lower operational costs.

 In addition, an evaluation and comparison of the data of the areas in the basin that
contribute the most for phosphorus load to the water bodies, plus data of population
density and poverty in these areas, assisted the program team in better defining the main
areas and types of interventions that would cause major positive impacts on the quality of
water of the reservoirs and the watercourses that feed them, as well as positive impacts on
the quality of life of the basins resident population.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower's capacity to handle safeguard issues is generally good. The State
Secretariat for Water, Sanitation and Water Resources (SSRH, former SSE) leaded the
preparation of the regional strategic environmental assessment, the social assessment and
the resettlement policy framework for the Program, in close collaboration with the State
Secretariat for the Environment and the State Secretariat for Housing. All three
secretariats, as well as the State Water Company, have considerable experience with
World Bank, IDB, JBIC and other financers for programs which include environmental
and resettlement issues. These three secretariats were responsible for the implementation
of the Bank-financed Guarapiranga program from 1992-2000, with a total cost of US$
400 million, which successfully implemented similar environmental and resettlement
activities in the Guarapiranga sub-basin
 The proposed activities to be implemented under the Program have been developed
during preparation to the conceptual level of design. During Program implementation the
respective interventions will be detailed to the level of final engineering designs for the
civil works interventions and to the levels of final terms of reference for the consultancies
assignments.

  Regarding safeguard policies, specific Environmental and Social Impacts Assessment
(ESIA) reports for each municipality were conducted during the preparation of the
project. These reports identify the potential impacts associated with different typologies
of Project investments (urbanization civil works, resettlements works, recovery of
protected areas, water supply and sanitation systems and reduction of water losses), call
for minimization of Project impacts; specify the guidelines and procedures to be used in
assessing environmental and social impacts during the sub-project design stage; and
provide guidance on the preparation of Environmental Management Plans to address site-
specific impacts during sub-project implementation. There is a sequenced approach to
safeguards management: (i) safeguards procedures and frameworks have been prepared;
(ii) site-specific simplified EAs will be carried out for all sub-projects with potential
environmental and social impacts and impact mitigation/compensation plan drawn up, as
needed; and (iii) environmental supervision of civil works, during implementation
process, as described in Operational Manual (item 4.6 - Environmental and Social
Procedures).

  The scope of the specific EA, including the Environmental Management Plan (EMP),
will include: (i) a description of the sub-project and assessment of alternative options; (ii)
identification of Project impacts; (iii) mitigation programs; (iv) arrangements and
timetable consultations; (v) specification of grievance mechanisms; (vi) institutional
responsibilities; (vii) timetables; (viii) budgets; and (ix) monitoring and evaluation plan.

 These analyses will be complemented by the requisite environmental impact studies that
are an obligatory requirement for applying for environmental licenses in accordance with
the environmental legislation of the State of Sao Paulo. The corresponding individual
environmental impact assessment (EIA) reports will be submitted to the Bank for analysis
and approval. The preliminary, installation and operational environmental licenses related
to each of the civil works interventions will also be submitted to the Bank. Submission to
the Bank of the preliminary license for a particular intervention will be a condition for the
bidding of the corresponding works, and submission of the installation license a condition
for signature of the associated works contract. These implementation conditions will be
presented in the respective loan agreements.

 Besides the ESIA report, the borrower also prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework.
 The Resettlement Policy Framework developed for the Program was designed to guide
the resettlement process for the families living in risk-prone areas that will be targeted
with investments under the Program. Activities under Component 2 of the Program
(Urban Integration) will involve the resettlement of approximately 1,200 families.
Precise resettlement action plans (RAPs) will be developed in consultation with area
residents and in conjunction with the technical process of planning the urban
improvements in each slum and irregular settlement. Each RAP will be sent to the Bank
for approval prior to the signature of the corresponding slums upgrading works contract.
The RPF presents the Program activities generating resettlement and the distribution of
responsibilities with respect to the resettlement activities.

 The RPF also includes (i) principles and objectives governing resettlement preparation
and implementation; (ii) a description of the process for preparing and approving
resettlement action plans; (iii) resettlement alternatives to be offered with close attention
to vulnerable families; (iv) eligibility criteria for defining various categories of displaced
people; (v) legal framework; (vi) method of valuing assets; (vii) organizational
procedures for delivery of entitlements; (viii) grievance redress mechanism; (ix) a
description of arrangements for funding resettlement; (x) a description of mechanisms for
consultations; and (xi) arrangements for monitoring and evaluation.
 The Borrower has the capacity to implement safeguard-related issues and the Program
has the technical assistance and other resources needed to implement appropriate
mitigating measures.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Besides the state and municipal government entities directly involved in the execution of
the Program (GESP, SABESP, SSRH (former SSE), SMA, SH/CDHU, PMSBC, PMG),
the social assessment also identified a number of key stakeholders that will participate in
the Program s implementation, including environmental and social NGOs, and
community and other associations.

 During preparation, a number of consultations and discussions were carried out with the
Alto Tiete basin committee and agency, and with the basin sub-committees of the
Juqueri-Cantareira, Tiete-Cabeceiras, Cotia-Guarapiranga, Billings-Tamanduate - and
Pinheiros-Pirapora sub-basins - including consultation on the terms of reference for the
EIA. The committee and the subcommittees are composed of representatives of state and
municipal governments, civil society and academia, amongst others. In addition, a
number of municipal and local entities and organizations were involved in these
discussions/consultations. A next round of consultations, following the dissemination of
the EIA report, was undertaken in June 2007, following the Pre-Appraisal mission. The
Program design and objectives were endorsed during these consultations.

 During preparation and implementation of the engineering designs, especially those
related to the urbanization of slums and irregular settlements and to the provision of WSS
and related services, a considerable amount of social participation and feedback is
anticipated, as was the case during implementation of the Guarapiranga Program. In
addition, the proposed Program includes for the social overview of civil works
interventions, as well as for the undertaking of public opinion surveys to register and
mitigate any unsatisfactory aspects of the Program s interventions.

  Component 1 of the Program includes complementary activities that will contribute to
the strengthening of communication and social participation, including: (i) capacity
building events for environmental agents; (ii) workshops for community participation;
(iii) development of educational videos and radio programs and the carrying out of
environmental education programs for stakeholders; (iv) preparation of environmental
and social diagnosis for awareness building; (v) the carrying out beneficiary surveys; (vi)
support to community mobilization, social outreach and other During preparation and
implementation of the project design, especially the ones related to slum urbanization,
urban recovery and IWSS activities, the Mananciais Horizontal APL Program included
considerable social participation, as was carried out during the Guarapiranga Program. In
addition, the Mananciais Horizontal APL Program included the social supervision of
works after conclusion by carrying out community surveys to improve any unsatisfactory
results.

 The distribution of responsibilities concerning the Program#s environmental and
resettlement activities across among the different participating institutions are presented
in the specific annexes of the ESIA and in a summary form in Annex 10 of the Program
PAD.

 The ESIA updated regarding the PMG and PMSBC specific annexes as well as the
updated RF have been disclosed in country on 06/28/2011, at the Mananciais Program
website, and in both the Guarulhos and Sao Bernardo de Campo municipality's websites,
and in the InfoShop on 07/19/2011.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           No
 Date of receipt by the Bank                          01/27/2011
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                      06/28/2011
 Date of submission to InfoShop                       07/19/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                              08/25/2011
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 04/18/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             07/18/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              08/21/2007
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
  Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                           N/A
  Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts      N/A
  (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
  Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements        N/A
  been made for public awareness and training?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Oscar E. Alvarado                         06/03/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Clarisse Torrens Borges Dall Acqua        07/12/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Clarisse Torrens Borges Dall Acqua        07/12/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan                           07/15/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Guang Zhe Chen                            07/14/2011
  Comments:
