                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC6140


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/22/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Brazil                                Project ID: P121167
Project Name: Ceara Rural Sustainable Development and Competitiveness
Task Team Leader: Maria de Fatima de Sousa Amazonas
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 31, 2011 Estimated Board Date: November 22, 2011
Managing Unit: LCSAR                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);Water supply
(25%);Irrigation and drainage (15%);Crops (10%);Information technology (10%)
Theme: Rural markets (35%);Rural services and infrastructure (25%);Trade facilitation
and market access (15%);Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (15%);Rural
policies and institutions (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           100.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                        50.00
                                                                        50.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
1. Ceará, one of the poorest states in Brazil: rural poverty in Brazil is concentrated in the
Northeast region of the country. Per capita income in this region is only half the average for the
country. Seventy percent of Brazilian farms with less than five hectares are in the Northeast. It
lags behind the southern region in many social indicators. For instance, 55 percent of its rural
population are illiterate or have less than one year of schooling. The state has made solid
progress in improving both economic and social indicators in recent years. Between 1985 and
2008, the State#s GDP (currently ranked 12th out of 27 States in Brazil) grew by an accumulated
117%, well above Brazil (79%) and the Northeast (66%). From 1981 to 2007, the average years
of schooling per adult in Ceará rose by 144%, out-performing 22 Brazilian States. Other social
indicators, including infant mortality and life expectancy, also have shown significant
improvement over the last two decades.
  Notwithstanding this recent progress, the state faces significant challenges. Poverty levels are
still unacceptably high in Ceará, with 12.73% of its population living below the regional extreme
poverty line # which is considering the required income to consume the calorically minimum
intake (2,000/day) according to the World Health Organization (WHO) #, and almost a third of
people (30.7%) below the regional poverty line. Contradictorily, public investment as a share of
GDP is the 5th lowest among Brazilian States, having never surpassed 1% of GDP since 1985. It
is evident that to obtain sustaining social inclusion gains and a substantial reduction in current
poverty levels will require more rapid economic growth with inclusiveness.
  2. Ceará inclusive growth strategy: Appropriately, under the present state administration,
reelected in 2010 after a four-year term, greater emphasis has been placed on #inclusive growth#,
while maintaining a commitment to develop further the good public sector management practices
supported during the previous term. The concern for inclusive growth, or a growth pattern that
includes all income strata, is not new. What is different is the urgency for achieving greater
inclusiveness -- and a nascent realization that without it, sustained growth will not be possible in
the near future and further.
  Improving agricultural productivity can help not only the rural poor by directly increasing their
income, but also the urban poor by lowering food prices. The state has to increase efforts to
reverse the decline in agricultural investments. To see a rise in employment and productivity as a
result, it will need to capitalize on the key linkages with agro-business and small and medium
enterprises, as well as address productivity issues in the semi-arid ecosystem that covers most of
the state, such as environmentally sound land use practices and access to water.
  3. The Ceará Rural Sustainable Development and Competitiveness Project has as development
objective to contribute to the state inclusive growth promoting continuous competitiveness
improvement of family agriculture farmers through their participation in prioritized productive
clusters and by expanding their access to supporting infrastructure, through drinkable/production
water distribution and logistics investments.
  Institutional strengthening is also an important objective, given the continued need for
territorial development efforts in the State of Ceará, adopting an integrated approach to deliver
public services and project#s activities in the field in order to achieve development objectives
timely and with more impact. It will be based on a multisectoral approach that requires a very
well designed institutional arrangement/management, workflow and monitoring system, based
on performance indicators and results.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The total Loan request at US$ 200 million was approved by the Federal Government / COFIEX
Recommendation N° 1223 in December 2010, in two tranches (of 50% each); therefore, the Loan
for this Project phase is confirmed at US$100 million, with total project cost of US$150 million
and duration of four years. The Project would be financed by a Specific Investment Loan
(US$100 million) combined with counterpart financing from the State of Ceará (US$50 million).
 The proposed three project components would support the inclusive growth and sustainable
development themes expressed by the State of Ceará, chiefly through facilitating and
strengthening competitive and innovative productive clusters and activities, and contributing to
the universal access to basic rural infrastructure, primarily water and sanitation. The project is
based on a multisectoral approach that requires well coordinated institutional management and
workflow and a monitoring system based on performance and results indicators.
 The selection of targeted beneficiaries and areas would be based on explicit inclusion and
exclusion factors, namely: (a) previous productive experience and market demand (anchor
enterprises) allied to potentiality and competitiveness of selected beneficiaries / areas # clusters
assessment (b) water scarcity vis-à-vis water resources availability (Pacto das Águas Strategic
Plan and Cinturão das Águas Program, both to improve/universalize access to water) and (c)
two-folders sustainability # environmentally and economically sustainable. Additionally, will be
considered the aggregation of municipalities/producers and spatial continuity, economic
dynamism, water scarcity and complementarities with other policies, programs and projects
(including other Bank-supported projects), with transparent eligibility and prioritization criteria.

 Component 1: Economic Inclusion (US$66.5 million) would finance business plans proposed,
developed and implemented by participating rural producer organizations. The business plan
would define the producers# organizations role in the context of the productive clusters and
would promote: (i) productivity-inducing, climate-smart investments in fixed capital (e.g., plant
and equipment, minor productive infrastructure), working capital, training and technical
assistance; and (ii) agricultural innovation, including business incubators, quality, labeling,
value-added through processing, contracts with municipal governments, supermarkets and agro
industries. Rural producers organizations would be responsible for a minimum of 20% of
business plan financing, either in cash or in-kind. Business plan preparation, approval and
eventual finance would be further governed by procedures outlined in the Project Operational
Manual.
 This component will be executed directly by the producers# organizations under supervision
and monitoring of Project Implementation Unit (oriented-demand approach linked to the
clusters).

  Component 2: Water Resources Distribution (US$63.5 million) would support the State#s
efforts to: (i) extend its basic infrastructure network in rural Ceará, primarily access to water
supply and sewage service for household consumption in order to support State Government
Strategy to universalize access to water in the rural areas by 2015 (in line with Pacto das Águas
and Cinturão das Águas structural investments); (ii) improve agriculture productivity through
small irrigation systems, using existing water resources and available infrastructure to enhance
production/productivity with adoption of sustainable systems and technologies; (iii) rural
infrastructures coherent with productive activities and to make them feasible and/or more
competitive; and (iv) scale up innovative management models for decentralized water
administration and service delivery, waste water reuse for agriculture.
  The project will also include natural disasters, environment and risk management, strategy and
activities.
  This component will be executed directly by the State Government institutions under
supervision and monitoring of the Project Implementation Unit (oriented-demand approach
linked to the water universalization strategy).
  Component 3: Institutional Strengthening (US$20.0 million) would finance the incremental
costs of: (i) the technical and administrative management of the proposed project, including
incremental salaries; (ii) development, implementation and supervision of the Environmental
Management Plan, the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework and the Project Communication
Strategy; (iii) updates to SDA Management Information System for use in project monitoring;
and (iv) design, development and implementation of an impact evaluation module to track
progress on results indicators.
  The project will also finance technical assistance; training and capacity building to project#s
stakeholders including the main beneficiaries, e.g. for business plan preparation, needs-
assessment, subproject design, beneficiary consultations, project implementation and
management, monitoring and evaluation. Institutional support would include limited technical
assistance and training to municipal-level authorities for participation in the Project participatory
mechanisms (such as, municipal and territorial councils) and inter-sectoral coordination in
complementary activities.

D. Project location (if known)
The area for the proposed project will be implemented in all 13 territories statewide. However
the planning unit will be defined and investments will focus in predefined areas combining two
main requirements: (i) water resources availability and (ii) linkage with productive clusters and
markets # either private or public.

 Additionally other key factors will be studied to contribute to an appropriate selection of
investment areas, such as: (i) rhythm of economic growth in the last decade; (ii) population
density in 2010; (iii) loss of rural and urban population in the last decade; (iv) areas susceptible
to desertification process; (v) spatial distribution of priority clusters; (vi) synergies with other
relevant programs; and also (vii) preliminary assessment of potential outcomes of proposed
interventions. These studies will be prepared by the borrower with the World Bank support.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The State has demonstrated satisfactory capacity to implement safeguards policies in previous
Bank-financed projects such as the ongoing Cidades do Ceará and the Rural Poverty Reduction
Project - RPRP (2001-2009), both implemented through the SDA, the State Secretariat of
Agrarian Development, through its Technical Unit (COPES), which would be responsible for
day-to-day implementation of the proposed project, including safeguards. Under the RPRP,
SDA/COPES satisfactorily implemented an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and an
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF). Additionally, SDA established a Technical,
Environmental and Social Review Committee to confirm compliance with the Project
Operational Manual, which included the Bank#s Environmental and Social Safeguards.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Judith M. Lisansky (LCSSO)
   Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSSO)
   Ms Clarisse Torrens Borges Dall Acqua (LCSEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No        TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
     One of the assumptions of the project is the adoption of environmental assessment as a
crosscutting theme for all the others, focused on the practice of proper environmental
management and explicit attention to biodiversity, climate change and environmental services.
With a territorial planning approach, the project in design level aims to foster economic growth
and inclusive development, promoting decentralization and strengthening of regional secondary
poles, with investments in: (i) economic inclusion (Component 1), (ii) water distribution and
irrigation (Component 2), and (iii) institutional enhancement (Component 3).
      The types of interventions preliminarily identified include: (i) developing and implementing
business plans for productive chains of organized smallholder producers, initially targeting, but
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes          No         TBD
not limited to, small ruminants, beekeeping and fish culture, (ii) innovative chains and non-
agricultural productive activities, as agro-ecology and environmental services (subcomponents
1.1 and 1.2), (iii) works for distributing drinking water and sanitation to aggregated rural
communities or individual systems for scattered areas (tanks), (iv) works to improve the
infrastructure for small-scale irrigation along existing sources of water (subcomponents 2.1 and
2.2), and (v) environmental management strengthening program, addressing good practices for
construction and operational procedures, including actions of land and environmental
regularization, licensing and certification of projects; and establishing a strategic network for risk
and natural disasters management, focused on severe droughts and floods; and, also training
requirements to guarantee management capacity (Component 3). The proposed investment in
water supply and irrigation will occur only in areas with adequate water availability and capacity
to meet the future demand.
       Based on the assessment of potential impacts under the proposed project, a Category B
designation is proposed. As the exact type and nature of subprojects to finance small-scale
community infrastructure (Component 2) and business plans of agricultural and not-agricultural
production chains (Component 1) would not be known ex ante (i.e., prior to project appraisal),
the Borrower would prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).
The ESMF would draw on lessons from previous operations implemented by SDA, including the
Rural Poverty Reduction Project (RPRP), and also other projects as PRODHAM, PROAGUA,
PROGERIRH and FECOP implemented by Ceará State, with good practices of soil conservation
and recovery of degraded areas. The ESMF will focus on Project-specific aspects, such as
institutional arrangements and capacity, regulatory framework, environmental screening
procedures and criteria and licensing. The ESMF will also provide guidance on: (i) identifying
the potential impacts associated with the typology of subproject investments; (ii) minimizing
potential impacts for productive and infrastructure projects; (iii) specifying procedures to be used
in assessing environmental and social impacts during the subproject design stage; and (iv)
addressing identified impacts during the subproject implementation. The ESMF will provide
baseline scenarios of agricultural production and other productive chains of interest as well as an
in-depth analysis of water resources in the region, to properly select and prioritize investments.
The ESMF would also present a budget and implementation schedule, both of which would be
integrated into the overall project operation plan.
       The proposed project interventions will be small-scale, oriented demand-driven investments
(i.e., subprojects). These subproject would not cause significant adverse environmental impacts,
related mainly to infrastructure development (i.e., water, sanitation and rural roads), new
agricultural practices (i.e., product diversification, conservation agriculture, promotion of value
added products, and product certification) and non-agricultural activities such as small-scale
processing units. Potential adverse impacts will be limited, site-specific, largely reversible, and
readily and reliably mitigated through known methods. The productive subproject selection will
be consistent with: (i) the national, state and local legislation concerning Brazilian Forest Code,
natural habitats and protected areas (Law 4771/65; SNUC Law 9985/00, Decree 4340/02 and
Decree 5758/06); and (ii) World Bank safeguards policies.
       Negative impacts are mostly expected to result from small-scale construction activities
under Component 1. Although these impacts are expected to be small, transitory and of short
duration, the ESMF will specify guidelines and procedures to be followed by the construction
contractors, covering aspects such as location of construction camps, clearance of vegetation,
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes           No          TBD
noise, traffic control, safety signaling, disposal of construction debris and waste material to be
incorporated in the bidding documents for civil works. Compliance with the practices outlined in
the Project Operational Manual would be a contractual obligation of the contractors. Regarding
small ruminants and irrigation activities under Components 1 and 2, some typology of potential
impacts will arise from the suite of potential subproject activities, related to desertification
process and vulnerability of semi-arid climate change, exploitation of native vegetation, use of
rudimentary management practices, increasing demand of firewood for tannery and frigorific or
even the potential degradation of surface and groundwater by entrainment of soil caused by
poorly dimensioned irrigation, potential increase in salinity and improper disposal of packaging
of chemicals, with demands for appropriate mitigation measures.
      The Project implementation procedures will adopt strict environmental screens to ensure
that approved subprojects demonstrate low potential for negative impact. The ESMF would
assess the most common types of intervention expected, in order to propose mitigation measures
a priori. To minimize expected adverse impacts on environmental and social conditions, there is
a negative list with types of project activities that will not be supported by the loan, including: (i)
productive activities that require commercial forest harvesting, wood extraction or firewood use
in the production chain; (ii) interventions that include purchase of equipment for use in tropical
forests; (iii) interventions that include the use of chemicals in categories IA and IB defined by
WHO; (iv) interventions that promote degradation of critical natural habitats, deforestation or
loss of native vegetation; (v) interventions in the productive chains located in areas under the
process of desertification without the adoption of appropriate management plans; (iv)
interventions in areas of high risk of natural disasters; (vi) interventions in areas of dispute and
/or petition for recognition as indigenous lands; and (vii) interventions in water supply and
irrigation that rely on existing dams 15 meters or more in height.
      Regarding climate changes, the FUNCEME strategic action into the Project should be
highlighted, bringing technical knowledge in meteorological and water resources studies and
future scenarios for the State of Ceará. IPECE - Instituto de Pesquisas e Estudos Estratégicos is
responsible for studies, researches, evaluations; socioeconomic and geographic information of
the state, as well acting as a knowledge management institution, which will work closely with
SDA in strategic studies to support alternative scenarios for production and natural resources use,
as well as climate vulnerability and adaptation. Through the GEF Mata Branca the State
Government is already working in one of the most vulnerable areas Sertão dos Inhamuns using a
Strategic Environmental Assessment approach.
      SDA would submit to the Bank a draft EA and ESMF by late-June 2011, prior to project
appraisal, and after a widely consulted upon document prior to being finalized. The Project plans
to establish a technical committee (as under the previous RPRP) with the specific purpose of
evaluating subprojects environmental eligibility, and monitoring implementation compliance
with Bank safeguards policy throughout the subproject cycle. The terms of reference for these
studies was submitted to Bank review and discussed with the borrower during the latest mission
(May 9 to 13).
      It was also requested that an independent social assessment was conducted by the client
addressing (a) the most vulnerable groups of the state rural population, (b) the issues related to
the main challenges and opportunities faced by family farmers to access the market and be
competitively inserted on the most profitable productive chains that will be supported by the
Bank operation goat breeding, beekeeping and fish farming and (c) a special case study of the
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No          TBD
livelihood conditions of rural families who have been previously resettled by the construction of
dams and are eligible for the projects sub-component on irrigation. The terms of reference for
these studies shall be submitted to Bank review and no objection by May 1st.
      SDA has capacity on safeguards management given their experience on the Sao Jose I and
II projects and other projects implemented by others government units.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                         X
    While activities are not planned for Areas of Permanent Preservation (APP) and legal
Reserves (RL), activities under the project components should nonetheless lead to positive
impacts on natural habitats, through the direct protection and rehabilitation of these areas,
following the provisions of the Brazilian Forest Code. Nevertheless, OP 4.04 is triggered and all
planning activities that may affect natural habitats must follow World Bank policies, identifying
monitoring and management activities to prevent or mitigate any possible negative impact.
      The Project has provisions to regenerate and reforest water-producing systems (mainly
riparian vegetation), benefiting also local biodiversity preservation and restoration. Subprojects
resulting in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats will not be
eligible.
      Springs and river margins areas are classified as Permanent Preservation Areas (APP), and
legally protected by the Brazilian Legislation (Federal Law 4771/65). APP use for water systems
development, intake and pipelines, requires specific permitting, mitigation and regeneration
measures. Despite the expected positive impacts, the ESMF should include clear guidance
regarding direct and indirect impacts on natural habitats.
      Special attention should be given to areas where desertification process was already
identified by the State (IPECE, 2010). These amount to 30,000 km2 representing 23% of the
Caatinga biome of Ceará.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                  X
    It is not expected that Project implementation will have negative impacts on forest resources.
Subprojects with the potential for conversion or degradation of natural forest or other natural
habitats that are likely to have significant adverse environmental impacts which are sensitive,
diverse or unprecedented are ineligible. The Project also excludes activities that require
commercial forest harvesting, wood extraction or firewood use in the production chain.
Activities resulting in reforestation and loss of native vegetation cover will not be allowed. The
Project would contribute to conserve and restore natural vegetation, generating positive impacts
through the maintenance and/or recovery of natural vegetation on rural private land holdings on
steep slopes, along water courses (up to a certain distance from the riparian margin) or in the
vicinity of springs. Additionally, the Project would contribute to conserve and/or restore a set-
aside area called Legal Reserve (Reserva Legal # RL) in these private holdings. As already
mentioned, the subproject selection procedures would be consistent with the Brazilian Forest
Code. Typical activities should support mainly conservation and restoration activities, and
should be planned and executed in such a way to minimize or prevent negative impacts on forest
areas.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                             X
    The Project would not finance any pesticides or other chemical amendments that would
trigger OP 4.09. Nevertheless, minor amounts of pesticides would probably continue to be used
in the short term by a small portion of targeted small-scale farms. The Project would encourage
and support technical assistance for the adoption of organic agriculture and of proven,
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes            No         TBD
economically-and environmentally-sustainable Integrated Pest Management (IPM). This
approach would increase farmer productivity (i.e., yields), reduce input costs and human health
risk, and minimize adverse environmental impacts through the virtual elimination of pesticide
use. The IPM approach further improves the sustainability of agro-ecosystems by focusing on the
knowledge and skills of farmers to better enable natural resource management.
      The need to use pesticides or herbicides should be indicated in each subproject, as well as
the IPM measures to be adopted. When the use of pesticides or herbicides is justified, an analysis
of potential negative impacts resulting from the use of these chemicals and the risks associated
with the inappropriate handling or storing of their containers should be conducted. The projects
should also include measures to reduce those risks, in compliance with the Law 7802/89.
      A Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be prepared and incorporated into the ESMF and the
Project Operational Manual. The PMP would make use of the World Health Organization#s
Recommended Classification of Pesticides by Hazard and Guidelines to Classification (Geneva;
WHO 1994-95). The PMP would also exclude finance under the proposed project for formulated
products that fall into WHO classes IA and IB, or formulation of products in Class II, if: (i) the
country lacks restrictions on their distribution and use; or (ii) they are likely to be used by, or be
accessible to, lay personnel, farmers, or others without training, equipment, and facilities to
handle, store, and apply these products properly.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                X
    Project implementation would not cause any negative impact on known physical cultural
resources (PCR). Proposed subprojects with expected direct and negative impact on known
archeological, paleontological, historical or other culturally significant sites will not be eligible.
      The State of Ceará has many historical and archeological sites. Brazil has a well-developed
legislative and normative framework, which is under Federal oversight by the National Institute
for Protection of Historical and Archeological Sites (IPHAN). Ceará also has the State Agency, -
Regional IPHAN (4a Superintendência Estadual do IPHAN) and Secretaria da Cultura, tasked
with the identification, restoration and protection of PCR in the State.
      The chance findings procedures would be included in the Project Operational Manual for
guidance during project implementation, particularly in regions with PCR sites already mapped
by Regional IPHAN. SDA may engage Secretaria da Cultura or other entities with the proven
experience to implement chance findings procedures.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                         X
    There are about 23,000 indigenous peoples recognized or claiming recognition in the State of
Ceará. They comprise 12 ethnic groups (Anacé, Anambé, Canindé, Gavião, Jenipapo-Kanindé,
Kalabaça, Kariri, Pitaguari, Potiguara, Tabajara, Tapeba and Tremembé). Data from 2006
PNAD/IBGE show that 59.2% of the indigenous population lived below the poverty line at that
time. On average, indigenous people earned the smallest monthly per capita income equivalent to
less than 24% of the minimum wage. They have also been driven from rural to urban areas,
where they tend to reside in small municipalities. Thus, from 1996 to 2006, their urbanization
rate rose from 47% to 95%.
      Currently the State#s indigenous population is scattered across 75 communities located
within 16 municipalities. However, most of these indigenous lands have not yet been fully
regularized. Three lands (Córrego João Pereira, Lagoa Encantada and Pitaguary), comprising 6.7
thousand hectares, have been regularized and one (Tapeba) is being delimited. The other areas
are still being identified. Insufficient and/or unsecure land tenure is a major constraint on
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes           No         TBD
indigenous peoples# livelihoods and poses a key challenge to their inclusion and participation in
the project.
      The recently closed World Bank Rural Poverty Reduction Project (RPRP) in Ceará
explicitly sought the inclusion of indigenous peoples by: (a) implementing an Indigenous
Peoples Planning Framework; (b) restructuring the deliberative municipal councils for creating
"space" for greater participation by them; and, (c) conducting multiple field seminars, workshops
and consultations to explain project objectives and rules, define areas for special focus, and
survey indigenous communities' initial subproject demands and concerns. Nevertheless, as most
indigenous groups are still awaiting formal recognition by FUNAI, no subprojects were financed
for indigenous groups by the end of the project. Nevertheless, the lessons learned will provide an
appropriate foundation for rapid progress and the more effective engagement of indigenous
peoples as part of the new project.
      As site-specific project investments cannot be defined at the preparation stage, the client is
preparing an Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework. Thus, during preparation of the new project,
the client will carry out another social assessment and engage in a process of free, prior and
informed consultations with indigenous peoples. The new draft IPPF that results from this
process will provide for the preparation of site-specific Indigenous Peoples Plans which will
serve to document, among other things, that the site-specific investments enjoy broad community
support. The final IPPF will incorporate indigenous inputs and recommendations, document the
consultation process, and take into account the key issue of land tenure. It will also propose
mechanisms for enhancing indigenous peoples# access to project benefits. The IPPF would be
formally submitted to the Bank for review by the end of July 2011 and publicly disseminated
prior to project appraisal.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                X
    It is expected that the new operation will not cause physical resettlement or economic
displacement. Nonetheless, some complementary investments in road maintenance and
enhancement which are needed to improve access from productive areas to market will be
supported. These complementary investments may require land acquisition and, potentially,
might cause adverse effects of physical and economic displacement, although small in scope and
locally confined. Besides, investments in community infrastructure and facilities may also be
required to strengthen productive chains and they may also require land acquisition. In
consequence, the Bank team triggered OP 4.12, and the client is preparing a Resettlement Policy
Framework for the project. This draft RPF will be consulted and submitted to the Bank for
review by the end of April 2011, and publically disseminated prior to project appraisal.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                          X
    It is not expected the possibility of promoting investments in water supply and irrigation
projects that will depend on the storage and operation of existing dams with 15 meters or more in
height.
      However, considering: (i) the high provision of water resources infrastructure installed in
the state over the past years, including the World Bank financing, and (ii) the current standard of
excellence in water resources management, with good practices already incorporated into the
SRH and COGERH routine procedures; as a precautionary measure, the OP 4.37 - Safety of
Dams is triggered, not to limit any possibility of use of existing water sources.
      Therefore, in the preparation phase of the project the Borrower should prepare a conceptual
framework of procedures to be adopted during the implementation phase. The borrower should
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes          No         TBD
arrange for one or more independent dam specialists to: (a) inspect and evaluate the safety status
of the existing dam, its appurtenances, and its performance history; (b) review and evaluate the
owner#s operation and maintenance procedures; and (c) provide a written report of findings and
recommendations for any remedial work or safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the
existing dam to an acceptable standard of safety. Previous assessments of dam safety or
recommendations of improvements needed in existing dam may also be accept by the Bank, if
the borrower provides evidence that (a) an effective dam safety program is already in operation,
and (b) full-level inspections and dam safety assessments of the existing dam, which are
satisfactory to the Bank, have already been conducted and documented.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                 X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                          X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 07/20/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
     SDA has begun preparation of: (i) the Environmental and Social Management Framework
   (ESMF); and (ii) the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF). Drafts of each would
   be submitted to the Bank for review and comments by end-June 2011. The finalized
     ESMF and IPPF would be disclosed in the Infoshop and in-country prior to project
   appraisal.




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Ms Maria de Fatima de Sousa Amazonas   06/08/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Glenn S. Morgan                     07/06/2011
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Ms Ethel Sennhauser                    07/15/2011
   Comments:
