                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/11/2011                                  Report No.: AC6490
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Brazil                                Project ID: P120139
Project Name: BR Pernambuco Rural Economic Inclusion Project
Task Team Leader: Edward William Bresnyan
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 21, 2011        Estimated Board Date: November 22, 2011
Managing Unit: LCSAR                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);Agro-industry, marketing,
and trade (30%);Water supply (20%);Information technology (10%)
Theme: Rural markets (40%);Technology diffusion (30%);Trade facilitation and market
access (20%);Rural policies and institutions (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           100.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                       35.25
         Financing Gap                                                   0.00
                                                                        35.25
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed project would support the Borrower#s Results Management Framework,
Todos por Pernambuco, by: (i) promoting rural business initiatives; and (ii) expanding
rural access to water and other complementary infrastructure.

3. Project Description
In the State of Pernambuco, rural poverty accounts for over one-third of the total state
poverty, despite the rural population share of about 20%. The rural poverty headcount of
roughly 45% is slightly below that of the Northeast as a whole (50%) but substantially
above the Pernambuco urban headcount of 25%. Recent measures of the Human
Development Index (HDI) show Pernambuco ranked 23rd among the 27 Brazilian states,
with an HDI of 0.718. Examination of the data would indicate a rural HDI of roughly
0.550.
 One of the reasons behind this elevated level of rural poverty is low agricultural
productivity. Pernambuco is home to 5% of the country#s population and 6% of the
agricultural labor force, yet generates only 2% of the Agricultural Gross Domestic
Product (Ag GDP). For the staple crops of beans and rice, family farm yields are about
one-half of those for non-family farms and, overall, average yields are only one-half of
those for the nation as a whole. Family farms, some 90% of total farm establishments
statewide, capture only 52% of value-added agricultural production. Average annual
family farm income (US$5,100) is about one-tenth of that for commercial farms, a
contributing factor to a rural Gini coefficient which exceeds 0.8 (IBGE 2006). Moving
forward, the challenge for Pernambuco, and for Brazil more widely, will be to increase
rural productivity with #climate-smart# and inclusive growth strategies.
  Another factor influencing rural poverty in Pernambuco is the general scarcity of water.
Pernambuco is one of Brazil#s driest states, with average annual per capita water
availability of 1,320 m3, equivalent to only 4% of the national average. The combined
semi-arid Sertão and transitional Agreste sub-regions represent 89% of the State#s
territory yet have only about 20% of its available water, with per capita annual water
availability ranging from 400 m3 to 800 m3, respectively. The impact of this extremely
low level of water availability is a relatively stunted irrigated area (only 3% of the state#s
total agricultural area) and periodic lack of water supply to rural enterprises and
households, significantly limiting the growth of commercial food processing and
domestic preliminary processing. The lack of adequate rural sanitation systems is also a
constraint to commercial processing, even at the level of the smaller cooperative
associations.
  A third factor which exacerbates rural poverty is the lack of structural investments in
transport and logistics, which reduce access to local and regional markets, by leading to
stunted market opportunities owing to high transport costs, increased transport times and
reduced access to fresh markets, and increased costs of off-farm inputs. Reducing these
coordination costs, while achieving needed productivity gains, will be key to raising rural
competitiveness.
  From the point of view of agricultural production, there is much ground to be gained by
small-scale producers in Pernambuco. Over the past decade, Brazil has become a
globally competitive powerhouse in agriculture, with a nearly 70% increase in the value-
added of crop production and a ten-fold increase in beef exports. Brazil is now the world
leader in exports of poultry, sugar and ethanol and second worldwide in soybean exports.
These impressive results attest to a strong history of capital investment and technological
innovation in the sector, particularly in agricultural research, focusing on commercial
agriculture, which comprises 16% of total farms nationwide. However, aside from strong
performance in the horticultural sector around Petrolina (primarily irrigated parcels),
agriculture in Pernambuco, particularly family agriculture, has not participated
significantly in this production and export boom.
  For these reasons, at a September 2009 meeting with Northeast Governors (and
reiterated in a similar meeting in June 2011), the Bank articulated a strategic vision for
continued engagement with Pernambuco and other Northeast states, emphasizing: (i)
economic growth with inclusion and innovation; (ii) improved water productivity and
management; and (iii) structural investments to enhance logistics and coordination. The
State of Pernambuco#s 2008-2011 multi-year investment plan (PPA) and recent
consultations toward its updated PPA (2012-2015) independently converge with this
three-pronged approach by focusing on:
  #     strengthening value chains and forging Local Productive Alliances (LPAs);
  #      prioritizing expanded access to safe and reliable water for both human
consumption and productive use through improved water resources development and
constructing stronger water management policies and practices; and
  #      financing structural investments to improve the enabling environment and
encourage greater private investment.
  Regarding structural investments, recent examples include the Suape Port Complex and
the industrial pole of Vitoria de Santo Antão (agroprocessing); several big-ticket
infrastructure projects are also planned, particularly the expansion of BR-101 and BR-
104, water pipelines (Pajeu and Agreste) and irrigation canals, and the Saupe-Recife-
Salgueiro corridor of the Trans-Northeast railway. The State has also worked to stimulate
integration across several value chains, most notably fresh fruits and vegetables, dairy,
small ruminants (e.g., lamb, goat), beekeeping and aquaculture. Efforts in the small-scale
dairy sector show the benefits of building LPAs: under the program Milk for All (Leite
para Todos) 4,400 enterprises have produced 33 million liters (2008), benefiting some
90,000 families across 154 municipalities.
  Main Challenges Facing Local Productive Alliances: Low rural productivity in
Pernambuco is tied to several constraints, among the most important of which are:
  #      low technological innovation, in terms of product, process and organization, as
well as downside risks of production losses and threats to household food security, which
could be exacerbated by increasing climate variability and subsequent water scarcity;
  #      weak market intelligence that hinders a coordinated and targeted supply response;
  #      poor access to capital, needed to boost smallholder asset accumulation on several
fronts: physical, financial, human, managerial, and social; and
  #      disconnect between supply-driven technical assistance and the expressed demands
of the family farm, both for meeting market requirements (e.g., sanitary restrictions and
certification) and reducing vulnerability through climate change adaptation.
  The public sector must also invest in structural investments that create the foundation
for improved rural services provision and rural competitiveness, particularly in
infrastructure (e.g., rural roads and water resources to improve logistics coordination),
phyto-sanitary regulation and certification, information and communication technologies
(ICT), and technical knowledge generation and diffusion. Meanwhile, responses from
commercial actors in the rural sector are needed so that the market constraints limiting
the competitiveness of family farms can be relaxed. Adoption of adequate technology,
market know-how, and the link to the markets # all in a market-driven and timely manner
- are major areas where private investment and private sector leadership are required.
  As given in the PPA (2008-11), Pernambuco#s approach to increased rural productivity
builds on the following tenets:
  #      Regional/territorial approach: Pernambuco#s twelve administrative regions and
its six Territórios da Cidadania will aid in concentrating and coordinating various
Federal- and State-level programs to boost economic and social inclusion.
  #      Climate-smart responses: The proposed project would stimulate innovations that
jointly raise agricultural productivity, increase the efficient use of scarce water, and
promote climate change resilience while reducing carbon emissions.
  #      Innovation: Rural producers must adopt new technologies and access greater
commercial intelligence in order to thrive in dynamic markets. This will require fresh
learning approaches to stimulate a #rural innovation culture# conducive to
competitiveness and capable of connecting education to jobs.
  #      Collective Action: Small-scale producers, working together under a shared
objective, can reduce asymmetric bargaining power in markets traditionally dominated by
intermediaries. Previous Bank-financed operations in Pernambuco have fostered more
than 5,000 such common interest groups, primarily composed of households engaged in
small-scale production, which would be targeted under the proposed operation.
  #      Value chains: Rural producer-based organizations that participate in value chains
can: (i) improve uptake of technological innovation through a scaled approach to
technical assistance; (ii) expand access to timely commercial intelligence through
interaction with downstream actors (e.g., processors, institutional buyers, freight-
forwarders); and (iii) reduce individual risks through risk spreading across value chain
actors.
  #      Equity: Equity among value chain partners would be promoted through alliances
(i.e. LPAs) that promote #win-win# market solutions.
  Recent initiatives in irrigated agriculture hold promise for expanding smallholder
participation in this sector. For example, the Public-Private Partnership (PPP) being
forged in the Pontal irrigation perimeter mandates that at least 25% of these irrigated
lands be offered to small-scale producers, preferably in a commercial alliance with
larger-scale value chain participants (empresas âncoras) that occupy the remaining 75%.
Additionally, existing perimeters with sizeable family farm participation (e.g., Brígida,
with 1,000 family farmers cultivating 3,000 irrigated hectares), can serve as test cases for
constructing greater access to private and institutional markets. In sum, PPPs contribute
to the overall objective of the proposed project by: (i) improving the efficiency of
existing productive infrastructure; and (ii) increasing the economic inclusion of
smallholders in verified market opportunities.
  Responding to water scarcity and its persistent unreliable supply, which constrains rural
economic performance and social development, the State has prioritized the water sector
in its development strategy, aiming to expand access to safe and reliable water for both
human consumption and productive use through: (i) improved water resources
development; and (ii) stronger management policies and practices for water infrastructure
and sanitation services. As climate change will further intensify moisture deficits in
Pernambuco, significant adjustments in water use for food production will be required,
especially in dry land areas where rain-fed agriculture dominates. Water productivity in
semi-arid rain fed cropping systems is quite low, with only 10 to 30% of total rainfall
actually absorbed in production. Without improvements in #crop per drop#, future
shortages of water could render agriculture non-viable or propel a shift toward less
reliance on annual crops and more on perennial and livestock-based production systems.
Adaptation measures to moderate this scenario include:
  #      Rainwater harvesting, to capture and conserve rainfall and improve its
productivity;
  #      ICT solutions, leveraging soils mapping, precision agriculture, climate modeling
and historical rainfall time-series to inform planting and input decisions;
  #      Crop diversification and crop biotechnology solutions, incorporating drought-
tolerant crops, and, where feasible, nanotechnologies; and
  #       Supplementary irrigation, such as next-generation drip and aspiration
technologies and the reuse of treated wastewater.
  Project Components
  Component 1: Investments in Rural Economic Inclusion (US$67.2 million) would
finance matching grants (i.e., subprojects), consultants# services, training and technical
assistance, toward the promotion of rural businesses in the Borrower#s territory.
Specifically, activities under the Component would consist of: (i) Support to Local
Productive Alliances; and (ii) Productive Investments.
  1a. Support to Local Productive Alliances - would absorb 20% of Component costs and
support pre-investment activities to: (i) promote the overall project concept and outreach
to rural producer-based organizations (RPOs), potential commercial partners and
financing institutions; (ii) facilitate territorial strategies across selected value chains; (iii)
consistent with territorial strategies, create and consolidate local productive alliances; (iii)
identify potential business opportunities on the part of these local productive alliances
(i.e., a business proposal or perfil de negócio); (iv) fully prepare the business opportunity
into a business plan (plano de negócio); and (v) build capacity among technical service
providers to enhance the quality of their services provided to these local productive
alliances. Outreach and promotional activities would be financed to identify the RPOs,
commercial partners and financing institutions, and assist them in forming sound
territorial strategies and local productive alliances.
  1b. Productive Investments # would, with the remaining 80% of Component costs,
provide subproject matching grants to co-finance the implementation of approximately
300 feasible business plans, in the context of territorial strategies for value chains. In
order to become eligible for the subproject matching grant, a business plan must be
consistent with defined territorial strategies, financially feasible and entail a concrete
Local Productive Alliance. Subprojects would be that portion of the Local Productive
Alliance#s business plan that would be: (i) financed with proceeds from the proposed
Loan; (ii) implemented by eligible RPOs; and (iii) governed by subproject agreements
signed between the RPOs and the Borrower. Subprojects would include fixed capital
(e.g., plant and equipment, minor small-scale infrastructure), working capital and
technical assistance expenditures. RPOs would be responsible for a minimum of 20%
and up to a maximum of 50% of subproject financing, resourced either through financial
institutions (e.g., loans) or with their own contributions (in cash or in-kind). Subproject
finance would be further governed by procedures outlined in the Project Operational
Manual.
  Component 2: Complementary Rural Infrastructure (US$54.3 million) would support
the State#s efforts to extend its basic infrastructure network in rural Pernambuco,
primarily: (i) access to water supply and sanitation services for both productive use and
household consumption; (ii) improved water productivity; and (iii) promotion of
innovative management models for decentralized administration and service delivery for
water and sanitation services. The component would support actions to: (i) reduce social,
cultural and environmental vulnerability in the communities of participating RPOs, and
(ii) complement Component 1 investments in contributing to the productivity and
competitiveness of productive chains, including LPAs and RPOs. Investments under
Component 2 would span the following dimensions:
 #       Rural Water and Sanitation: In the context of territorial planning, the component
would finance small-scale rural water supply systems (including, in some cases, cisterns)
and rural sanitation (including septic systems), in support of the Borrower#s goal of: (i)
universalizing access to these services, particularly in the interior of Pernambuco; and (ii)
extending application of these services to productive activities (e.g., irrigation,
aquaculture, agroindustry). Consistent with accumulated experience in rural Pernambuco
under ProRural#s oversight, these investments would be executed by participating RPOs
under existing community participation approaches.
 #      Logistics: Investments to reduce and/or eliminate, among others, bottlenecks in
the flow of value-added production along the producer chain (e.g., small bridges, all-
weather crossings, minor road reforms)
 #      Investment Management: To strengthen the day-to-day management of small-
scale rural water supply and sanitation systems -- both those financed under Component 2
and existing systems in rural Pernambuco # Component 2 would support training and
capacity-building designed to extend recent successful management pilots.
 Component 3: Project Management, Supervision, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$9.2
million) would support the incremental costs of: (i) the technical and administrative
management of the proposed project, including incremental salaries; (ii) development,
implementation and supervision of the Environmental and Social Management
Framework, the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework and the Project Communication
Strategy; (iii) updates to SARA#s Management Information System for use in project-
specific monitoring; and (iv) design, development and implementation of an impact
evaluation module to track progress on results indicators.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The area for the proposed project includes 180 municipalities - i.e., all municipalities
statewide except for those which comprise metropolitan Recife.

 Pernambuco is home to 5% of the country#s population and 6% of the agricultural labor
force. For the staple crops of beans and rice, yields for family farms are about one-half of
those for non-family farms. Yields in Pernambuco are only about one-half of those for
the nation as a whole. Family farms, some 90% of total farm establishments statewide,
capture only 52% of value-added production. Moving forward, the challenge for
Pernambuco, as well as Brazil more widely, will be to increase rural productivity with
#climate-smart# and inclusive growth strategies.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Judith M. Lisansky (LCSSO)
   Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSSO)
   Ms Maria Bernadete Ribas Lange (LCSEN)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                           X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project does not entail any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible
negative impacts.

 The Project implementation procedures will adopt strict environmental "screens" to
ensure that approved subprojects demonstrate low potential for negative impact. The
ESMF assessed the most common types of intervention expected, in order to propose
mitigation measures a priori.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
None are expected because the proposed project interventions will be small-scale,
demand-driven investments (i.e., subprojects). These subprojects would not cause
significant adverse environmental impacts, related mainly to infrastructure development
(i.e., water and sanitation), new agricultural practices (i.e., product diversification,
conservation agriculture, promotion of value added products, and product certification)
and non-agricultural activities such as small-scale processing units. Potentially adverse
environmental or social impacts will be minor or non-existent, as they will be avoided or
minimized through appropriate preventive actions and mitigation measures. The
subproject selection procedures will be consistent with: (i) the national, state and local
legislation concerning Brazilian Forest Code, natural habitats and protected areas (Law
4.771/65; SNUC - Law 9985/00, Decree 4340/02 and Decree 5758/06); and (ii) World
Bank safeguards policies.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project has been rated a category #B# as the impact is limited in scope, localized,
temporary and reversible. The Borrower has prepared an ESMF, an IPPF and an IRF. The
Project would establish a technical committee (as done under the recently closed, Bank-
financed Rural Poverty Reduction Project-RPRP) with the specific purpose of evaluating
subprojects# environmental eligibility, and monitoring implementation compliance with
Bank safeguards policy throughout the subproject cycle. During the implementation of
the RPRP, the Client established a special team to coordinate, supervise and monitor
activities related with vulnerable groups # particularly indigenous people and quilombola
communities # and has been responsible for the successful implementation of its IPPF.
The Client#s technical team is also in charge of a JSDF Grant to #level the playing field#
of quilombola communities and has developed its capacity to work with vulnerable
communities in very participatory ways. This team will be responsible for coordinating
the implementation of the IPPF in the new operation and ensuring the ongoing
consultation with indigenous people. Client capacity to manage resettlement issues will
be reviewed during appraisal to determine what special capacity building issues may
arise. If deemed necessary, capacity building in this area will be included in the yearly
project implementation plans.

  Site-specific assessments will be conducted and impact mitigation plans drawn up, as
needed, during subproject preparation which complies with the overall project safeguard
framework.

 For effective and informed decision making on the need to conduct detailed assessments
on subprojects, screening, supervision and monitoring mechanisms have been included in
the IPPF.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders associated with the Project are: the small-scale rural producers and their
representative organizations (community associations, producer groups, rural labor
unions, etc.) # including the most vulnerable social groups and traditional communities
(indigenous people and quilombola communities); municipal government and civilian
society representatives at municipal councils and territorial forums. Key stakeholders
have been involved in project preparation through the ongoing consultation process.
  The proposed project will take advantage of major gains in community organization,
social capital building and social network strengthening attained during the RPRP. Key
stakeholders will participate in the deliberative municipal councils and territorial forums
and, thus, they will be strongly involved in the planning, implementation and monitoring
of project s activities and their adherence to safeguard policies.
  In addition, the proposed project will benefit from the previously mentioned network of
collaborating governmental and nongovernmental organizations built during the RPRP
and the ongoing consultation process with indigenous representatives.
  Finally the IPPF will design a communication/mobilization campaign to ensure that
indigenous communities will be mobilized and will have access to participate on the
Project s deliberative municipal and territorial boards, to discuss their priority needs and
to present their proposals on these deliberative boards.
 From April to June 2010, eight consultations were held during regional summits of the
Municipals Councils (#Encontros Regionais dos Conselhos Municipais#). A total of 180
municipals councils were engaged in the regional summits.

 In November 2010, the ESMF was presented to the Environmental State Council
(Conselho Estadual de Meio Ambiente # CONSEMA).

 A second phase of the consultation process to discuss specific project activities took
place in March 2011. This phase was more comprehensive, focusing on civil society
organizations active in the environmental sector as well as indigenous organizations.

 During project implementation, as subprojects are prepared and potential impacts are
identified, consultations will be held locally as needed.

 The ESMF will be disseminated in Brazil through the Project website
(www.prorural.pe.gov.br), and contains a more detailed description of possible positive
and negative environmental impacts of the project supported subprojects.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06/28/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  07/14/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07/14/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06/22/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  07/14/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07/14/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06/22/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  07/14/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07/14/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                        N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                    N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                     N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                      Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                     No
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or    N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                   Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed    N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
  Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   N/A
  been carried out?
  Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           N/A
  constraints?
  Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        N/A
  provisions for certification system?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s          Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project      Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the              Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                            Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Edward William Bresnyan                      06/30/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Maria Bernadete Ribas Lange                  07/11/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Judith M. Lisansky                           07/11/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa                   07/11/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Ethel Sennhauser                             07/26/2011
  Comments:
