                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/23/2011                                    Report No.: AC6501
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Brazil                              Project ID: P126372
Project Name: Recife Swap Education and Public Management
Task Team Leader: David Evans
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 26,      Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: LCSHE                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Pre-primary education (40%);Primary education (40%);Public administration-
Other social services (8%);General finance sector (8%);General transportation sector
(4%)
Theme: Education for all (80%);Other public sector governance (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           130.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                     760.50
                                                                      760.50
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to expand coverage of improved early child
education, create conditions more conducive to learning in primary education, and
improve municipal public management.

3. Project Description
The Project will have two components, the first of which will co-finance existing eligible
government programs in early child and primary education via a Sector Wide Approach
(SWAp), and the second of which will provide technical assistance to strengthen public
sector management.

 Component 1: Strengthen coverage of Early Child Education (ECE) and create
conditions conducive to learning in Primary Education (estimated total cost: US$860.5
million; Bank: US$100.0 million). This component will expand coverage to improved
early child education and create conditions more conducive to learning at the primary
education level. It will also improve cross-sectoral articulation of services for young
children.

 Component 2: Strengthen institutions for more efficient and effective public
management (Estimated total cost: US$29.675 million; Bank: US$29.675 million). This
component will strengthen management of systems in the Municipality in seven areas:
education, tax administration, public debt management, efficiency of public expenditures,
municipal planning and results based management, urban mobility and project
management.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Project activities will take place in the urban municipality of Recife.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Sarah Keener (LCSSO)
   Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
n/a

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
 Project interventions imply some degree of construction activities, thereby triggering
OP/BP 4.01. Most Project activities are not expected to generate adverse environmental
effects. The bulk of activities involving construction will be refurbishing and
rehabilitating of schools, although some schools will be built from the ground up. Given
exact school locations are unknown, the appropriate Environmental Assessment tool is an
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) which was prepared and will be
disclosed prior to Appraisal. The EMF provides a description of the following: (i) the
environmental mitigation and monitoring measures to be taken during implementation;
(ii) waste disposal measures; (iii) construction site management criteria, including proper
safety protocols for construction workers, including the use of personal protective
equipment; (iv) dust and noise control; and (v) institutional arrangements for supervision
and oversight of environmental measures. Safety measures will also ensure that students
and teachers attending the schools where any construction activities are taking place are
not negatively affected. As appropriate, each civil works contract will specify the
required environmental management measures to be followed at each site.

 Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)
 Damage to physical cultural resources is unlikely since construction will not occur on
any known sites of cultural significance, and any construction on as yet unknown sites
will be screened for cultural significance prior to being included in the program. These
screening procedures, as well as chance-find procedures, are part of the Environmental
Management Framework (EMF), under its standard environmental rules for contractors.

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
  The project involves construction of Municipal Early Child Education Centers (CMEIs),
the ultimate location and footprint of which may change as this is a SWAp approach with
no contractual obligation to the specific centers. Thus, it is not possible at this stage to
predict with certainty that there will be no physical relocation, or adverse impacts on
livelihoods resulting from restricted access to land and other resources as defined in
OP/BP 4.12. However, a review of several sites under consideration suggests that the
likelihood of physical resettlement or economic displacement is likely to be low (with
fewer than 200 people potentially affected). The most common type of safeguards issue is
the acquisition of modest areas of land in urban Recife to build new CMEIs. The current
housing boom in Recife creates challenges for locating vacant land available for sale, and
also highlights the need to avoid the involuntary expropriation of land if at all possible.
Nonetheless, in a small number of cases, if alternative sites cannot be located, the
Municipality may seek to resettle a limited number of individual households or replace
income for persons who used the land for income generating purposes. In order to
address this possibility and the associated impacts, the project will trigger OP/BP 4.12
and proceed with a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).

  The Municipality has already prepared a draft RPF which is currently available at [name
World Bank website as well as Municipal website]. The RPF provides a screening
process, a clear roadmap and allocation of responsibilities, proper monitoring, and
grievance procedures should any of these above mentioned conditions be encountered
during project implementation. The Secretariat of Education (SEEL) has not had
substantive experience with issues of resettlement or land acquisition under World Bank
financed projects, but has agreed that they would (i) enter into an agreement of technical
support with the Recife Urbanization Company (URB), the Municipal Department
responsible for larger scale resettlement in Recife, in the event that the screening process
identifies any potential displacement of income or businesses (in which case an
abbreviated or full Resettlement Action Plan would be submitted to the World Bank for
prior review); (ii) assign a qualified specialist to work on these issues during preparation
and implementation; and (iii) adhere to the principles of Bank policy on OP/BP 4.12,
including the principle of resorting to involuntary expropriation of land only once all
other alternatives had been explored. In addition, training will be provided to SEEL staff
on World Bank resettlement policies.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
n/a

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The newly appointed municipal Secretary of Environment established clearly that it is
their objective to have contractors and others involved with projects financed or not with
WB monies comply with national legislation and where appropriate WB safeguard
policies. A strong commitment to creating the capacity where it does not exist is also one
of his priorities and he welcomed the Bank#s offer to provide training on safeguards.

 The Municipality published an EMF and a RPF committing to following World Bank
Safeguard policies and will seek advisory support and technical guidance from URB,
which has extensive experience in resettlement issues. (Published in Municipality's
website:
http://www.recife.pe.gov.br/2011/09/23/programa_de_desenvolvimento_da_educacao_e_
da_gestao_publica_no_municipio_do_recife_178928.php

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders in the project include parent associations, teachers, teachers#
unions, Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) involved in education delivery or urban
mobility, civil servants, taxpayers, and the municipal administration. The MOR has
several ongoing consultative forums for involving key stakeholders in issues of education
policy design and implementation. This includes the Municipal Education Conference
(Conferência Municipal de Educação, or COMUDE), which holds periodic consultations
with teachers, parent associations, educational agencies and CSOs. The Municipality
has held discussions with COMUDE regarding the plan for construction of CMEIs. In
addition, approximately half of the first group of CMEIs to be constructed have been
selected by the population during a Participatory Budgeting process at the sub-municipal
level, in which citizens directly vote and prioritize the selection of investments; the
remainder were selected via a needs assessment carried out by the Municipality. For
those selected via Participatory Budgeting, a highly consultative process has been
followed. Given the project focus on improving the efficiency of education, and human
resource management in the Municipality, two areas that will need to be monitored
include the sensitivity of the potential new salary structure and career paths in the
Municipality (as proposed in the public sector reform component), and the hiring of
additional teachers for expansion of the school day. Additional consultations on the full
project with stakeholders noted above will be undertaken during project appraisal to
complement the consultative process already undertaken around the CMEIs.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 09/16/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             09/23/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              09/23/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 09/21/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             09/23/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              09/23/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
  Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
  Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
  adverse impacts on cultural property?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr David Evans                               09/23/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Gunars H. Platais
Social Development Specialist       Ms Sarah Keener
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Chingboon Lee                             09/23/2011
  Comments:
