                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC606
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-May-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Brazil                                  Project ID:                       P126452
                              Project Name:                   Rio Grande do Norte: Regional Development and Governance (P126452)
                              Task Team Leader:               Maria de Fatima de Sousa
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 20-Aug-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:             20-Nov-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  LCSAR                                   Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%), Public administration- Information and communications
                                                              (20%), General educati on sector (20%), Health (20%), Irrigation and drainage (10%)
                              Theme:                          Rural markets (40%), Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (30%), Municipal governance
                                                              and institution building ( 10%), Education for the knowledge economy (10%), Health system performance (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                   40.00
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                     360.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                     400.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              22.       The proposed project will support the State strategy to promote more inclusive and equitable economic, social, and human development,
                              as well as to modernize public sector management to improve service delivery. Therefore, the project would support an integrated approach to
                              promote sustainable development and improved living conditions, with special attention to lagging regions of the State.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              C. Project Description

                              26. The proposed project would be a US$ 360 million Specific Investment Loan (SIL) to support implementation of the government's program over
                              a four year period. Two forms of support would be provided through two separate components:

                              a. Component A – Integrated Economic and Human Development: This component will have a total amount of USD 306 million and will provide
                              technical and financial support to prioritized investments and implementation of key elements of the government's strategy in social and economic
                              development, infrastructure, health and education actions.
                              b.        Component B – Public Sector Management: This component, with a total amount of USD 54 million will offer technical and financial
                              support to selected sector programs that are part of the government's strategy to foster more efficiency in public service management and delivery.

                              27.        The preliminary project design represents the government's integrated approach to promote social and economic development in the
                              state with the ultimate goal of improving living conditions of the population and reduce poverty and extreme poverty indicators. Special attention
                              would be given to the lagging regions of the state. The component will be organized in the following fashion to fulfill the State's strategy:

                              28.        Component A: Integrated Economic and Human Development. Component targeted at supporting initiatives to promote rural
                              development in the state, with a focus on reducing regional inequalities and based on social, environmental and economic sustainability, as well as
                              at supporting the improvement of access and quality of fundamental public services, with a focus on education and health. Prompt support will be
                              given to the state in the development of its social protection program and related monitoring mechanisms. It will be divided into three
                              subcomponents:

                              29.         Subcomponent A1: Social and Economic Development. The project would support the government's social and economic development
                              strategy by: (a) improving the inclusion and competitiveness of small family farmers in the priority action territories (Territórios da Cidadania); (b)
                              aiming at fostering sustainable agriculture in those micro-catchment areas most susceptible to environmental degradation; (c) promoting the
                              inclusion of women and youth in the marketplace; and (d) promoting the expansion and quality of infrastructure to further develop an integrated
                              logistics for regional development.

                              30.        Subcomponent A2: Health. In light of the main challenges faced by Rio Grande do Norte in the health area, the government designed a
                              strategy to improve the quality of service provision and ensure adequate access to specialized treatment in the state. The strategy aims to
                              introduce changes to the health care model by improving the primary health care deliveries provided in municipalities, focusing child and maternal
                              care, oncology care, as well as structuring specialized emergency care.
                           31.       Subcomponent A3: Education. The government's overall objective for the education sector is to ensure that all children in Rio Grande do
                           Norte have access to good quality education. Among the key challenges identified are to increase access and retention in basic education, reduce
                           over-age students and improve student learning outcomes. Therefore, the government has identified six main objectives grouped in four main
                           programs which include inter alia: (i) education quality through the improvement of learning and teaching standards and practices as well as a
                           longer school-day; (ii) education access through the expansion of service delivery as well as the rehabilitation and repair of school facilities; (iii)
                           professional development through training of teachers and valorization of the teacher profession; and, (iv) modernization of education
Public Disclosure Copy




                           management through the development of education partnership with municipal Governments and a better integration of schools within their
                           community.

                           32.        Component B: Public Sector Management. Component aimed at supporting actions to modernize public sector management in the state,
                           through measures grouped around three goals: planning, budgeting and finance management integration, institutional modernization, and more
                           strategic and efficient human resources management. It will be divided into three subcomponents:

                           33.         Subcomponent B1: Planning, Budgeting and Finance Management Integration. This subcomponent would support activities aimed at
                           improving the efficiency of revenue collection, strengthening debt management and administration of fiscal risks. Moreover, it would also support
                           the revision of the expenditure commitment and execution process and the strengthening of the internal control function. Potential activities
                           include: (i) develop of a strategic plan for the Finance Secretariat; (ii) prepare an IT master plan for the Finance Secretariat; (iii) revise and reform
                           the tax collection process; (iv) assess the functioning of the debt management department and devise an action plan for strengthening procedures
                           and capacity; among others. These potential activities will be further discussed and agreed upon during preparation.

                           34.         Subcomponent B2: Institutional Modernization. One of the main objectives of the government strategy is to increase the effectiveness
                           and efficiency of the state’s public administration. As part of this strategy, the government intends to undertake a functional review, identifying the
                           key roles of its agencies and promoting a discussion on alternative service delivery modes. A first initiative under this subcomponent is to review
                           the role and administrative structure of government entities. Modernization efforts would also focus on the revision of administrative procedures
                           and processes, with the aim of increase efficiency. Strengthening planning capacity, monitoring, evaluation and policy making will also be
                           supported under this subcomponent. The new administration has already initiated efforts to revamp its planning capacity and use the multi-year
                           plan (PPA) as an actual tool for expressing the government's policy intentions, as per the available fiscal space. These efforts have made clear
                           that some sectors will need additional help in clarifying their key goals and strategies, as well as defining intermediate and results indicators.
                           Activities t o strengthen the budgeting procedures and to allow for strategic allocation of resources to policy priorities will also be supported.
                           Furthermore, it would be advisable to undertake a review of existing IT systems and their functionalities, in order to devise a plan for actual system
                           integration. Finally, support will be given to the introduction of performance agreements by the government.

                           35.        Subcomponent B3: More Strategic and Efficient Human Resources Management. A more effective and efficient government will require
                           strengthening the State's workforce more strategically by focusing on attracting and retaining professional personnel, in particular in the center-of-
                           government institutions. Rio Grande do Norte’s goal should be to move gradually from a pyramidal to a quasi diamond-shaped staff structure,
                           increasing quality of personnel expenditures. It will require state's efforts to professionalize and in turn, putting in place adequate controls over the
                           state's payroll to create the fiscal space needed.

                           36.       Potential activities to be supported under this pillar are expected to include: (i) detailed survey and diagnostic of the human resources
                           framework of the State I order to identify the challenges and opportunities to reform; (ii) preparation of an strategic workforce plan with long-term
                           vision and a short-term action plan; (iii) development of a planning, budgeting and management career; (iv) preparation of operational manuals for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           center-of-government secretariats; (v) technical assistance for aligning the state's pay policy and HRM to the state's objectives; (vi) monitoring
                           systems; and (vii) a communications strategy for the planning and implementation of HRM reforms.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           37.        For Component 1 – Integrated Economic and Human Development, the project interventions will be located across the State territory,
                           with 8 development regions already defined by the State’s government. The selection of targeted beneficiaries and areas would be based on
                           explicit demands from vulnerable groups and in sensitive environmental areas, as well as on beneficiaries below extreme poverty line.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies




                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Judith M. Lisansky (LCSSO)
                           Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSSO)
                           Clarisse Torrens Borges Dall Acqua (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                                Triggered?        Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01               Yes                 Component 1 of the proposed project may support small and medium-scale
                                                                                                investments in rural development, health and educational infrastructure.
                                                                                                Possible negative impacts from these investments are expected to be small,
                                                                                                localized and reversible. Given these characteristics of the project, a category B
                                                                                                is proposed. The Environmental Assessment safeguard is mandatory to all sub-
                                                                                                projects that may potentially have an environmental and social impact. The
                                                                                                Borrower would carry out a regionally focused Environmental and Social Impact
                                                                                                Assessment (ESIA), which defines strict environmental “screening?, to ensure
                                                             that selected sub-projects demonstrate low potential negative impacts. The
                                                             Terms of Reference (ToR) of this study are being prepared by the Borrower and
                                                             will be submitted to the Bank for approval before the hiring process. Criteria and
                                                             screening procedures for the selection of interventions to be financed will be
                                                             finalized during preparation. Final selection of interventions will be done during
                                                             implementation. The Borrower would apply the environmental “screening? before
                                                             the final selection of each investment subproject. Project preparation will include
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             the preparation of an Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                             (ESMF) for all project interventions to assess potential impacts and propose a
                                                             framework for preventing or mitigating them. These studies will also include
                                                             health waste management issues due to the health sector components of the
                                                             operation, and also building construction and safety in the education
                                                             components, consistent with Bank and national standards. Principles of OP 4.01
                                                             with regards to proper consultation will be applied as part of project preparation
                                                             and ESMF will be reviewed by the Bank and publicly disseminated prior to
                                                             appraisal.
                                                             Given the multiple stakeholders and third parties affected by the activities to be
                                                             supported by this project, the ESMF will be supported and informed by high
                                                             quality social assessment and robust consultation processes. This social
                                                             assessment will include: an initial socio-cultural scoping; stakeholders mapping,
                                                             broad information and consultation; and the analysis of risks and potentially
                                                             beneficial and adverse impacts. Criteria and screening procedures for the
                                                             selection of interventions to be financed will be finalized during preparation. Final
                                                             selection of interventions will be done during implementation. The Borrower
                                                             would apply the environmental “screening? before the final selection of each
                                                             investment subproject. Project preparation will include the preparation of an
                                                             Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for all project
                                                             interventions to assess potential impacts and propose a framework for
                                                             preventing or mitigating them. These studies will also include health waste
                                                             management issues due to the health sector components of the operation, and
                                                             also building construction and safety in the education components, consistent
                                                             with Bank and national standards.
                                                             Principles of OP 4.01 with regards to proper consultation will be applied as part
                                                             of project preparation and ESMF will be reviewed by the Bank and publicly
                                                             disseminated prior to appraisal.
                                                             Given the multiple stakeholders and third parties affected by the activities to be
                                                             supported by this project, the ESMF will be supported and informed by high
                                                             quality social assessment and robust consultation processes. This social
                                                             assessment will include: an initial socio-cultural scoping; stakeholders mapping,
                                                             broad information and consultation; and the analysis of risks and potentially
                                                             beneficial and adverse impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes     Component 1 of the proposed project may also support investments for the
                                                             recovery of degraded areas in rural areas, whose selection activities will follow
                                                             the prioritization and definitions of the State Program to Combat Desertification
                                                             and also the provisions of the Brazilian Forest Code. Furthermore, all planed
                                                             activities in areas considered by the state to be environmentally sensitive (i.e., in
                                                             riparian areas) - Permanent Preservation Areas (APP) and Legal Reserves (RL),
                                                             will undergo an environmental screening and any potential direct or indirect
                                                             impacts on those areas will be assessed.). The OP 4.04 is triggered and all
                                                             planning activities that may affect natural habitats must follow World Bank
                                                             policies, identifying monitoring and management activities to prevent or mitigate
                                                             any possible negative impact. Springs and river margins areas are classified as
                                                             Permanent Preservation Areas (APP) and legally protected by Brazilian
                                                             Legislation (Federal Law 4771/65). APP use for water systems development,
                                                             intake and pipelines, requires specific permitting, mitigation and regeneration
                                                             measures. Despite the expected positive impacts, the ESIA and ESMF will
                                                             include clear guidance regarding direct and indirect impacts on natural habitats.
                                                             Special attention will be given to areas where desertification process was
                                                             already identified by the State (SEMARH, PAE, 2010). As noted in the Carta
                                                             Consulta, only 2.4% of the State’s areas do not show susceptibility to
                                                             desertification. The more critical area is the desertification process in Seridó,
                                                             with 2,800 km2 (5.7% of the total desertification process).
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes     It is not expected that the Project implementation will have negative impacts on
                                                             forest resources. Sub-projects with the potential for conversion or degradation of
                                                             natural forest or other natural habitats that are likely to have significant adverse
                                                             environmental impacts, which are sensate, diverse or unprecedented, are
                                                             ineligible. Nevertheless, OP 4.36 is triggered given the potential for rehabilitation
                                                             activities for APPs and Legal reserves. It is expected that the Borrower defines a
                                                             negative list to exclude activities that may affect forest areas. Additionally, if any
                                                             demand driven activities that could involve reforestation could be included, the
                                                                        ESMF will contain provision for the design and management of these activities in
                                                                        compliance with the policy.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                  Yes     The Project would not finance any pesticides or other chemical amendments
                                                                        that would trigger OP 4.09. Nevertheless, minor amounts of pesticides would
                                                                        probably continue to be used in the short term by a small portion of targeted
                                                                        small-scale farms. The Project would encourage and support technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        assistance for the adoption of organic agriculture and of proven, economically-
                                                                        and environmentally-sustainable Integrated Pest Management (IPM). This
                                                                        approach would increase farmer’s productivity, reduce input costs and human
                                                                        health risks, and minimize adverse environmental impacts through the virtual
                                                                        elimination of pesticide use. The IPM approach further improves the
                                                                        sustainability of agro-ecosystems by focusing on the knowledge and skills of
                                                                        farmers to better enable natural resource management.
                                                                        The need to use pesticides or herbicides will be indicated in each sub-project, as
                                                                        well as the IPM measures to be adopted. When the use of pesticides or
                                                                        herbicides is justified, an analysis of potential negative impacts resulting from
                                                                        the use of these chemicals and the risks associated with the inappropriate
                                                                        handling or storing of their containers will be conducted. The projects will also
                                                                        include measures to reduce those risks, in compliance with Law No. 7,802/89.
                                                                        A Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be prepared and incorporated into the
                                                                        ESMF and the Project Operational Manual. The PMP would make use of the
                                                                        World Health Organizations Recommended Classification of Pesticides by
                                                                        Hazard and Guidelines to Classification (GENEVA; WHO 1994-95). The PMP
                                                                        would also exclude finance under the proposed project for formulated products
                                                                        that fall into WHO classes IA and IB, or formulation of products in Class II, if: (i)
                                                                        the country lacks restrictions on their distribution and use, or (ii) they are likely to
                                                                        be used by, or be accessible to, lay personnel, farmers, or other without training,
                                                                        equipment, and facilities to handle, store, and apply these products properly.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes    Project implementation would not cause any negative impact on known
                                                                        physical cultural resources (PCR). Proposed sub-projects with expected direct
                                                                        and negative impact on known archaeological, palaeontology's, historical or
                                                                        other culturally significant sites will not be eligible.
                                                                        However, they may include historical sites and/or archaeological findings. As
                                                                        such, impacts and procedures for "chance findings" from specific investments
                                                                        under Component 1 (if applicable) will be assessed within the ESIA, and the
                                                                        resulting ESMF will include relevant provisions to mitigate any potentially
                                                                        adverse impacts. Such provisions will include compliance with the guidelines
                                                                        defined by the National Institute for Historical and Cultural Heritage (IPHAN)
                                                                        regarding historical sites and/or archaeological findings.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No      A screening was carried out using information from the Brazil’s National Indian
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        Foundation (FUNAI) and the Socio-Environmental Institute (ISA) indicating that
                                                                        there are presently no indigenous groups nor recognized indigenous lands in the
                                                                        State of Rio Grande do Norte. As such, the OP 4.10 is not triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes     Component 1 of the proposed project may support small and medium-scale
                                                                        investments in rural development, health and educational infrastructure in areas
                                                                        to be chosen during project implementation from explicit demands made by
                                                                        vulnerable groups. Potential sites of intervention are not yet known and will not
                                                                        be selected until during project implementation.
                                                                        The team has evaluated the types of subprojects proposed under Component 1
                                                                        and concluded that some proposed activities (such as the building of rural
                                                                        schools, productive infrastructures with small facilities to support production,
                                                                        health facilities, and the expansion of logistics infrastructures, such as roads
                                                                        rehabilitation for better connectivity between areas of production and
                                                                        consumption) might require land acquisition and, consequently, could potentially
                                                                        cause involuntary resettlement. While this is relatively unlikely, as a
                                                                        consequence OP 4.12 has been triggered and a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                        (RPF) will be prepared, consulted and publicly disseminated prior to appraisal.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                Yes     It is not expected that the investments in water supply and irrigation projects
                                                                        will depend on the storage capacity and operation of existing dams.
                                                                        However, as a precautionary measure, the OP 4.37 is triggered, not to limit any
                                                                        possibility of using existing water sources, but to ensure that no new dam
                                                                        construction will be financed by this operation.
                                                                        Therefore, in the preparation phase of the project, the Borrower will prepare a
                                                                        conceptual framework of procedures to be adopted during the implementation
                                                                        phase. The Borrower will arrange for one or more independent dam specialist to:
                                                                        (a) inspect and evaluate the safety status of the existing dam, its appurtenances,
                                                                        and its performance history; (b) review and evaluate the owner's operations and
                                                                        maintenance procedures; and (c) provide a written report of findings and
                                                                        recommendations for any remedial work or safety-related measures necessary
                                                                        to upgrade the existing dam to an acceptable standard of safety. Previous
                                                                                                                        assessments of dam safety or recommendations for improvements needed in
                                                                                                                        existing dam may also be accept by the Bank, if the Borrower provides evidence
                                                                                                                        that (a) an effective dam safety program is already in operation, and (b) full-level
                                                                                                                        inspections and dam safety assessments of the existing dam, which are
                                                                                                                        satisfactory to the Bank, have already been conducted and documented.
                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          No                    Not applicable. The Project will not finance interventions that may interfere with
Public Disclosure Copy




                                7.50                                                                                    dams or be directly dependent of them.
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No                     Not applicable. The whole state area and natural resources are located in the
                                                                                                                        national territory. Therefore, none of the Project activities are located in
                                                                                                                        international waterways.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 22-Jun-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    Environmental assessment and social framework studies and Resettlement Policy Framework should be finalized and disclosed by June 22,
                                    2012.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: Maria de Fatima de Sousa
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                           Date: 16-May-2012
                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Ethel Sennhauser (SM)                                                                           Date: 08-Feb-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
