                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC4323

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Brazil                           Project ID:      P143184
                            Project Name:      SUSTAINABLE PROD. IN AREAS PREVIOUSLY CONVERTED TO
                                               AGRICULTURAL USE (P143184)
                            Task Team          David Tuchschneider
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                           Estimated        30-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: LCSAR                                Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Agricultural extension and research (76%), Public administration- Agriculture,
                                               fishing and forestry (20%), Forestry (4%)
                            Theme(s):          Climate change (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural policies
                                               and institutions (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     11.13                     Total Bank Financing:           0.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.51
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                 10.62
                              Total                                                                        11.13
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the proposed Project is to improve the adoption of low carbon
                           agricultural technologies in the Cerrado, under the ABC Plan, through the capacity building of rural
                           technical assistance, financial agents, and farmers.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed US$10.62 million grant is part of the Brazil Investment Plan (BIP) and will support the
                         Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food Supply (MAPA) to promote the six climate smart
                         agriculture technologies supported by the ABC Plan, with focus in the Cerrado biome: (i) recovery of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         degraded pasture land; (ii) implementation of integrated crop-livestock-forestry systems; (iii)
                         adoption of no-tillage farming; (iv) biological fixation of nitrogen; (v) plantation of commercial
                         forests, and (vi) treatment of animal waste, through capacity building.

                         Priority areas. Considering the absence of co-financing, the project will need to be very selective in
                         the choice of States and the target population. The project will be carried out in States and
                         Municipalities where the farmers and agribusiness are judged to be most ready for adoption of
                         climate smart technologies (areas known for innovation and early adoption of technologies). During
                         project preparation a number of criteria to measure “adoption readiness” will be developed. The
                         criteria will include the presence of farmer organizations, enterprises and leaders with a vision for a
                         more sustainable agriculture and livestock as well as the capacity of the implementing agency to
                         carry out the capacity building programs. The selection criteria will not necessarily focus on degrees
                         of probable impact on climate change or on social objectives. The main aim of prioritizing areas is
                         to have successful adoption with the hope that these early examples will stimulate producers and
                         enterprises in other geographical areas to adopt the new technologies.

                         Participant producers. As small farmers can ill afford the risk of adopting unknown practices, the
                         project will initially focus on the innovators and early adopters (medium and large producers) whom
                         the project will accompany in the adoption of the new technologies. Small producers will adopt
                         these technologies once they prove to be cost-efficient and profitable.

                         The proposed project has three components:

                         a.       Component 1: Dissemination of the ABC Plan and producer capacity building (US$7
                         million) – the project will finance publicity campaigns, info-training courses, technical events and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         participation in rural fairs addressing potentially interested producers (in particular innovators and
                         early adopters), farmers´ associations, entrepreneurs, financial intermediaries and suppliers of
                         agriculture-related technical services. These activities will provide information on the ABC Plan, its
                         modus operandi, requirements and procedures (including those related to rural land environmental
                         registration), recommendations for accessing credit and on the new technologies.
                         The component will also draw up business models and assist producers with the development of
                         business plans and credit applications incorporating climate smart technologies.
                         Under this component the project may co-finance the establishment of small demonstration fields on
                         innovators’ land in priority areas and provide producers or farmer organizations with technical
                         assistance in the early adoption of the technologies. This close implementation follow-up of early
                         adoption will provide useful feedback and generate lessons on the costs (and possible difficulties)
                         producers face when adopting the technologies as well as on the short-term benefits.

                         b.       Component 2: Support to providers of services and inputs (U S$2.62 million) – the project
                         will finance the training of professionals, technical staff and other practitioners involved in
                         agricultural production in the climate smart technologies eligible under the ABC Plan, and in the
                         operational aspects of the plan. The implementing agency with the assistance of EMBRAPA (the
                         Brazil Agricultural Research Agency) will develop a series of courses for some 2000 technicians and
                         field instructors on ABC technologies. These technicians, employed by diverse agencies, will
                         provide extension services to interested producers on the ABC technologies and will be trained in the
                         presentation of credit applications.
                         Training will also be provided on environmental regularization of rural landholdings, including the
                         benefits of adhering to the Rural Environmental Cadastre (CAR). The component will also support
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the establishment of technical modules for training professionals, technical staff and producers.

                         c.       Component 3: Implementation and management of the Project (US$1 million). The project
                         will support activities related to the management and implementation of the Project. MAPA will be
                         the main responsible agency to supervise technical and financial aspects of the project, and monitor
                         project indicators. A project Director will be responsible for overall project implementation. MAPA
                         delegated the technical training part of the project implementation to SENAR. Part of MAPA’s
                         strategy is to benefit from SENAR’s operational capacity, technology and pedagogical experience to
                         conduct the capacity building of rural extension technicians, farmers and financial agents on
                         agricultural low carbon technologies. SENAR will also be responsible for the procurement and
                         financial management of the project.

                         FIP Brazil Investment Plan (BIP)

                         The BIP intends to promote sustainable land use and improve management of the productive
                         landscape in the Cerrado. The BIP focuses on two thematic areas: Management and Use of Already
                         Anthropized Areas, and Generation and Management of Forest Information. The forest information
                         focus area, includes two projects: (1) Development of Systems to Prevent Forest Fires and Monitor
                         Vegetation Cover in the Brazilian Cerrado Project (P143185), supported by the World Bank and (2)
                         Forest information to support public and private sectors in managing initiatives focused on
                         conservation and valorization of forest resources, supported by IDB. Under the management of
                         anthropized areas theme, the Bank is supporting Environmental regularization of rural lands (based
                         on the Rural Environmental Registry, CAR) (P143334), and the Promotion of Low Carbon
                         Agriculture in the Brazilian Cerrado Project (P143184).
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The Cerrado biome, located in central Brazil, south of the Amazon region, covers almost one quarter,
                         or 2.04 million km2, of the country. It includes a mosaic of ecosystems with 23 types of vegetation
                         consisting mostly of tropical savannas woodland, grasslands and forests. The Cerrado has been the
                         stage for an unprecedented expansion of agricultural production in Brazil, primarily through cattle
                         ranching on natural and planted pastures since the 1940s, and, since the 1970s, through mechanized
                         commercial production of soybean, maize and cotton.

                         The Cerrado is a strategic biome both for economic and environmental reasons and also for food
                         security. It covers a large area with significant carbon stocks, water resources and substantial
                         biodiversity. The Center-West region has the largest portion of the land area occupied by rural
                         properties (32% of the total) in Brazil and has the highest average area per property of all farms in
                         the country (397.2 ha). There are also a large number of small and medium farms that use older
                         production techniques and do not necessarily have access to The Cerrado region now has a unique
                         opportunity to develop new paradigms combining modern and sustainable agriculture with the
                         conservation of natural resources and the promotion of human well-being.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Brazilian Government has advanced environmental laws, reflecting a political culture of strong
                         environmental protection. The Brazilian Government has also shown adequate procedures and
                           capacity to identify and mitigate impacts under Bank funded operations. However, the Bank has
                           never worked with SENAR and SENAR is not familiar with Bank guidelines and procedures. The
                           Borrower has already hired high quality and experienced consultants who will prepare an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental and Social Management Framework for the Project which will provide overall
                           guidance as to how to proceed during implementation as well as assess the Borrower s need of
                           institutional capacity strengthening to properly implement the project according with the principles
                           and guidelines of Banks environmental and social safeguard policies.

                           The preparation of the Brazil Investment Plan for the FIP included broad consultation of
                           stakeholders, which included MAPA, EMBRAPA, individual producers, entrepreneurs, agribusiness,
                           and farmer organizations. Arrangements for involving society in the preparation and consultation
                           processes were coordinated by MMA, with the participation of MAPA, MCTI, MF, FUNAI, and
                           SFB, with support from the Brazilian Biodiversity Fund – FUNBIO, through the IP preparation
                           grant. An online consultation process would be carried out by the Borrower during the preparation of
                           the Project's safeguard documents focusing on the key stakeholders for this operation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSSO)
                           Agnes Velloso (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The proposed Project consists essentially of an
                           BP 4.01                                              agricultural technology transfer project and
                                                                                thus, a Category B is proposed. The Project is
                                                                                expected to have a positive impact on the
                                                                                environment as it seeks to promote the reduction
                                                                                of the environmental impacts of agricultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                activities mainly through capacity-building and
                                                                                rural extension activities. Notwithstanding these
                                                                                positive impacts, the proposed Project will be
                                                                                working in some sensitive biodiversity and dry
                                                                                forest areas and will promote certain agricultural
                                                                                land uses and commercial practices that could
                                                                                have environmental impacts.
                                                                                Based on the preliminary assessments
                                                                                undertaken and previous projects, potentially
                                                                                adverse impacts are expected to be small since
                                                                                all Project actions are intended to promote and
                                                                                consolidate the adoption of sustainable
                                                                                agricultural practices to reduce carbon
                                                                                emissions.
                                                                                The MAPA is preparing an Environmental and
                                                                                Social Management Framework (ESMF),
                                                                                including social and environmental assessments,
                                                                                to provide guidance on potential issues that
                                                                                could arise during Project implementation.
                                                             Potentially adverse social and environmental
                                                             impacts are expected to be small, as they will be
                                                             avoided or minimized through appropriate
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             preventive and mitigation measures. The ESMF
                                                             will include reference to all activities that could
                                                             be supported by the project, especially those
                                                             related to animal waste management and
                                                             commercial forest plantations.
                                                             This report will also contain a detailed
                                                             description of the potential environmental
                                                             impacts of Project activities and supported
                                                             production methodologies, particularly
                                                             regarding natural habitats, forest resources and
                                                             pest management, and identify preventive/
                                                             corrective measures. The ESMF will address the
                                                             distributive impacts of the project as well as
                                                             gender-related issues. It will include an analysis
                                                             of any economic or social impact that project
                                                             activities might have on vulnerable groups,
                                                             traditional communities or poor rural dwellers.
                                                             The ESMF will be submitted to the Bank by
                                                             appraisal stage. The ESMF report will be
                                                             disclosed and disseminated through MAPA and
                                                             SENAR websites and will be consulted with key
                                                             stakeholders.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   Activities under the proposed Project should
                                                             lead to positive impacts on natural habitats, such
                                                             as their conservation and recovery in private
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             properties. Thus, OP 4.04 is triggered and
                                                             therefore all planning activities must follow
                                                             World Bank policies, identifyingmonitoring and
                                                             management activities in the ESMF to prevent
                                                             or mitigate any possible negative impacts.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   This policy is triggered given that the specific
                                                             project sites have not been identified and some
                                                             field sites may present issues related to the
                                                             management of forest resources, especially in
                                                             activities related to commercial forest
                                                             plantations and integrated crop-livestock-
                                                             forestry systems.

                                                             This Project will contribute to the conservation
                                                             of the Cerrado biome. It is expected to have a
                                                             positive impact by promoting the restoration
                                                             and/or preservation of Legal Reserves and
                                                             Permanent Preservation Areas in private lands,
                                                             in compliance with the Brazilian Forest Code.
                                                                 The ESMF to be prepared should consider the
                                                                 requirements of OB/BP 4.36 whenever
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 restoration and plantation activities are being
                                                                 planned, and include screening criteria to ensure
                                                                 that project activities identify potential adverse
                                                                 impacts on the forest resource or on the social
                                                                 risks associated with any proposed changes to
                                                                 forest management, especially as it relates to
                                                                 small holders or other vulnerable groups.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   Although the agricultural technologies to be
                                                                 promoted by the proposed Project are focused
                                                                 on the recovery of degraded areas and pasture
                                                                 land; the implementation of organic agriculture
                                                                 and livestock production systems; cultivation
                                                                 forestry cattle raising-forestry or cultivation-
                                                                 cattle raising-forestry integration systems; the
                                                                 implementation, maintenance and management
                                                                 of planted forests; and the appropriate disposal
                                                                 of debris and waste, among other practices that
                                                                 are more environmentally sustainable than
                                                                 conventional production practices, they may
                                                                 involve the use of agricultural chemicals.
                                                                 Furthermore, the project will train rural
                                                                 extension agents who will provide support to
                                                                 producers on the recognized agricultural
                                                                 technologies. Thus, this policy is triggered and
                                                                 the ESMF should include guidance on OP/BP
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 4.09 requirements for field interventions and for
                                                                 leveraging these requirements through the
                                                                 extension agents trained under the project and
                                                                 include screening procedures to identify any
                                                                 adverse risks, as well as measures to promote
                                                                 careful management and use of agricultural
                                                                 chemicals in all situations where appropriate
                                                                 under the project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    It is not expected that Project implementation
                         BP 4.11                                 activities would have any negative impact on
                                                                 archaeological or physical cultural resources, as
                                                                 all field activities will occur in private lands that
                                                                 were already converted to agriculture. This
                                                                 policy is not being triggered at this time.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    The project will not interfere with Indigenous
                                                                 Peoples as its activities will focus on privately
                                                                 run farms.
                                                                 The Project should result on reduced emissions/
                                                                 improved carbon sequestration and should ease
                                                                                                                                 pressures for deforestation on the remaining
                                                                                                                                 forests. Thus and insofar as its activities reach
                                                                                                                                 farming areas surrounding indigenous lands,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 indigenous peoples may derive co-benefits
                                                                                                                                 related with the reduction of pressure for
                                                                                                                                 converting new native forest areas, the
                                                                                                                                 protection of headwaters and riparian zones, the
                                                                                                                                 improvement of the physical, chemical and
                                                                                                                                 biological conditions of the soil, the reduction
                                                                                                                                 of water and soil pollution, and the better
                                                                                                                                 conservation of natural resources on which their
                                                                                                                                 livelihoods hugely rely.
                                                                                                                                 In the planned ESMF, measures will be
                                                                                                                                 included to ensure that (a) no impacts will occur
                                                                                                                                 on indigenous peoples during implementation of
                                                                                                                                 grant activities and (b) grant activities will not
                                                                                                                                 take place on land which ownership is disputed
                                                                                                                                 by indigenous peoples.
                                                                                                                                 The Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Indigenous
                                                                                                                                 Peoples and Traditional Communities –
                                                                                                                                 currently under preparation in the scope of the
                                                                                                                                 Brazilian Forest Investment Program – may
                                                                                                                                 address similar issues and open similar
                                                                                                                                 opportunities to Indigenous Peoples.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            Activities supported by the project will not
                                 4.12                                                                                            require land acquisition or imply on the creation
                                                                                                                                 of Protected Areas. Therefore, involuntary
                                                                                                                                 population displacement and/or negative
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 impacts on livelihoods due to land acquisition
                                                                                                                                 are not envisaged as a consequence of the
                                                                                                                                 project and OP 4.12 is not triggered
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This policy is not triggered since the project will
                                                                                                                                 not finance any dams nor will it rely on the
                                                                                                                                 operations of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            This policy is not triggered since the project will
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            not affect any international waterways as
                                                                                                                                 defined under the policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This policy is not triggered as the project will
                                 7.60                                                                                            not work in any disputed areas as defined under
                                                                                                                                 the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 16-Sep-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             All the required studies will be initiated before the end of June 2013 and are expected to be
                             concluded by the end of August 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Task Team Leader:       Name: David Tuchschneider

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                               Date: 07-Aug-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Wilhelmus Gerardus Janssen (SM)                     Date: 07-Aug-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
