                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC6484


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/05/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Brazil                             Project ID: P126537
Project Name: Energy and Mineral Sector Strengthening
Task Team Leader: Christophe de Gouvello
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 22, 2011 Estimated Board Date: November 1, 2011
Managing Unit: LCSEG                        Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                            Loan
Sector: General energy sector (80%);Other Mining and Extractive Industries (20%)
Theme: Regulation and competition policy (30%);Infrastructure services for private
sector development (30%);Environmental policies and institutions (20%);Climate change
(20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           49.60
IDA Amount (US$m.):             0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                       3.30
                                                                       3.30


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed Project Development Objective is to strengthen the capacity of energy and the
mineral sector agencies to support the adaptation of these sectors to the combined challenges of
accelerated national economic growth and increased requirements for social and environmental
sustainability in a context of globalization.

 The principal outcome expected from the project is the further capacity building of key
institutions of both the energy and the mineral sectors to ensure that they deliver the regulatory
adjustments, and the planning and the modernization of their infrastructure, in particular related
to information systems and technology development, which are required for these sectors to be
able to attend in a sustainable manner, from both environmental and social perspectives, to the
requirements of the accelerated economic growth of the country.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
1.     The proposed Project would support a sector wide efficiency improvement in the energy
and mineral sectors, by financing (i) strengthening capacity, planning activities, and
sustainability (ii) institutional and regulatory development, and (iii) South-South cooperation.

 2.      Component 1: Strengthening the capacity of the Government to drive the sustainable
development of the Energy and Mineral sectors (US$12.5 million, of which US$9.2 million from
IBRD and US$3.3 million from counterpart funds). This component would aim to strengthen the
capacity of MME and affiliated entities in energy and mining in planning, social and
environment sustainability, and in the area of management, monitoring and evaluation of
activities. Targeted entities are the Executive Secretariat, the Secretariat for Planning and Energy
Development (SPE), the Secretariat for Electricity (SEE), the Secretariat for Oil, Gas and Bio-
fuels (SPG), the Secretariat for Geology, Mining and Mineral Transformation (SGM), the
Nucleo for Environmental Sustainability Studies (NESA), and the Energy Planning Company
(EPE). This component will be composed of the following subcomponents:

 i.     Planning of the Energy and Mineral Sectors. This sub-component will strengthen the
ability of the Ministry to formulate and implement strategies (i) for expanding the supply of cost-
effective and sustainable energy to meet the evolution of demand, in the medium and long term
and (ii) for developing the volume of business and added value in the mineral sector. In
particular, it will finance a set of technical activities focused on the short, medium and long term
planning of the energy and mineral sectors, which will contribute to the development and
implementation of the various sectoral and sub-sectoral plans. This sub-component is a scaling-
up of the Bank support in the area of energy and mineral planning provided under the former
ESTAL project.

  ii.   Strengthening capacity to design and implement policies and practices to improve the
sustainability of the energy and mineral sectors. This subcomponent will finance studies and
training aimed at identifying opportunities, developing policies and disseminating best practice
to improve the environmental and social sustainability of both the energy and mineral sectors.

 iii. Management, monitoring and evaluation of activities. This subcomponent will finance
the strengthening of the capacity of the Executive Secretary of MME to manage, monitor and
evaluate technical assistance activities, in particular the TA activities supported by this project.

 Activities to be financed include: (i) strategic studies and development of scenarios to support
planning of the energy matrix ; (ii) studies to support the planning of the mineral sector; (iii)
inventory and technical-economical analyses of low-carbon energy sources; (iv) development of
information systems; (v) training and meetings aimed at improving and disseminating best
practices regarding gender issues and the mitigation of social impacts on populations affected by
investments in the energy and mineral sectors; (vi) TA activities management support, including
procurement and safeguards and support to the Project Management Unit (PMU); and (v) M&E
activities. The PMU will be financed by the Brazilian Government counterpart funding, for an
estimated value of up to US$ 3.3 million in the first phase.

 3.    Component 2: Strengthening of regulatory institutions (US$ 7.6 million, from IBRD).
This component would aim to strengthen the legal, institutional, and oversight capacities and
frameworks of the regulatory functions for the energy and mineral sectors. The proposed set of
activities covers capacity building for the formulation of policies and guidelines, legislative
improvements and institutional strengthening for the relevant sectoral departments and agencies.
This component will benefit principally regulatory entities and the federal sector institutions
related to the regulation and oversight of the energy and mineral sectors, in particular, the
various different secretariats of MME and of ANEEL. It will also support the creation of a new
regulatory agency for the mineral sector, the creation of the National Council of Mineral Policy,
the restructuring of DNPM, and the modernization of CPRM. In particular, this component
would aim to provide the support above described through the following three sub-components:

 i.      Development of the legal and regulatory frameworks for electricity, biofuels and mining
activities. This sub-component will finance activities to complement and consolidate the changes
already taking place in the energy sector, as well as activities to implement the new model for the
mineral sector, which includes the introduction of a separate regulatory agency.

 ii.    Strengthening the monitoring and control capacity of the power sector. This sub-
component will finance activities aimed at improving the capacity to monitor and manage the
electricity sector to address the need to develop more efficient tools for Government to take
effective regulatory action in the sector.

 iii. Institutional strengthening in the area of geology and mineral resources. This sub-
component will finance activities aimed at strengthening various public agencies and entities of
the mineral sector. Special emphasis will be given to restructuring the mineral sector with the
creation of the Regulatory Agency and the National Mineral Policy Council and the
modernization of CPRM.

  4.    Component 3: Technology Development. (US$ 30.5 million, from IBRD). This
component will support the development and use of cutting edge technologies to tackle a series
of new challenges (i) in the power sector, in particular to develop ultra-high voltage (more than
one million volts) transmission lines and phasorial measurement systems to transport efficiently
large blocks of energy across continent-wide distances and (ii) in the mineral sector, in particular
by installing the very first nanoscopic ionic microprobe in Latin America to better investigate the
quality of mineral deposits and thus attract investments. This component will mainly finance
equipment and research in the electricity sector and in the area of geological survey. The direct
beneficiaries will be R&D public entities affiliated with MME that will generate public goods for
the energy and mineral sectors, namely CEPEL, CPRM, and ONS. Specific activities will
include the following.

  i.    Investments in Research and Technological Development. This subcomponent will
finance (i) the refurbishment and technology development of the technical laboratories of CPRM
and CEPEL to meet the evolving demands for research and technological development in the
energy and mineral sectors and (ii) the implementation of a security technology (phasor
measurement units) for the National Interconnected System operated by the ONS. This later
activity is aimed at implementing recommendations that resulted from TA activities developed
under the previous ESTAL project.
 ii.   Studies in Research and Technological Development. The subcomponent includes studies
and research in the energy and mineral sectors required for the implementation and development
of new technologies in these sectors.

  5.     Component 4: South-South Cooperation. (US$0.14 million, funded by IBRD). This
component will support South-South cooperation between Brazil and developing countries, in
particular Latin American, Caribbean and African countries, in the area of energy and mining.
The activities will focus on the areas of regulation, renewable energy, climate change, clean
energy, information systems and environmental and social sustainability. The increasing number
of demands for cooperation that Brazil is receiving in these areas has been difficult for the
different governmental agencies to address in a systematic and coordinated manner, and MME
frequently has lacked adequate means to ensure consistency and coherence and to transform
opportunities into concrete activities. This component will support the Ministry#s effort to
improve the preparation and orchestration of these activities. In particular, it will support
activities to systematically organize information, and to assign the necessary means and
responsibilities for activities to ensure concrete results. Specific studies and consultancies will be
financed to facilitate the building of results-oriented cooperative engagements in this area.

 6.     Financing Plan. The financing support provided under the IBRD loan to each component
of the project will be distributed under four categories, consultancy, goods, services and works,
as detailed in the table below:

 Financing plan per component, Million US$ (excluding US$ 5.43 in unallocated)

 Component 1 Component 2       Component 3 Component 4 Total
 Consultancy $ 8.86            $ 1.65 $0.38       $ 10.89
 Goods       $0.00 $ 0.39       $ 20.07     $0.00 $ 20.46
 Non-Consultant
 Services    $0.00 $ 5.93       $1.32 $0.14 $ 7.39
 Works                          $8.74         $ 8.74
 Sub-Total   $ 8.86            $ 7.97 $ 30.51        $0.14 $ 47.48
 Unallocated                                  $ 5.43
 Total                                $ 52.91

D. Project location (if known)
The Project looks to promote the sustainable development of the Brazilian Energy and Mineral
sectors, strengthening the regulatory institutions, supporting sector wide technology development
and South-South cooperation between Brazil and other developing countries. Activities to be
financed with the META Project encompass primarily conceptual studies, institutional
development#related activities, information systems improvement, and investments in research
centers.

 The Project has therefore a nationwide relevance, addressing energy and mineral resources
regulatory and planning activities all over the country. The preparation of guidelines to conduct
the national GHG inventory, the studies related to the national energy policy, and the electricity
regulation studies are clear examples of sub-projects that may affect the whole country.
 The technology development sub-projects consist of primarily acquisition of equipment for the
mineral and electricity research centers, located in Brasília and Rio de Janeiro urban areas. Only
the proposed investments at the Eletrobras Research Center CEPEL, Adrianópolis Unit, and the
Alto Uruguai Sub-Project may cause minor environmental impacts and demand site-specific
environmental assessment.

  The CEPEL Unit is located in the Nova Iguaçu County, Rio de Janeiro Metropolitan Region. It
is located in the upstream portion of the Nova Iguaçu River, NW portion of the Baixada
(lowlands) area, approximately 45 km from the Rio de Janeiro downtown area. The Unit is
placed in a low-density, largely agricultural area, at the foot slope of the #Serra do Mar#
mountains. Natural vegetation (Atlantic Forest) remains in the steep terrains, but most original
vegetation in flat areas has already been removed to form plantations and pastures. No
significant impact on natural habitats is foreseen.

 The Alto Uruguai region is located in the southern part of Brazil, including portions of the
Santa Catarina and Rio Grande do Sul States, in the transition from the Grassland to the Atlantic
Forest ecosystem. The region is densely populated, and known for intensive family farming
activities. A relevant environmental problem at the region is environmental pollution due to
concentration of pig and poultry farming, without appropriate waste disposal.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Borrower#s institutional capacity for safeguard issues management is considered adequate.
Within MME, there is an Environmental Sustainability Study Center (NESA) responsible for
articulating and promoting socio-environmental sustainability in all activities developed by the
Ministry and its subordinated agencies. NESA is also responsible for monitoring the
implementation of the environmental guidelines defined by the Power Sector Committee, and
environment-related activities of all programs and policies under the Ministry#s jurisdiction.

 Eletrobras and its research division, CEPEL, also have adequate capability to implement the
Project#s safeguards requirements. CEPEL has a comprehensive and suitable environmental
management plan, and follows the Eletrobras Sustainability Policy.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSSO)
   Mr Augusto Ferreira Mendonca (LCSEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                               X
    The META Project is expected to have positive environmental impacts, given the focus on
capacity building of key institutions of both the energy and the mineral sectors. The Project will
promote regulatory adjustments, sector planning and sector institutions strengthening. Energy
and mining face numerous environmental challenges, currently aggravated by the accelerated
national economic growth. The regulatory and supervision agencies capacity improvement has
important environmental and social implications, allowing the country energy use efficiency
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No          TBD
enhancement and adoption of sustainable practices in both sectors, among other
environmentally relevant outcomes.
      The Project includes primarily conceptual studies and activities related to institutional
strengthening, which are likely to have minimal or no adverse environmental impacts. For this
reason, the project has been rated category #B# and Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
has been triggered. The approach to identifying and managing environmental and social impacts
and risks under the project will be twofold. The Environmental Assessment safeguard is
mandatory to all sub-projects that may potentially have an environmental or social impact. Other
safeguard policies have been triggered on a precautionary basis. The Natural Habitats, Forests,
Physical Cultural Resources, Involuntary Resettlement and Indigenous Peoples safeguards will
be activated if the specific impacts are identified during Project preparation or should these arise
during the Project implementation.
      The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) being prepared by the
Borrower lays out the principles and procedures for assessing all sub-projects# potential
environmental and/or social impacts. It has sub-projects screening and eligibility criteria to make
sure that no sub-projects with high potential impacts can be eligible.
      The sub-projects can be separated, according to the potential social and environmental
impacts, into five different types: 1. Institutional strengthening measures, with no direct or
indirect environmental implications; 2. Investments in research centers (activities that do not
cause adverse environmental impacts); 3. Interventions with small magnitude impacts, such as
sub-projects related to research centers (Eletrobras - CEPEL) and bioenergy in the Upper
Uruguay; 4. Conceptual studies with direct environmental implications, and 5. Conceptual
studies that may have indirect environmental implications. The ESMF defines mitigation,
supervision, monitoring and evaluation procedures applicable to all types of sub-projects
described above, to ensure the effective and timely implementation of environmental and social
safeguards during the Project#s implementation. Two types of sub-projects deserve special
attention: interventions with small magnitude impacts and conceptual studies that may have
indirect environmental implications.
      The CEPEL facilities were visited by the Project#s environmental specialist during the
project identification phase, to evaluate the proposed activities potential impacts, concluding that
CEPEL sub-project potential impacts are site-specific, and can be adequately mitigated. The
Borrower agreed to prepare a specific environmental management plan for the CEPEL
Laboratory interventions, including the sub- project characterization, legal framework, impacts
assessment, management plan (mitigation plan, monitoring plan, implementation measures and
institutional arrangement), and a brief construction manual for the new facilities construction.
The Alto Uruguai sub-project#s EMP will be prepared during the project implementation, upon
definition of the sub-project exact location.
      The conceptual studies that may have indirect environmental implications will be also
object of specific analysis and implementation criteria. The ESMF term of reference, agreed with
the Borrower, includes screening procedures and eligibility criteria for all sub-projects, including
the conceptual studies related to hydropower in the Amazon Region.
      Additionally, the Borrower agreed to include clear mechanism for integration of the social
and environmental dimensions into the conceptual studies with potential environmental
implications. These studies will include social and environmental assessment sections, with
appropriate impact assessment methodologies and instruments to evaluate eventual policy
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes           No         TBD
proposals outcomes environmental implications. These studies will be also object of broad
participatory process with stakeholders.
      MME will conduct two independent consultations with key stakeholders. The first to
present the Project ESMF report findings and a specific consultation on the CEPEL
environmental management plan.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                          X
     The project does not include conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats, and no
significant impact on natural habitats is foreseen. However, the Project includes energy and
mining related conceptual studies that may have implications on natural habitats nationwide.
      The Natural Habitats safeguards is therefore triggered on a precautionary basis, and must be
applied if impacts on natural habitats are identified, or anticipated, during project preparation, or
if they arise during the Project implementation.
      The environmental part of the conceptual framework to be prepared (ESMF) addresses the
Natural Habitats safeguard requirements to be considered in all conceptual studies that may have
indirect environmental implications, such as the studies related to hydroelectricity in the Amazon
region.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                   X
     The project does not include forest restoration or plantation development. However, the
planned conceptual studies, and eventual policy guidelines, may have consequences on health
and quality of forests, or may generate changes in the management, protection, or utilization of
natural forests or plantations. Some sub-projects, such as the study on national wood and
charcoal demand, and studied considering hydroelectric projects development in the Amazon,
among others, may have implications for natural forests.
      Due to that, the Forests safeguard is also triggered on a precautionary basis, and must be
applied if impacts on natural forests and plantations are identified, or anticipated, during project
preparation, or if they arise during the Project implementation.
      Analogous to Natural Habitats, the environmental part of the conceptual framework to be
prepared addresses the Forests safeguard requirements to be considered in all conceptual studies
that may have indirect environmental implications, such as the studies related to hydroelectricity
in the Amazon region.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                          X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                               X
     The META Project does not involve excavations, earth movement, flooding or other major
environmental changes. It is not expected that project implementation would have any negative
impact on physical cultural resources. However, the planned conceptual studies and derived
policy guidelines may have implication on physical cultural resources. Brazil has a well-
developed legislative and normative framework for protection of historical and archeological
sites. The Physical Cultural Resources safeguard is triggered on a precautionary basis, and its
principles must be incorporated into the environmental screening section of the environmental
management plan.
      The Physical Cultural Resources safeguard requirements also need to be considered in all
conceptual studies that may have indirect environmental implications, such as the mining- and
energy-related studies
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                        X
     The META project will not make any investments that directly affect Indigenous Peoples and
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes          No          TBD
lands. No direct negative social impacts for Indigenous Peoples are anticipated from its
activities. Nonetheless a number of its conceptual studies are related with regulatory policies,
institutional strengthening and energy-mining sector planning and modernization and might have
interfaces with Indigenous Peoples and trigger safeguard concerns. In this case the studies are
related with hydroelectric and mining potentials in the Amazon basin and, in particular, the
proposed comprehensive social assessment of the historical and recent context in which
relationships between indigenous peoples and the energy-mineral sector actually take place.
Relying on a participatory methodology, this study aims to propose principles and guidelines to
be adopted as the sector policy for its relationships with indigenous societies. The overall
expectation is that these conceptual studies may bring positive consequences to indigenous
people by improving their opportunities and channels of communication and dialogue with the
energy-mining sector.
      To ensure that compliance with World Bank safeguards procedures and protocol is
considered and closely monitored, OP 4.10 has been triggered on a precautionary basis and the
client is preparing an Indigenous People Policy Framework (IPPF) in the context of the Project s
Social and Environmental Management Framework. The IPPF will: (a) provide a preliminary
overview of the most salient social issues involved in the interface between the energy-mining
sector and indigenous people in Brazil that will be in depth addressed by the previously
mentioned comprehensive social assessment; and (b) set the principles and guidelines that will
be enforced in the eventual positive or adverse interference with Indigenous Peoples resulting
from other Project s supported activities.
      A consultation event about these IPPF principles and guidelines will be conducted at the
appropriated level, including representatives of Indigenous Peoples and other key stakeholders
(Fundação Nacional do Índio, Ministry of Justice, etc.). Their comments and suggestions will be
collected through this consultative process; they will be incorporated as appropriate; and, their
support will be documented in the final draft of the IPPF that will be submitted to the Bank and
publicly disclosed prior to Appraisal.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                  X
    It is expected that the META Project will not require involuntary taking of land leading to
direct adverse impacts # relocation or loss of shelter, loss of assets or access to them, loss of
income sources and/or means of livelihood # on the people involved. Thus, it is expected that the
META Project will not cause involuntary physical and/or economic displacement of people.
Nevertheless, some of its proposed activities might require the building of new facilities. As
there is no previous guarantee that (i) these new facilities will require or not land acquisition, (ii)
the status of the land tenure rights over the plots that might be acquired (public or privately
owned areas, occupied or free lands), and (iii) will be made on a free and voluntary basis or
require state expropriation of land tenure rights, the Involuntary Resettlement policy (OP 4.12)
has been triggered on a precautionary basis. An Involuntary Resettlement Policy Framework is
being prepared by the client, aiming (a) to provide the principles and guidelines to be followed
by the executors of all activities that might eventually require land acquisition, (b) to set clear
screening criteria through which involuntary resettlement issues can be identified and monitored
by the executing agencies, the client and the Bank throughout project s implementation, and (c)
to stimulate the option for free, voluntary, and market-oriented procedures of land acquisitions in
the scope of the activities supported by the project.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                              Yes              No             TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                    X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 06/30/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage
   ISDS would be prepared: 06/30/2011

        B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-
       stage ISDS: N/A

        C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
       needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

        The draft Environmental and Social Management Framework # including the Involuntary
       Resettlement Policy Framework and the Indigenous People Policy Framework # will be
       completed and submitted to the Bank by late May 2011.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Christophe de Gouvello                                      08/04/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Glenn S. Morgan                                             07/11/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Philippe Charles Benoit                                     08/05/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
