                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/23/2011                                  Report No.: AC6503
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Brazil                              Project ID: P126537
Project Name: Energy and Mineral Sector Strengthening
Task Team Leader: Christophe de Gouvello
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 22, 2011 Estimated Board Date: November 1, 2011
Managing Unit: LCSEG                         Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                             Loan
Sector: General energy sector (80%);Other Mining and Extractive Industries (20%)
Theme: Regulation and competition policy (30%);Infrastructure services for private
sector development (30%);Environmental policies and institutions (20%);Climate change
(20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            49.60
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      3.30
                                                                       3.30
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed Project Development Objective is to strengthen the capacity of key public
sector institutions to improve the contribution of energy and mineral resources to
accelerated national economic growth and increased social and environmental
sustainability in a context of globalization and technological change.

 The principal outcome expected from the project is to improve capacity of key
institutions in both the energy and the mineral sectors to ensure that they deliver the
regulatory adjustments, the improved planning and the modernization of infrastructure -
in particular related to information systems and technology development # that are
needed in order to support accelerated economic growth that is sustainable from both
environmental and social perspectives.

3. Project Description
Project components. The proposed Project would support sector-wide efficiency
improvements in the energy and mineral sectors through four components.
 Component 1: Strengthening the capacity of the Government to drive the sustainable
development of the energy and mineral sectors (US$9.94 million, of which US$8.94
million from IBRD and US$1 million from counterpart funds). This component will be
composed of the following subcomponents:

 i.     Planning of the Energy and Mineral Sectors. This sub-component will strengthen
the ability of the MME to formulate and implement strategies aiming at (i) expanding the
supply of cost-effective and sustainable energy to meet the evolution of demand, in the
medium and long-term and (ii) improving governance, increasing value added, and
enhancing sustainability in the mining sector;

 ii.   Strengthening capacity to design and implement policies and practices to facilitate
the expansion and improve the sustainability of the energy and mineral sectors. This sub-
component will also include support to improve institutional communication related to
the implementation of these policies and practices.

  iii. Management, monitoring and evaluation of activities. This subcomponent will
finance the strengthening of the capacity of the Executive Secretary of MME to manage,
monitor and evaluate technical assistance activities, in particular the TA activities
supported by this Project.

 Component 2: Strengthening of regulatory institutions (US$3.33 million, of which
US$2.33 million from IBRD and US$1 million from counterpart funds). This component
aims to strengthen the energy and mineral sectors# legal, institutional, and oversight
capacities and frameworks of their regulatory functions, with special focus on ANEEL,
DNPM and CPRM. The proposed set of activities covers capacity building for the
formulation of policies, guidelines, and legislative improvements, and institutional
strengthening for the relevant sector departments and agencies. Subcomponent (i) aims to
strengthen the monitoring and control capacity of the electricity sector, including the
development of more efficient tools for effective regulatory action. Subcomponent (ii)
focuses on institutional strengthening in the area of geology and mineral resources, with
special emphasis on the modernization of DNPM and CPRM.

 Component 3: Technology Development. (US$36.69 million, of which US$35.69
million from IBRD and US$1 million from counterpart funds). This component will
support the development and use of cutting edge technologies to: (a) improve R&D
capacity of the electricity sector to transport efficiently and reliably large blocks of
energy across continent-wide distances and (b) in the mineral sector, enhance CPRM#s
capacity to use geophysics equipment for the prevention of natural disasters, and better
investigate the quality of mineral deposits and thus attract investments.

 i.     Investments in Research and Technological Development. This will finance (i)
the refurbishment and technology development of the technical laboratories of CPRM
and CEPEL to meet the evolving demands for research and technological development in
the energy and mineral sectors and (ii) the implementation of a security technology
(phaser measurement units) for the National Interconnected System operated by the ONS.
 ii.   Studies in Research and Technological Development. This includes studies and
research in the energy and mineral sectors required for the implementation and
development of new technologies in these sectors.

 Component 4: South-South Cooperation. (US$3.52 million of which US$2.52 million,
funded by IBRD and US$1 million from counterpart funds). This component will support
two-way South-South cooperation between Brazil and developing countries (in particular
in Latin America, the Caribbean and Africa) in the area of energy and mining. The
activities will focus on the areas of regulation, renewable energy, climate change, clean
energy, geological surveys, information systems and environmental and social
sustainability. This component will support the effort of the MME and possibly other
institutions, such as ELETROBRAS, to improve the preparation and execution of these
activities. In particular, it will support activities to systematically organize information,
and to assign the necessary means and responsibilities for activities to ensure concrete
results. Specific studies and consultancies will also be financed to facilitate the building
of results-oriented cooperative engagements in this area. This will help meet an
increasing demand for cooperation that Brazil has been receiving in these areas. The
implementation of this component will benefit from the experience, instruments, and
expertise of the World Bank in the area of South-South cooperation, in particular in the
area of knowledge exchange, related information management systems and results
monitoring.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project aims to promote the sustainable development of the Brazilian energy and
mineral sectors, strengthening the regulatory institutions, supporting sector wide
technology development and South-South cooperation between Brazil and other
developing countries. Activities to be financed with the META Project encompass
primarily conceptual studies, institutional development#related activities, information
systems improvement, and investments in research centers.

 Consequently, the Project has nationwide relevance, addressing energy and mineral
resources regulatory and planning activities all over the country. The preparation of
guidelines to conduct the national GHG inventory, the studies related to the national
energy policy, and the electricity regulation studies are clear examples of sub-projects
that may affect the whole country. The technology development sub-projects consist of
primarily acquisition of equipment for the mineral and electricity research centers,
located in Brasília and Rio de Janeiro urban areas.

 Only the proposed investments at the Eletrobras Research Center CEPEL, Adrianópolis
Unit, may cause minor environmental impacts and demand site-specific environmental
assessment. The CEPEL Unit is located in the Nova Iguaçu County, Rio de Janeiro
Metropolitan Region. It is located in the upstream portion of the Nova Iguaçu River, NW
portion of the Baixada (lowlands) area, approximately 45 km from the Rio de Janeiro
downtown area. The Unit is placed in a low-density, largely agricultural area, at the foot
of the #Serra do Mar# mountains. Natural vegetation (Atlantic Forest) remains in the
steep terrains, but most original vegetation in flat areas has already been removed to form
plantations and pastures. No significant impact on natural habitats is foreseen.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSSO)
   Mr Augusto Ferreira Mendonca (LCSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                   X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                            X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                        X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                             X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                      X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
13.      The project does not entail any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible
negative impacts. The Social and Environment Assessment (EA) analyzed the potential
environmental impacts (both positive and adverse) of the activities to be supported by the
project and has not identified potential large scale, significant and irreversible impacts.
On the contrary, the Project includes primarily conceptual studies and activities related to
institutional strengthening, which are likely to have minimal or no adverse environmental
impacts and, given the focus on capacity building of key institutions of both the energy
and the mineral sectors, it is expected to have positive environmental impacts. The
Project will promote regulatory adjustments, sector planning and sector institutions
strengthening. The regulatory and supervision agencies capacity improvement has
important environmental and social implications, allowing the country energy use
efficiency enhancement and adoption of sustainable practices in both sectors, among
other environmentally relevant outcomes.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
14.      No significant indirect or long-term or cumulative impacts are foreseen under the
Project. The sub-projects and/or activities included in the META Project can be
separated, according to the potential social and environmental impacts, into four different
types: 1) Institutional strengthening measures, with no direct or indirect environmental
implications; 2) investments in research centers (activities that do not cause adverse
environmental impacts); 3) interventions with small magnitude impacts, such as sub-
projects related to research centers (Eletrobras - CEPEL); and, 4) conceptual studies that
may have indirect environmental implications. The last two types of sub-projects deserve
special attention, as they may have indirect, minimal, site-specific, and reversible adverse
environmental impacts that can be readily mitigated. These sub-projects will be subjected
to a rigorous screening process # according to criteria and procedures defined in the
ESMF # to ensure that unintended negative environmental and social impacts are avoided
or minimized.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable as no significant adverse impacts are foreseen for the project as designed.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower#s institutional capacity for safeguard issues management is considered
adequate. The Bank team assessed the capacity of the Ministry of Mining and Energy
and the implementing partners. A specific unit (PIU) will be created for the project
management under the Executive Secretary of MME. Within MME, there is an
Environmental Sustainability Study Center (NESA) responsible for articulating and
promoting socio-environmental sustainability in all activities developed by the MME and
its subordinated agencies. NESA is also responsible for monitoring the implementation of
the environmental guidelines defined by the Power Sector Committee, and environment-
related activities of all programs and policies under the Ministry#s jurisdiction in a
unified way. NESA is assigned to provide all the support and expertise needed to the PIU
to fulfill safeguards requirements. Eletrobras and its research division, CEPEL, also have
adequate capability to implement the Project#s safeguards requirements. CEPEL has a
comprehensive and suitable environmental management plan, and follows the Eletrobras
Sustainability Policy.
  The approach to identifying and managing environmental and social impacts and risks
under the project is twofold. The Environmental Assessment safeguard is mandatory to
all sub-projects that may potentially have an environmental or social impact. Other
safeguard policies have been triggered on a precautionary basis. The Natural Habitats,
Forests, and Physical Cultural Resources safeguards will be activated if the specific
impacts are identified during Project preparation or should these arise during the Project
implementation. The Borrower has addressed safeguard policy issues by preparing a
satisfactory Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) in accordance
with this twofold approach, which sets the guidelines, procedures and criteria for
screening activities and ensures that they will not cause any negative environmental and
social impacts.
  The specific measures taken by the Borrower to address each of the safeguard issues are
described in the following.

 OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. The activities most likely to cause indirect
environmental impacts are related to interventions with small magnitude impacts (the
CEPEL sub-project) and conceptual studies. These impacts are most likely to be minimal,
site-specific, reversible adverse environmental impacts and can be readily and adequately
mitigated. In consequence, the Project is classified as Category B. A satisfactory
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared and submitted
by the Borrower and approved by the Bank as a mandatory safeguard policy. The ESMF
lays out the principles and procedures for assessing all sub-projects# potential
environmental and/or social impacts. It has sub-projects screening and eligibility criteria
to make sure that no sub-project with high potential impacts can be eligible. The ESMF
defines mitigation, supervision, monitoring and evaluation procedures applicable to all
types of sub-projects described above, to ensure the effective and timely implementation
of environmental and social safeguards during the Project#s implementation.
 The ESMF also includes a clear mechanism for integration of the social and
environmental dimensions into the conceptual studies with potential environmental
implications. These studies will include social and environmental assessment sections,
with appropriate impact assessment methodologies and instruments to evaluate eventual
policy proposals outcomes environmental implications. These studies will be also the
object of broad participatory processes with stakeholders. Additionally, the Borrower
prepared a specific environmental management plan for the CEPEL Laboratory
interventions, including the sub-project characterization, legal framework, impact
assessment, and management plan (mitigation plan, monitoring plan, implementation
measures and institutional arrangement).

 OP 4.04 Natural Habitats. The Natural Habitats safeguard was triggered on a
precautionary basis and must be applied if impacts on natural habitats are identified, or
anticipated, during project preparation, or if they arise during the Project implementation.
The environmental part of the conceptual framework (ESMF) addresses the Natural
Habitats safeguard requirements and clear guidance to be considered in all conceptual
studies that may have indirect environmental implications.

 OP 4.36 Forests. The Forests safeguard was also triggered on a precautionary basis and
must be applied if impacts on natural forests and plantations are identified, or anticipated,
during project preparation, or if they arise during the Project implementation. The ESMF
addresses the Forests safeguard requirements to be considered in all conceptual studies
that may have indirect environmental implications and has included clear guidance
regarding indirect impacts on native forests.

 OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources. Although Brazil has a well-developed legislative
and normative framework for protection of historical and archeological sites, the Physical
Cultural Resources safeguard has been incorporated on a precautionary basis into the
environmental screening section of the ESMF, and its requirements will be considered in
all conceptual studies that may have indirect implication on physical cultural resources
(such as the mining- and energy-related studies).

 Other safeguard policies (OP 4.09 Pest Management, OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples, OP
4.12 Involuntary Resettlement, OP 4.37 Safety of Dams, OP 7.50 Projects on
International Waterways and OP 7.60 Projects in Disputed Areas) are not applicable.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
There will be an array of beneficiary stakeholders at the national and international levels.
Directly, the project will engage the entities targeted for strengthening # such as the
Executive Secretariat, the Secretariat for Planning and Energy Development (SPE), the
Secretariat for Electricity (SEE), the Secretariat for Oil, Gas and Bio-fuels (SPG), the
Secretariat for Geology, Mining and Mineral Processing (SGM), the Nucleus for
Environmental Sustainability Studies (NESA), and EPE.
  Other directly benefitted stakeholders are the regulatory agencies and the federal sector
institutions # in particular, the various different secretariats of MME and of the National
Electricity Regulatory Agency (ANEEL) # and the research and development agencies #
the National Center for Research in Electricity (CEPEL), the CPRM, and the National
Operator of the Transmission System (ONS). Indirectly, the project#s main beneficiary
will be the Brazilian population as a whole, which will benefit from having more reliable
power at lower prices in the future, and from capturing the economic benefits resulting
from a growing and more efficient mining sector. Additionally, other developing
countries will benefit from the exchange of information and knowledge with Brazil
through South-South interactions.
  These stakeholders have been consulted throughout the preparation stage. First there
was an on-line public dissemination and consultation process of the draft ESMF, which
was carried on through MME website, from June 13 to 24th, 2011. In addition, MME
conducted two independent consultations with key stakeholders. One consultation was
conducted on the CEPEL environmental management plan and held at CEPEL
headquarters (Rio de Janeiro), on June 29th, 2011. The other consultation was conducted
to present the findings of the Project s preliminary ESMF report and held at MME
headquarters (Brasília) on June 30th, 2011. Suggestions and comments received through
these consultative processes have been incorporated in the final versions of both
documents.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 06/07/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             06/14/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              08/23/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                 Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)             Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the             Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of          No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other     N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?               Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential             Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   Yes
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           Yes
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        No
provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s          Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Christophe de Gouvello                    08/19/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Augusto Ferreira Mendonca                 08/19/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa                08/19/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan                           08/19/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Todd M. Johnson                           08/22/2011
  Comments:
