                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 01/19/2012                                      Report No.: 66515
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P111996                 Original Project Name: Rio de Janeiro
                                             Mass Transit Project II
Country: Brazil                              Project ID: P125630
Project Name: Upgrading and Greening the Rio de Janeiro Urban Rail System
Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Arturo Ardila Gomez
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 24,        Estimated Board Date: January 26, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: LCSTR                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: General transportation sector (100%)
Theme: Climate change (50%);Other urban development (30%);Infrastructure services
for private sector development (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           600
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed PDOs are: (a) to improve the level of service provided to suburban rail
transport users in the RJMR in a safe and cost-efficient manner; (b) to place the suburban
rail transport system on a lower carbon growth path; and (c) to improve the transport
management and policy framework in the Borrower’s territory and in the RJMR.

3. Project Description
The components of the original project remain as originally stated in the PAD and Loan
Agreements for that project. The Additional Financing introduces new project activities
as follows:

 Component 1: Infrastructure and Equipment
 1.     Acquisition of an additional sixty (60) trains (EMUs) with four (4) cars each and
accessories, for a total of at least 360 (in the aggregate) cars to be operated on the lines of
CENTRAL’s System, by the Concessionaire under the terms of the Concession Contract.

 2.     Design and implementation of a non-motorized transport and greening
demonstration pilot program in selected stations of the CENTRAL System, through the
acquisition of bicycles required therefor.

 Component 2: Institutional and Policy Development

 1.      Provision of technical assistance to SETRANS for the carrying out of additional
studies on policy development, including, inter alia: (a) the design (but excluding
implementation) of a sustainable transport policy for the Borrower, including measures to
reduce the carbon growth path of transport and improve environmental and social
sustainability; (b) the design and implementation of a strategy for the Borrower’s territory
and the RJMR passenger and freight transport system, to adapt to the impacts of climate
change, environmental and social risks and liabilities, and natural disasters; (c) the design
and implementation of a center to monitor the impact of natural disasters on the
metropolitan public transport system, including those stemming from climate change
impacts; (d) the design (but excluding implementation) of a strategy to improve the
efficiency and to reduce the carbon footprint of the Borrower’s freight system and its
environmental and social risks and liabilities; (e) the carrying out of feasibility and
detailed engineering studies (but excluding implementation) for potential BRT corridors
in the RJMR area which are not competing with the rail-based transport; (f) the design
(but excluding implementation) of a transport-related, accident-reduction policy to make
the Borrower’s transport system safer; (g) the design (but excluding implementation) of
an updated strategy for SETRANS to carry out consultations with stakeholders to
improve its transport reform planning process; (h) the carrying out of an evaluation study
to assess the social, economic and environmental impact of the Project, particularly on
carbon emissions; and (i) the carrying out of studies to support the implementation of Part
A.2 of the Project.

 2.      Provision of technical assistance to CENTRAL for Project management and
supervision, including the acquisition and reception of the trains (EMUs).

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The proposed project is part of the Rio de Janeiro State Government#s strategy and
policies to reduce the carbon footprint of urban transport by improving the urban rail-
based mass transport in a safe, clean and affordable way in the Rio de Janeiro
Metropolitan Region (RMRJ). The State Government is conducting a reforms to improve
the management of metropolitan urban space, in line with the continuation of Rio de
Janeiro#s Program of Accelerated Growth (PAC), and other urban, housing, and social
programs. Rail-based mass transport is a key component of the State#s strategy, looking
to improve the metropolitan region transport system.
 The proposed project is associated specifically with the SuperVia concession which
consists of approximately 225 km of passenger rail system in five main lines (Deodoro,
Japeri/Paracambi, Santa Cruz, Belford Roxo, Saracuruna) in 11 municipalities in the
RMDJ (these 11 municipalities account for approximately 82 % of the RMDJ
population). SuperVia is operated by a private sector concessionaire, and supervised by
the Secretariat of Transport (SETRANS) and the State Regulatory Agency
(AGETRANSP). The concession was established in 1998. The trains are electric powered
are the concessionaire presently has approximately 161 trains (cars) and normally operate
with three to four passenger cars. The concession includes 89 stations and two main
maintenance facilities. The train system connects the Rio de Janeiro downtown area to
the Baixada Fluminense and West Zone counties, which are basically all urban or semi-
urban areas.
 Most of the project area of influence has poor air quality due primary to mobile source
air emissions (e.g., estimated that approximately 77 % of total pollutants emitted are from
mobile sources). The Baixada Fluminense and West Zone areas air quality condition is
influenced by several physical-geographical factors. The Duque de Caxias County has the
worst air quality in the Metro Region, but other counties also have high concentrations of
total suspended particles (TSP) and ozone.

  Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The project does not involve construction
activities, and involves the purchases on 60 new cars and some technical studies, and thus
it is not likely to have significant adverse environmental impacts. The project does
indirectly involve the operation and maintenance of the SuperVia concession. The
project will create positive environmental impacts on a regional scale by reducing vehicle
traffic (i.e., more people will use the SuperVia train system) thus reduced air emissions
and improving air quality and also reducing traffic related accidents. The project potential
impact related to acquisition of new cars is limited, and thus the potential moderate
impacts are associated with the operation and maintenance of the SuperVia system.
Approximately 80 families illegally occupying a portion of one rail line right-of-way that
will require resettlement due to safety and operational reasons (see OPBP 4.12 for
details). The project is classified as Category B under OP/BP 4.01.

 An Environmental Assessment was prepared for the Rio Mass Transport II Project
(P111996) and an Environmental Management Plan was established and has been
implemented.

  A new Environmental Assessment (EA) was prepared to assure the Greening the Rio de
Janeiro Urban Rail System Project compliance with applicable Brazilian environmental
legislation and World Bank safeguard policies. The EA includes: legal and regulatory
framework review, updated baseline assessment, prior environmental activities
consolidation; environmental impacts assessment; and an updated Environmental
Management Plan (EMP). The EMP addresses the potential negative impacts associated
with the Supervia concession, and in relation to SuperVia includes: environmental
institutional capacity strengthening, social communication and environmental education,
industrial and hazardous waste management plan, vector control plan, effluents
management plan, noise monitoring program, PCB management plan, right-of-way
vegetation plan, contaminated areas assessment program, environmental compliance
action plan, and resettlement action plan. The EMP also establishes actions under the
responsibility of SETRANS, including related to people walkways over the train right-of-
way, control of wastewater discharges and solid waste disposal into the right-of-way
from outside of the right-of-way, and environmental supervision by SETRANS. The
EMP assigns responsibilities and indicates a schedule and budget.

 Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04). The project does not involve any new construction and
does not involve any potential significant conversion or degradation of critical natural
habitats or natural habitats. Thus is not necessary to trigger the Natural Habitats
Safeguard.

 Pest Management (OP 4.09). The concessionaire SuperVia sprays the right-of-way on a
regular basis for vegetation and pest control. Additional spraying is done when diseases,
such as dengue, are identified. The Pest Management Safeguard is triggered. The EMP
has a pest management plan and attempts to promote the use of ecologically based
biological or environmental pest management practices, to the extent practicable, and to
reduce reliance on synthetic chemical pesticides. The pest plan includes procedures for
procurement and use of pesticides in accordance to the Bank guidelines and Brazilian
applicable legislation.

 Forests (OP 4.36). The project does not involve conversion or degradation of natural
forests or other natural habitats, and does not require triggering the Forest Safeguard.

 Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11). The project does not directly involve any
construction. However the ongoing operation and maintenance of the Supervia
concession can involve some minor maintenance of buildings under the responsibility of
the concessionaire. The main terminal (Central do Brazil) includes a building recognized
by competent authorities as #urban heritage# due to its historical and architectural
significance (Municipal Decree 14.741, April 22, 1996). The Central do Brasil terminal is
also classified as #urban heritage#, by State and Federal authorities. The EA did a study
on historically significant buildings and structures along the railroad corridors, and
identified other four building classified as cultural heritage: the São Cristovão Terminal,
the Engenho de Dentro Terminal, the Vila Militar Terminal, and some facilities at the
Engenho Novo site. The project does not include interventions on the main terminal and
other cultural heritage facilities. However, if the concessionaire needs to perform works
on these buildings, appropriate authorizations and approvals are required under Brazilian
legislation.

 Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The project will not implement new
construction activities or require new land acquisition. The railway system right-of-way
has been established. However, there are three areas in which the right-of-way of an
auxiliary rail line that has been invaded and occupied by 80 families. For safety and
operational reasons, this are which is within the concession established right-of-way
needs to be cleared of all buildings and occupants. As those families have illegally
occupied the area, live in precarious housing conditions and are exposed to the risks of
accidents in the railway, they must be relocated and OP 4.12 was triggered.

  In February 2011, the State of Rio de Janeiro and its concessionaire (SuperVia) hired an
expert consultant who has prepared the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). The cadastre
and the socioeconomic assessment of the families living at the right-of-way have been
immediately carried out. The sealing of their houses was properly completed in March
2011, which was defined as the cut-off date. The draft RAP was discussed with the
affected people in three community meetings and comments and suggestions have been
critically incorporated in the finalized version of this document. The draft RAP was also
publicly disclosed in the websites of SETRANS and SuperVia by June 30, 2011. The
finalized version was submitted by the Client to the Bank for no objection by July15,
2011 and late disseminated in line with the Access to Information Policy prior to Project
Appraisal. The RAP is included in the EMP.

 The RAP clearly defines resettlement principles and institutional responsibilities.
Additionally, it identifies the categories of affected people, states the eligibility criteria
and establishes alternative compensations. The RAP also outlines the schedule of
implementation # including prior and post resettlement activities # and a comprehensive
budget. The removal of affected people will take place during the first year of project
implementation and prior than the new trains enter in operation. Finally and in line with
OP/BP 4.12, the RAP set the guidelines for grievance mechanisms, monitoring and
evaluation methodologies.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSSO)
   Mr Robert H. Montgomery (LCSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                 Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                            X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                        X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                         X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                            X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                      X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project does not involve construction activities and it is not likely to have direct or
indirect significant large scale and/or irreversible adverse environmental impacts. A
limited relocation of people (approximately 80 families) illegally occupying the right-of-
way of one rail line will required resettlement due to due safety and operational reasons.
The project will create positive environmental impacts on a regional scale by reducing
vehicle traffic (i.e., more people will use the SuperVia train system) thus reduced air
emissions and improving air quality and also reducing traffic related accidents.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The project may cause net positive environmental impacts on a regional scale. The
additional trains financed by the loan may attract current and potential users of more
polluting road-based modes (i.e. cars and inefficient bus operations) to rail, thereby
reducing local and global emissions with a reduction of vehicle-kilometers. The project
may also cause net positive environmental impacts by improving the metropolitan region
transport system efficiency.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The proposed loan will finance acquisition of new modern equipment, electric trains,
with high energy use efficiency, no air emissions, and low noise generation. Alternatives
considered when the ongoing Rio de Janeiro Mass Transit 2 project was designed were:
a) do nothing; b) rehabilitation of existing trains; and c) parallel bus-ways. To achieve the
goal of reducing the carbon footprint of urban transport by transforming the system in a
metro-like operation with high frequency in a safe, clean and affordable manner, the
decision to buy new trains which have regenerative braking and are energy more efficient
and reliable was considered the best alternative. The acquisition of new air conditioned
trains is expected to shift passengers from road-based modes to rail. Therefore, it is not
possible to identify any other project alternative that may avoid or minimize adverse
impacts beyond the selected one.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The SuperVia concessionaire succeeded in implementing the EMP prepared in 2008 for
the Rio Mass Transport II Project. This resulted in various improvements such as
improving waste management in the workshops and maintenance yards, promoting a
solid and hazardous waste management program for the system and surrounding
communities, and improved environmental management capacity.
  For this project, an updated EMP has been prepared, complementing the former
environmental assessment and RMP prepared for the original project. A RAP has been
developed to address the relocation of people occupying the a small area of the train
right-of-way. The Borrower and the Concessionaire engaged specialized consultants to
prepare the EMP and the RAP, and are implementing improvements on their
environmental management system.
  In relation to the purchase of the 60 new trains in the project, the bidding document
requires that the supplier and its subcontractors shall operate in conformity with the
provisions of the laws of that country (which would include environmental, worker health
and safety). The equipment design is to consider as part of the design and construction, in
consultation with the purchaser, use of materials and design to minimize the potential
environmental impacts.
 The SuperVia concession has obtained its required environmental operation permits.
The concessionaire and applicable governmental agencies have established two
compliance agreements (Terminos de Ajustamento de Conduta; one in 2002 and one in
2008) which establish actions in order to bring the concession into compliance with
applicable Brazilian requirements. These agreements have helped make the concession
in compliance, and have been basically fulfilled with only a few actions still pending
completion which are includes as part of the EMP.
 The SuperVia concessionaire has established an Integrated Management System
(Sistema Integrado de Gestao), which includes specific components related to
environmental, health and safety, in order to comply with all applicable Brazilian
legislation and regulatory requirements and concession agreement requirements. The
system also includes a Contingency/Emergency Plan.
 The project rail system is operated by a private sector concessionaire, (SuperVia), and
supervised by the Secretariat of Transport (SETRANS) and the State Regulatory Agency
(AGETRANSP), with different mandates. SETRANS issues the transport system
concessions and follows up the concession contracts performance. The regulatory agency
monitors the services standards. Environmental aspects compliance is observed by both
agencies. SETRANS and its subsidiary, CENTRAL, have long term experience with
projects financed by the World Bank, and are implementing specific measures to improve
their environmental management capacity.
 The state of Rio de Janeiro has seriously improved its involuntary resettlement
legislation and procedures. Decree 41148/2008 introduced guidelines and mechanisms
that potentially advance socially responsible resettlement processes that guarantee the
participation of the potentially affected people and extensive consultation processes with
main stakeholders to address their concerns during implementation, which are in
accordance with most of the provisions of the Bank's resettlement policies. These
practices of resettlement have been assessed in the preparation of the Urban and Housing
Development Policy Loan (P122391). Additionally, as agreed on the Resettlement Action
Plan, a specific multidisciplinary team # lawyer, engineer and social work # will be hired
and a new and specific grievance mechanism will be defined by the state of Rio de
Janeiro (SETRANS) to address the issues of involuntary resettlement directly related
with this project.
 SuperVia, the system operator, has staff dedicated to environmental, health and safety.
The EHS section is responsible for implementing the company#s EHS management
system (which is part of the company#s SIG), including a comprehensive social program
with the surrounding communities. It addresses environmental education and
communication. The ongoing environmental management measures already produced
positive results, implementing a sound waste management in the maintenance yards, joint
activities with community volunteers, among other relevant actions. SuperVia is
strengthening its EHS institutional capacity, expanding its staff and budget committed to
environmental management.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Associated with the project, an Environmental Assessment, Environmental Management
Plan (EMP) and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) were prepared covering all the
safeguard policies triggered by the project and including measures to mitigate any
potential negative effects of project implementation. The plans were disclosed to the
public.
  A variety of stakeholders were consulted during the project preparation in evaluating
project-related safeguard policy issues. They included: (a) the operators of the system #
the concessionaire (SuperVia), the state implementing agency (Central), state
government entities, railroad workers and community mobilization teams; (b) the people,
communities and business settled in the area of influence of the railroad (railroad system
users, community dwellers and associations, business enterprises and organizations, and
the squatter families that may be displaced); (c) municipal and metropolitan authorities
and organizations: and, (d) the third sector entities concerned with the mass
transportation system in the metropolitan area of Rio de Janeiro.
  Meetings and consultations were held with representatives of key stakeholders on the
draft EA, EMP and RAP. Three meetings with affected people were held and addressed
the principles and guidelines of the RAP. The inputs from all these meetings were
considered and critically included in the final drafts of the EMP and the RAP.
  In line with the Access to Information Policy, the finalized versions of the EMP and the
RAP will be disclosed through the websites of SuperVia, Central and SETRANS and in
the Bank s Infoshop prior to appraisal.
  As part of their EHSMS, the EMP, RAP and SuperVia have specific activities related to
ongoing public interactions.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    06/07/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                07/01/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 10/18/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    10/23/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                10/06/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 10/20/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                               N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    No
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Arturo Ardila Gomez                       10/13/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Robert H. Montgomery                      10/12/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa                10/12/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Augusto Mendonca                          10/12/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan                           10/14/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Aurelio Menendez                          10/13/2011
  Comments:
