                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC2774

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Brazil                          Project ID:       P143334
                            Project Name:     FIP: Environmental regularization of rural lands in the Cerrado of Brazil
                                              (P143334)
                            Task Team         Maria Bernadete Ribas Lan
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       00-undefined-0000                 Estimated         24-Sep-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: LCSAR                              Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (34%), General
                                              agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (33%), Forestry (33 %)
                            Theme(s):         Land administration and management (40%), Environmental policies and
                                              institutions (40%), Climate change (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     32.48                    Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     0.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Credit                                               32.48
                              Total                                                                       32.48
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives


                           C. Project Description
                           The Strategic Climate Fund (SCF) was created to provide financing for new ways of developing or
                         up-scaling activities which seek to respond to a specific challenge related to climate change or to
                         provide a sectoral response through directed programs. The Forest Investment Program (FIP) was
                         created as one of these directed initiatives in order to catalyze policies and measures and to mobilize
Public Disclosure Copy




                         funds to facilitate the decrease of deforestation and forest degradation, with a view to promote more
                         sustainable forest management, thus leading to reduced emissions and enhanced conservation of
                         forest carbon stocks. Brazil is one of eight pilot countries participating in the FIP. The Brazil
                         Investment Plan (BIP) seeks to promote sustainable land use and forest management improvement in
                         the Cerrado, so as to reduce pressure on remaining forests, reduce GHG emissions and increase CO2
                         sequestration.

                         The proposed Project, to be funded as part of the BIP, will assist States and Municipal Governments,
                         as well as landholders in the Cerrado Biome in implementing the Forest Code (Law 12,651/2012).

                         The following components are proposed:

                         Component 1: Implementation of the national rural environmental cadastre system in the 11 states of
                         the Cerrado. The proposed component aims at strengthening the States’ capacity to carry out the
                         CAR in their territories, i.e.: to complete the regulatory framework; to receive, verify and approve
                         registry entries; to connect to the national data base; to conduct an environmental diagnostic from the
                         data received; and, to assist landholders in preparing their declarations. Analysis and verification of
                         entries would be largely automatized. The following activities are expected: (i) technical, legal and
                         financial assistance to target States, which will facilitate the preparation of normative, institutional,
                         operational and other necessary frameworks as necessary; (ii) purchase of equipment and materials;
                         (iii) training for stakeholders.

                         Component 2: Registration of privately owned rural landholdings in priority municipalities. The
                         proposed component aims to register the majority of properties in selected municipalities. The
                         following activities are expected: (i) dissemination and mobilization campaigns; (ii) preparation of
                         maps and treatment of available data on land use and landholdings; (iii) informational support to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         medium and large landholders to motivate and facilitate their voluntary self-registration; (iv) creation
                         of local service desks and state call centers; (v) field surveys; and, (vi) direct assistance to
                         smallholders in documenting their landholdings and getting them registered in the CAR.

                         Component 3: Implementation and management of the Project. The proposed component aims at
                         supporting activities related to Project management and implementation. MMA will be responsible to
                         supervise technical and financial aspects of the Project, and monitor Project indicators.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Cerrado biome, located in central Brazil, covers almost one quarter, or 2.04 million km2, of the
                         country, with a mosaic of 23 types of vegetation consisting of tropical savannas woodland,
                         grasslands and forests. It is considered one of the world's 34 biodiversity hotshots by Conservation
                         International. The rapid expansion of agriculture in the Cerrado biome has caused the conversion of
                         natural vegetation to alternative land uses (deforestation) and has also increased the use of slash-and-
                         burn as an agriculture practice. The Cerrado had lost about 48% of its forest cover by 2010.
                         Estimates indicate that deforestation in the Cerrado is proportionally more severe than that of the
                         Amazon.

                         Distributed over 11 States and 4 geopolitical regions (North, Northeast, Center-West and Southeast),
                           the Cerrado biome is mostly occupied by private landholdings. Some 78% of about one million
                           landholdings in the biome are small landholders (up to 4 fiscal modules), but occupy only 15% of the
                           area of all landholdings, whereas 22% of the larger landholdings occupy 85% of the area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Ministry of Environment published Decree No 97, on March 22, 2012, determining the 52
                           priority municipalities in the Cerrado biome that require immediate actions to prevent and control
                           deforestation, as these are the municipalities with the highest levels of deforestation for the years of
                           2009-2010, and the ones that have an area of remaining native vegetation of more than 20% of their
                           total area or have protected areas.

                           The following criteria would be used for selecting the target municipalities: (i) municipalities belong
                           to the Official List of Cerrado biome Municipalities with the highest deforestation; (ii) extent of
                           remaining natural vegetation cover; (iii) municipalities that have accessibility and logistical
                           conditions that allow completion of the surveys within the Project period; (iv) municipalities that
                           present a reasonably strong interaction and mobilization of local actors; (v) potential synergy with
                           other initiatives; and, (vi) the readiness of the administration to implement this program.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Brazilian Government has advanced environmental laws, reflecting a political culture of strong
                           environmental protection. The Borrower has shown adequate procedures and capacity to identify and
                           mitigate impacts under Bank funded operations. The Client will prepare an Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework (ESMF) for the Project which will provide overall guidance as to how to
                           proceed during implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSSO)
                           Maria Bernadete Ribas Lange (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              The proposed Project is a conservation Project,
                           BP 4.01                                                and it proposed to be rated as Category B. The
                                                                                  proposed Project is expected to have a positive
                                                                                  impact on the environment as it seeks to
                                                                                  promote the rural environmental cadastre of
                                                                                  holdings by landholders. The nature and scale of
                                                                                  the proposed investments in environmental
                                                                                  regularization will not have significant adverse
                                                                                  impacts. Notwithstanding these positive
                                                                                  impacts, the proposed Project will be working in
                                                                                  some sensitive biodiversity and dry forest areas.
                                                                                  The Brazilian Forest Code requires landholders
                                                                                  to retain natural vegetation on steep slopes,
                                                                                  along watercourses (up to a given distance from
                                                                                  the margin) or in the vicinity of springs. These
                                                                                  areas are APPs (Area of Permanent
                                                                                  Preservation). In addition, the holdings must
                         also set aside an area called Legal Reserve
                         (Reserva Legal – RL). In this context, the Rural
                         Environmental Cadastre (CAR) has been
Public Disclosure Copy




                         introduced as an additional tool to monitor and
                         control forest deforestation and getting
                         properties registered in the CAR is a first step
                         towards bringing them into compliance with
                         Brazil’s Forest Code.
                         The CAR is an electronic system of geo-
                         referenced identification of privately owned
                         rural landholdings, containing the delimitation
                         of the APPs, RL and remaining natural
                         vegetation inside the landholding, for the
                         purposes of control and monitoring. Note that
                         public land (Eg: protected areas; indigenous
                         lands) cannot be registered in the CAR.
                         Based on the preliminary assessments
                         undertaken and previous projects, no negative
                         impact is expected since: (i) CAR promotes the
                         compliance with existing laws without creating
                         any additional conservation requirements and/or
                         restrictions to the use of natural resources by
                         landholdings; (ii) CAR, as defined by the law,
                         cannot be used as an evidence for land
                         regularization; and (iii) the Project will not work
                         on land tenure issues. It is important to highlight
                         that only private lands are going to be mapped,
                         excluding all areas that overlaps with lands
Public Disclosure Copy




                         claimed for Indigenous Lands. Also, the Project
                         will not register any landholding under dispute
                         between private parties in the CAR system.
                         To avoid misunderstandings and make sure that
                         CAR process and implications are well
                         understood among landholders the proposed
                         Project’s approach includes wide-ranging
                         outreach communication strategy to mobilizes
                         all landholders and cover all landholdings in the
                         selected municipalities.
                         The experience gained with the MMA’s
                         previous projects shows that conducting the
                         process in close consultation and cooperation
                         with the landholdings minimizes the potential
                         conflicts and better responds to their needs and
                         demands.
                         The MMA is preparing an Environmental and
                         Social Management Framework (ESMF),
                         including social and environmental assessments,
                         to provide guidance on potential issues that
                         could arise during Project implementation.
                         Potentially adverse social impacts expect to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         small, as they will be avoided or minimized
                         through appropriate preventive and mitigation
                         measures.
                         The ESMF will be submitted to the Bank by
                         appraisal stage. The ESMF report will be
                         disclosed and disseminated through websites of
                         all participating state governments as well as
                         MMA and IBAMA websites.
                         This report will contain a detailed description of
                         the environmental impacts of Project activities
                         and identify preventive/corrective measures.
                         The ESMF will include measures to be taken to
                         avoid potential social conflict that could result
                         from project activities. The ESMF will also
                         include an analysis of any economic or social
                         impact project activities might have on
                         vulnerable groups, traditional communities or
                         poor rural dwellers.
                         Stakeholder consultations. The proposed
                         consultation process is a two-stage process. The
                         first phase consisted of preliminary meetings to
                         discuss the concept of the proposed Project.
                         These took place from May to November 2012,
                         and included several meetings in Brasilia with
                         representatives from the States of the Cerrado
Public Disclosure Copy




                         biome. A second phase of the consultation
                         process to discuss specific Project activities is
                         taking place in Brasilia. This phase is more
                         focused on rural civil society organizations that
                         are active in the productive sector as well as
                         INCRA and Environmental agencies.
                         Project approach and activities proposed have
                         received broad support by state governments,
                         producers’ organizations, as well as INCRA. As
                         a result of these preliminary meetings it was
                         agreed that the Project will adopt a mechanism
                         to keep stakeholders fully informed of Project
                         implementation activities.
                         Others meetings will be held in the target States
                         and/or municipalities from March to June 2013,
                         when the environmental and social issues that
                         may potentially arise during implementation,
                         and proposed actions to address any adverse
                         Project impacts will be discussed. Similar
                                                                 consultations will be also held with land
                                                                 regularization agencies.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   Activities under proposed Project should lead to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 positive impacts on natural habitats, such as
                                                                 their conservation and recovery. Given that OP
                                                                 4.04 is triggered and all planning activities must
                                                                 follow World Bank policies, the project will
                                                                 identify monitoring and management activities
                                                                 to prevent or mitigate any possible negative
                                                                 impacts on natural habitats. The rural
                                                                 environmental cadastre procedures will comply
                                                                 with: (i) the Brazilian Forest Code; (ii) Brazilian
                                                                 legislation on protected areas (SNUC - Law
                                                                 9,985 of 2000, Decree 4,340 of 2002 and
                                                                 Decree 5,758 of 2006); and (iii) national, State,
                                                                 and local laws on natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   This Project will contribute to the conservation
                                                                 of the Cerrado biome. It is expected to have a
                                                                 positive impact by avoiding deforestation and
                                                                 maintaining natural vegetation in parts of
                                                                 private privately owned rural landholdings (all
                                                                 land on steep slopes), along water courses (up to
                                                                 a given distance from the margin) or in the
                                                                 vicinity of springs, protecting environmental
                                                                 services and values of natural vegetation. These
                                                                 areas are Area of Permanent Preservation
                                                                 (APPs). The Project will also contribute to
                                                                 conserve and/or restore special areas in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 private landholdings, which are to be set aside
                                                                 and preserved and are known as a “Legal
                                                                 Reserve? (RL).
                                                                 The ESMF to be prepared will consider the
                                                                 requirements of OB/BP4.36 whenever
                                                                 restoration and plantation activities are being
                                                                 planned.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    This policy is not being triggered because the
                                                                 proposed Project will not support the purchase
                                                                 or increased use of pesticides and other
                                                                 agricultural chemicals as defined under the
                                                                 policy. The proposed Project will not include
                                                                 any support for forest plantations or other
                                                                 agriculture land use, which would promote pest
                                                                 management.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    It is not expected that Project implementation
                         BP 4.11                                 activities would have any negative impact on
                                                                 archeological or physical cultural resources.
                                                               Therefore, this policy is not being triggered at
                                                               this time.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No   The Rural Environmental Cadastre (CAR) is a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               tool for monitoring and controlling deforestation
                                                               in private landholdings. Therefore, the
                                                               provisions in the Forest Code specify that Rural
                                                               Environmental Cadastre (CAR ) procedures do
                                                               not apply to indigenous lands – as defined under
                                                               the Federal Constitution, the Indigenous Statute
                                                               and other national legal and administrative
                                                               provisions, regardless of whether such areas
                                                               have formally been demarcated or not – or
                                                               public lands. No landholding will be registered
                                                               in CAR if it is found to overlap with land
                                                               claimed by indigenous peoples, even in cases
                                                               where such land is not yet declared or registered
                                                               as indigenous land.
                                                               As an additional measure, a guideline to prevent
                                                               any Project activities and potential impacts on
                                                               indigenous communities will be prepared for the
                                                               Project and included in the ESMF. The ESMF
                                                               to be prepared for the proposed Project will
                                                               include a screening process to identify
                                                               indigenous peoples and indigenous land in
                                                               project areas to avoid any overlaps with, and
                                                               impacts on, such communities and their lands
                                                               during project implementation.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No   In accordance with the Bank’s OP 4.12, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.12                                  Involuntary Resettlement policy is not triggered
                                                               because the proposed Project will not cause
                                                               involuntary physical resettlement nor negative
                                                               impacts on livelihoods since: (i) no person
                                                               would be displaced or relocated from his/her
                                                               landholding or lose any of his/her assets as APP
                                                               and RL remain part of his/her private
                                                               landholdings; (ii) the Rural Environmental
                                                               Cadastre (CAR) focuses on regulating natural
                                                               resources management on a national and State
                                                               level (Presidential Decree 7029/2009); (iii) the
                                                               Project would not restrict the management of
                                                               natural resources; (iv) the Project will not
                                                               register in the CAR system any land which is
                                                               the subject of dispute between private parties;
                                                               (v) the enforcement of restrictions will not
                                                               affect access to natural resources in protected
                                                               areas; and (vi) participation in the Rural
                                                               Environmental Cadastre is voluntary .
                                                                                                                                 The land use restrictions of Permanent
                                                                                                                                 Preservation Areas (APP) and Legal Reserves
                                                                                                                                 (RL) have been applied to private landholdings
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 since 1965 and impose no access restrictions to
                                                                                                                                 natural resources. Activities supported by the
                                                                                                                                 project will comply with the Brazilian Forest
                                                                                                                                 Code and the Brazilian legislation on protected
                                                                                                                                 areas (SNUC - Law 9985 of 2000, Decree 4340
                                                                                                                                 of 2002 and Decree 5758 of 2006). They will be
                                                                                                                                 carried out in accordance with addendum
                                                                                                                                 2166-67 to the Brazilian Federal Law 4771/65,
                                                                                                                                 which allows for sustainable agroforestry
                                                                                                                                 activities in small rural properties as long as
                                                                                                                                 they do not change the overall character of the
                                                                                                                                 forest cover and do not alter ecosystem
                                                                                                                                 functions in the area, whereas allows larger
                                                                                                                                 landowners to compensate the productive use of
                                                                                                                                 areas in their landholdings that should be
                                                                                                                                 converted to APPs by establishing them in other
                                                                                                                                 areas. Accordingly to the Brazilian law, APPs
                                                                                                                                 and RL are not designated or treated as protect
                                                                                                                                 areas. Therefore, the Project will not affect the
                                                                                                                                 rights or welfare of landholders nor their
                                                                                                                                 dependence on, or interaction with, the forest.
                                                                                                                                 Project preparation will include: (i) a detailed
                                                                                                                                 assessment of potential adverse impacts on
                                                                                                                                 private landholders from registering their
                                                                                                                                 landholdings in the CAR system; (ii) measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 to avoid or mitigate such impacts; and (iii)
                                                                                                                                 measures to screen for landholdings disputes.
                                                                                                                                 Project design will also include periodic
                                                                                                                                 assessments to assess any adverse impacts
                                                                                                                                 experienced by participating landholders during
                                                                                                                                 Project implementation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The proposed Project will neither support the
                                                                                                                                 construction or rehabilitation of dams nor will it
                                                                                                                                 support other investments related with services
                                                                                                                                 of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The proposed Project will not affect
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The proposed Project will not be implemented
                                 7.60                                                                                            in disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 27-May-2013
                               B.



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                             The specific
                             Target       studies
                                    date for      and their
                                             the Quality    timing1 should
                                                         Enhancement Reviewbe specified
                                                                            (QER),       in thetime
                                                                                     at which   PAD-stage  ISDS: ISDS
                                                                                                    the PAD-stage
                             would be prepared: May 27, 2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The
                             specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: June 3, 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Maria Bernadete Ribas Lan

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name:                                                 Date:
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Laurent Msellati (SM)                           Date: 16-May-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
