                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 02/09/2012                                     Report No.: AC6617
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P101508                   Original Project Name: Rio de Janeiro
                                               Sustainable Rural Development Project
Country: Brazil                                Project ID: P126684
Project Name: Additional Financing - Rio de Janeiro Sustainable Rural Development
Project
Task Team Leader: Marianne Grosclaude
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 9,          Estimated Board Date: July 12, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: LCSAR                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (77%);Public administration-
Agriculture, fishing and forestry (21%);Agricultural extension and research (2%)
Theme: Other rural development (55%);Participation and civic engagement (35%);Other
environment and natural resources management (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           100
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                       60.00
                                                                        60.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                          Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]       No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
Current project development objective (formally revised on October 27, 2011): The
objective of the Project is to increase the adoption of integrated and sustainable farming
systems approaches in specific areas of the Borrower’s territory and help re-establish an
agricultural productive environment in areas of the Serrana Region affected by the
January 2011 natural disaster, thus contributing to the higher-order objective of
increasing small-scale farming productivity and competitiveness in those areas.

3. Project Description
Although the project structure would remain similar to the original loan , new activities
would be included under Components 1 and 2, taking into consideration the lessons
learned from the recent natural disaster in the Serrana Region and the new economic
context of the State of Rio de Janeiro (State of RoJ). These new activities would aim at
expanding and deepening the range of activities to scale up the Project’s impact and
development effectiveness. The proposed financing would allow the engagement in a
longer-term intervention to deepen and expand coordinated agricultural and
environmental management. This would be implemented by (i) scaling up existing
activities through the expansion of the Project to new micro-catchments and (ii)
complementing those micro-level investments with investments at the landscape-level,
designed to ensure the integrity of fragile ecosystems and their continued provision of
environmental “goods and services?, including providing a buffer to the effects of natural
disasters and reduction of risk to human populations. The scaled-up activities would also
strengthen support for small farmers’ competitiveness so that they are able to seize the
new market opportunities emerging in the lead to the major investments planned in the
State of RoJ in the coming years.

 New activities would be included under Components 1 and 2 to reflect the changes
mentioned above. These include:

 a.    Under Component 1, subprojects to be implemented by groups of producers
covering more than one micro-catchment. While the type of subprojects would remain
the same as those currently included in the project (Productive Subprojects and
Environment Subproject), the new activities would be implemented on a larger scale
(group of micro-catchments) than the current ones (which remain at producer or micro-
catchment level), and
 b.    Under Component 2, value-chain studies and additional research and partnerships
to support investments under Component 1 and enable small rural producers to seize new
market opportunities emerging in the State of RoJ.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
While the proposed project area will include seven administrative regions, covering most
of the State of RoJ’s geographical area (as in the original project), the target area will
mainly concentrate in three main territories that include the North and Northwestern
Fluminense (NNWF) administrative regions and the Serrana administrative region. These
regions represent a total area of about 22,000 square kilometers (50.4 % of the total area
of the state). Replication activities will also be carried out in clusters of municipalities
located in four administrative regions of the SoRJ, which include: Metropolitan, Coastal
Floodplains, South (except Paraty and Angra municipalities), and Paraíba River Middle
Valley, representing a total area of about 21,700 square kilometres (49.6% of the total
area of state). The original EMF covered all these regions i.e. all rural areas of the state.
The scaled-up project would expand to 366 micro-catchments in 72 municipalities (Table
1 below). It would target a total of 41,000 small rural producers directly and 78,000
beneficiaries indirectly. The selection and prioritization of municipalities, as well as
participating communities within those municipalities, will be based on production
potential, along with environmental and social criteria.

 Table 1 – Beneficiaries and Target Area
 Beneficiaries (no.) Original Loan Restructured Loan    Additional Financing
      TOTAL
 Municipalities       59    59     13     72
 Micro-catchments 270       66     300    366
 Population (Indirectly)    37,000 28,000 50,000 78,000
 Population (Directly)      19,000 17,000 24,000 41,000

 With approximately 1.6 million inhabitants, an estimated 55,000 families (or 220,000
people) in the NNWF and Serrana regions are classified as rural whose main occupation
and source of income is agriculture. Historically, this sector has been characterized by the
use of simple technology and low productivity cattle farming, as well as sugarcane and
coffee production dominated by “boom an bust? cycles. These traditional land use
patterns have contributed to severe environmental pressure on the NNWF’s natural resour
base (see Environmental Issues Section below). Combined with low organizational levels
among farmers and limited technical assistance, poverty has become one of the most
pressing issues for rural households, particularly in the Northwest region. This directly
affects an estimated 55,000 people in the rural areas of the NNWF and Serrana regions
who live below the poverty line .

  The landscapes of the North Fluminense administrative region are notable for extensive
flooding associated with the river-delta plain of the Paraíba do Sul and the lower reaches
of the Imbé, Prata, and Macubu Rivers. These areas are characterized by a comple mosaic
of river, lagoon, and marine environments. Further inland, well-drained lands can be
found in the form of large tablelands and low-lying hills where most of the region’s
agriculture occurs (these are defined by gentle slopes with low to moderate susceptibility
to erosion). These lowlands extend to the Serra do Mar, a mountainous area characterized
by steep slopes that is highly vulnerable to mass movements and falling boulders; large
portions of the steep Serra do Mar are covered and protected by the Desengano State
Park.

  In contrast to the North Fluminense, the Northwest Fluminense administrative region is
distinguished by the predominance of dry and low hills interspaced by staggered
mountain ranges. This region suffers from widespread environmental degradation,
including deforestation, which extends up to and into much of the mountainous zone. The
situation is aggravated by an irregular and insufficient rainy season that contributes to
frequent water deficits.
  The Serrana Region is located in a mountainous area, with magnificent geographic
features, historical landmarks and mild temperatures. In the state of Rio de Janeiro, the
Serrana Region holds a significant state portion of the national Serra do Mar Corridor,
considered one of the richest biodiversity areas in the Atlantic Forest. This corridor
presents one the most important network of protected areas of the Atlantic Forest,
including two major parks in the Serrana (e.g. Serra dos Órgãos National Park and Três
Picos State Park).
  The project area in the Serrana and the other four administrative regions (Metropolitan,
Coastal Floodplains, South, and Paraíba River Middle Valley) includes ecosystems and
climates typical to coastal and inland Atlantic forests. Forests are located through the
Paraíba River Middle Valley, which crosses the state from the southern border with São
Paulo to the NNWF. Large extents of these inland Atlantic forests have been removed in
the past for agricultural use, with a significant portion characterized by unsustainable
practices and degraded soils. The recent natural disaster in the Serrana increased erosion
in rural landscapes to very high and severe levels, particularly in the seven most affected
municipalities.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Judith M. Lisansky (LCSSO)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                          X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
A Bank review of potential additional financing environmental impacts, in terms of their
identification, measurement, interpretation, information, and dissemination, was
conducted during two recent Bank missions (in September and November 2011). The
project’s additional financing is expected to produce significant positive environmental
impacts. The most significant positive impacts foreseen include improved soil
management and conservation, watershed and biodiversity protection, improved water
quality, and restoration of degraded lands. In accordance, with Bank policies, an updated
EA and Environmental Management Framework (EMF) were prepared and a final
version submitted to the Bank on December 20, 2011, and subsequently approved by the
Bank. The EA/EMF specifies the criteria and procedures (including operating rules) that
will be used during implementation to avoid or minimize adverse environmental impacts.

 The project would remain classified as environmental category B and no additional
safeguards policies are triggered. While small changes are proposed in the size of certain
types of subprojects in selected areas - from small to medium-sized investments -
possibly involving clusters of producer/micro-catchment associations, the type of
subprojects will remain the same, and will focus on: a) promoting value added and
developing value chains (e.g. coffee, milk, sugarcane, aquiculture, horticulture, and fruit
production); b) addressing logistical bottlenecks; and c) the implementation of
environmental interventions at landscape level in the disaster (Serrana Region) and other
selected priority areas, in order to arrest and revert land and water degradation while
supporting market-driven agricultural development.

 No large-scale, significant, and/or irreversible impacts are foreseen. However, certain
subprojects supported (on-farm and off-farm investments) could generate small negative
impacts at the local level. Regarding specific project-supported activities, the potential
impacts as they relate to each of the safeguard issues are described in the following.

 OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. New activities carried out in subprojects
supported under Component 1 could generate small negative impacts. These subprojects
will involve productive and environmental investments and small infrastructure works for
road rehabilitation and maintenance (see types of subproject in the table below). As
specific subprojects and their location cannot be identified a priori, based on the demand-
driven nature of the Project, precise impacts cannot be anticipated. However, the impacts
of any misdirected support for these investments could include soil erosion and water
pollution (i.e., sediments, use of fertilizers, or eventually from pesticide use even if not
directly procured by the Project).

 Types of SubprojectsActivities
 Subprojects to be implemented by groups of producers covering individual micro-
catchments
 1. Productive subprojects Support to sustainable agricultural production systems and
added-value investments (small and medium-scale agro-processing); value chains
development
 2. Environmental subprojects           Support to environmental compliance of small-scale
farms, agro-ecological practices, on-farm sanitation, rehabilitation of degraded farm land
 3. Rural roads rehabilitation Small works and equipment to improve drainage and
paving of critical parts of rural roads in the Serrana region and, subsequently, to support
natural disaster risk reduction and improved access to markets
 Subprojects to be implemented by groups of producers covering more than one micro-
catchment
 4. Productive and Environmental Productive: support to improved access to markets
and the establishment or strengthening of added-value arrangements (such as
cooperatives)
 Environmental (landscape level interventions): reforestation of degraded lands with
native species, including riparian zones; disaster risk reduction measures; natural
regeneration of riparian zones (when the state of the riparian stock allows for short to
medium term re-growth), etc.

 OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats. The additional financing would not support or lead to the
conversion of natural habitats. In fact, it would support a longer-term intervention
focusing on sustainable land and soil management and conservation practices in the
State’ rural areas to maximize positive externalities in riparian zones which are important
to preserve local biodiversity and the quality of water resources. Hence, this intervention
would complement those micro-level investments with investments at the landscape-
level, designed to ensure the integrity of fragile ecosystems and their continued provision
of environmental “goods and services?, including providing a buffer to the effects of
natural disasters and the reduction of risk to human populations. On-far investments are
expected to take place in areas that have been traditionally dedicated to crop and
livestock farming and would not therefore involve conversion of natural habitats.

  The proposed additional financing would support natural habitat conservation though:
(i) promotion of environmentally sound practices which engender agricultural
productivity, (ii) restoration and protection of steep slopes and degraded riparian forests
(important to preserve biodiversity and the quality of water resources), and (iii) improved
land use planning and management for more sustainable use of agricultural lands, and
rehabilitation of degraded natural habitats.

 OP/BP 4.36 Forests. The Project will support reforestation with native species, natural
forest regeneration, and environmentally-friendly production practices, hence promoting
the transition away from degrading and unproductive agricultural practices while
supporting biodiversity conservation and reducing carbon emissions. Examples of
activities/practices that could be supported under Component 1 that are related to forests
include: environmental licensing and establishing/legalizing private reserves, protecting
springs, rehabilitating riparian forests, forest fire prevention, planting native trees,
protecting internal roads and corridors, and small-scale plantations on already converted
small-farmer lands, preferably with native trees to support the implementation of a state
government policy which promotes reforestation through agro-forestry and plantations
with native trees.

 OP 4.09 Pest Management. Although the Project will not finance the procurement of
any pesticides or other chemical amendments, small amounts of pesticides will probably
continue to be used by a small portion of farmers receiving project support.
 OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources. The Project will finance small-scale works in
already established agricultural zones where the likelihood of disturbing archaeological,
paleontological, or other culturally significant sites is small. As a result, the Project is not
expected to have negative impacts on cultural property, including movable or immovable
objects, sites, structures, groups of structures, or natural features or landscapes with
archeological, paleontological, historical, architectural, religious, aesthetic, or other
cultural significance.

 OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. It is not anticipated that the Project will cause
physical resettlement nor nonphysical displacement, however, there is a potential for
small-scale and acquisition from planned activities for rural road rehabilitation and
maintenance. Small works for rural roads will include improving drainage and paving of
critical parts of rural roads in the Serrana region to support natural disaster risk reduction
and improved access to markets.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No significant indirect or long-term or cumulative impacts are foreseen under the Project.
Following the EA/EMF procedures, subprojects under Component 1 will be subjected to
a rigorous screening process to ensure that maximum socioeconomic and environmental
benefits are accrued and that any unintended negative environmental impacts are avoided
or minimized, including those eventually associated to secondary or indirect and long-
term effects. In addition, the EA/EMF recommends that a cumulative impact assessment
be carried out during the mid-term review to take into account eventual indirect and/or
long-term and cumulative positive and adverse impacts.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not Relevant.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The EA/EMF specifies the criteria and procedures that would be used during project
implementation to avoid or minimize potentially adverse environmental impacts. Key
aspects regarding Bank’s safeguards included in the EA/EMF are described below. The
Borrower’ institutional capacity to plan and implement safeguard measures is considered
adequate. The implementation agency (SEAPEC) has already developed and
implemented two EMFs, one for the initial phase of the original loan another for the Rio
de Janeiro Sustainable Integrated Ecosystem Management in Productive Landscapes of
the North-Northwestern Fluminense GEF Project (Rio Rural GEF, which closed in
November 2011). The procedures for environmental screening have been incorporated in
the Operational Manual (OM), which also includes procedures for the evaluation,
approval, and monitoring of subprojects seeking to be financed under the investment
component. Training of key staff from the implementing agency on EMF procedures has
been provided under the Rio Rural GEF Project, and additional training is foreseen under
the draft EMF, as well as technical training (to both small farmers and extension staff) in
various environment-related areas, including integrated production and pest management
practices, organic agriculture, and zero-tillage.

 The specific measures taken by the Borrower to address each of the safeguard issues are
described in the following.

  OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. The Project is classified as Category B, which
is the appropriate classification for a project whose potential adverse environmental
impacts on human populations or environmentally important areas are site-specific,
reversible, and can be readily mitigated (OP 4.01, paragraph 8). In accordance, an EA
and EMF were prepared and a final version submitted to the Bank on December 20,
2011, and subsequently approved by the Bank. The EA/EMF specifies the criteria and
procedures (including operating rules) that will be used during implementation to avoid
or minimize adverse environmental impacts. Some of the key aspects regarding Bank’s
safeguards taken into consideration in the EA/EMF are included in the descriptions of the
safeguard policies below.

 OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats. The EMF explicitly forbids any project activities in areas
supporting critical natural habitats or inducing conversion. It also ensures that any
activity in the buffer zone of a protected area will be designed to help reduce pressure on
the protected area itself. Furthermore, the EMF includes criteria for screening subprojects
to ensure that they will not cause any negative impacts on protected areas, provides clear
guidance regarding unintended impacts on natural habitats, and provides a strategy to
ensure close coordination with other activities aimed at conserving the Mata Atlântica in
the SoRJ.

 OP/BP 4.36 Forests. The requirements of OP 4.36 for this project overlap with those of
OP/BP 4.04. Despite the project expected positive impacts, the EMF contains procedures
to ensure that all project activities comply with OP 4.36, and with national legislation,
which establishes a series of measures to protect existing forests. The EMF provides clear
guidance and criteria to ensure that: (i) these small-farmer lands do not contain critical
habitats, including adjacent or downstream critical natural habitats; and (ii) small-farming
plantation subprojects are designed to prevent potential threats to biodiversity and natural
habitats. With regard to plantation size, the following criteria have been included in the
EMF: (i) area planted not to exceed 2 hectares; and (ii) area planted not to exceed 20% of
total holdings.

  The EMF also stresses the use of community, micro-catchment, municipal, and
territorial development plans as tools to identify, map, and exclude natural reserves from
production activities (although degraded lands will be rehabilitated with native species in
the permanent preservation areas - Areas de Preservação Permanente). Moreover, one of
the key objectives of the project-supported participatory community and individual farm
plans stemming from the micro-catchment plan ─ which may include small-scale
plantations and forest conservation and rehabilitation activities ─ aims at assisting
farmers to support environmental compliance of small-scale farms. The project would
treat the issue of Areas de Preservação Permanente and Reserva Legal in a pragmatic
manner, helping the farmers to progressively improve the level of environmental
compliance.

 OP 4.09 Pest Management. A section on pest management has been included in the
EA/EMF (and also included in the OM) to provide guidance on how to minimize
potential negative environmental impacts, as well as on training (under Component 3) in
safe pesticide use, handling, storage, and disposal. The Project will also support technical
assistance for the adoption of organic agriculture and of proven, economically, and
environmentally-sustainable Integrated Pest and Plant Management (IPPM). This
approach is designed to reduce input costs and human health risks, and to minimize
adverse environmental impacts through the virtual elimination of pesticide use without
significantly affecting yields. The IPPM approach will further improve the sustainability
of agro-ecosystems by focusing on improving the knowledge and skills of farmers for
sound resource management.
  OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources. The EMF includes a framework for screening
project activities in relation to potential negative impacts of cultural property. In any
case, such impacts will be avoided through the application of subproject eligibility
criteria and the safeguards screening system, based on Brazil’s well-developed legislative
and normative framework, which is under the oversight of the National Institute for
Protection of Historical and Archeological Sites (IPHAN). The EMF defines that “chance
find? procedures will be included in the contracts for any subproject involving works, as
well as in the Operational Manual, in order to comply with this safeguard and with
national legislation on cultural property.

 OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. Since the Additional Financing will be scaled up
to include additional beneficiaries but the exact locations for the rural road rehabilitation
and maintenance are not yet known, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was
prepared by the Borrower, approved by the Bank, and publicly disclosed on January 12,
2012.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
There will be an array of national and beneficiary stakeholders in the Project. National
stakeholders will include: federal institutions (EMBRAPA, Ministries of Agriculture,
Environment and Agrarian Development, and universities); state institutions (Agriculture,
Environment, Water Resources, Civil Defense, Education, Health, Public Defense, and
various universities); municipal organizations (the State SRD Council, Municipal
Secretariats of Agriculture and Environment, and Municipal Development Committees);
national and local NGOs; and the private sector. Beneficiary stakeholders will include
small-scale farmers and their families, rural women and youth, school teachers, and
community leaders.

 The mechanism for consultations of civil society organizations and stakeholders are
mainly workshops, seminars and focus groups organized usually at the regional level. All
safeguard documents (EA/EMF report, SA report and Resettlement Policy Framework)
are available online on the home page of the State Secretariat of Agriculture and
Livestock (SEAPEC) http://www.microbacias.rj.gov.br/biblioteca_virtual.jsp. These
documents were also subjected to a virtual public consultation process with key
stakeholders prior to their finalization and no substantial comments were received by the
Borrower.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?          Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                          12/21/2011
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                      01/30/2012
 Date of submission to InfoShop                       02/01/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/26/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             01/12/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              02/01/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/20/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             01/30/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              02/01/2012
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                      Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                     No
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or    N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?               Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential             Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   N/A
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           N/A
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        No
provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's          No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project      Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the              Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name      Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Marianne Grosclaude   02/07/2012
Environmental Specialist:
Social Development Specialist       Ms Judith M. Lisansky    02/08/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan       02/08/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Ethel Sennhauser      02/08/2012
  Comments:
