                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                       APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                        Report No.: 81109-BR
Date ISDS
                          September 3, 2013
Prepared/Updated:
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Brazil              Project ID:              P127463
 Project Name:                Operation to strengthen service delivery in skills development,
                              early childhood development and water quality programs
                              (P127463) – IPF Component
 Task Team Leader:            Thomas Kenyon
 Estimated Appraisal Date: 16-Sep-2013            Estimated Board Date: 22-Nov-2013
 Managing Unit:               LCSPF               Lending Instrument:      IPF (hybrid with PforR)
 Sector:                      Pre-primary Education (12.5%); Other Social Services (12.5%);
                              Vocational Training (12.5%); General Industry & Trade (12.5%); Public
                              Administration, Water, Sanitation (12.5%); General Water (12.5%);
                              Sub-national Government Administration (25%)
 Theme:                       Themes: Water Resource Management (25%); Managing for
                              Development Results (25%); Education for All (12.5%); Social
                              Inclusion (12.5%); Export Development and Competitiveness (12.5%);
                              Education for Knowledge Economy (12.5%)
 Financing (in USD Million)
   Financing Source                                                                       Amount
   Borrower                                                                                      0.00
   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                        35.00
   Total                                                                                        35.00
 Environmental Category       B
 Is this a Repeater project? No

 2. Operation Objectives
 This ISDS relates to the technical assistance (IPF) component (the ‘project’) of a PforR
 Operation. The Program Development Objective (PDO) is to support the Government to
 improve public service delivery particularly in the areas of skills development, early
 childhood development and water quality. The project consists exclusively of high-quality
 firm and individual consulting services. Its objective is to strengthen: i) cross-cutting public
 sector management functions; ii) sector-specific public sector management functions; and iii)


1|Page
 fiduciary systems.

 3. Project Description
 The IPF component will consist exclusively of consulting services (both individual and firm)
 and will comprise support for: i) cross-cutting public sector management functions; ii) sector-
 specific public sector management functions; and iii) for strengthening fiduciary systems:
 (i): Cross-cutting public sector management (US$ 12.1 million): support for strengthening
 results based management, including mechanisms for inter-sector coordination; design and
 implementation of investment planning and costing methodology; payroll audit and stock-
 taking of human resource management; reform of budget preparation and execution
 procedures; support for strengthening citizen participation and monitoring; technical audit of
 DLI compliance; support for project implementation unit.
 (ii): Sector-specific public sector management (US$ 19.2 million):
         Skills development and innovation (US$ 3.2 million): support for monitoring and
         impact assessment of professional education programs; support for impact assessment
         of innovation programs; assessment of and recommendations for improvements to
         policy process for supporting private sector development; validation and monitoring of
         implementation of private sector development strategy; methodology for training
         professional education instructors and support for entrepreneurship training and
         student testing;
         Early childhood development (ECD) and poverty reduction (US 7.0 million): training
         for ECD coordinators and school principals; development, implementation,
         monitoring and evaluation of a pilot home-based parenting program; monitoring and
         capacity building for social assistance centers (CRAS); strengthening of monitoring
         and results-based management of programs financed by the state anti-poverty fund
         (FECOP);
         Water quality (US$ 9.0 million): recommendations for improving the institutional
         framework for water management; strategic environmental assessment of state policies
         and programs; classification of reservoirs by use; methodology for modeling water
         quality; support for strengthening monitoring of water quality; capacity building for
         municipal technical staff; assessment of economic impact of environmental
         degradation and climate change; draft legislation to support market for environmental
         services; support for strengthening enforcement of environmental legislation; recovery
         plans for degraded open air dumps; implementation of recycling program in the three
         strategic watersheds; recommendations for structure of solid waste management
         regulation and design of regulatory instruments.
 (iii): Fiduciary systems (US$ 3.7 million):
         Financial management (US$ 0.5 million): support for the adoption of international
         public sector accounting standards; strengthening risk and performance-based external
         auditing;
         Procurement (US$ 3.2 million): design and implementation of management
         information systems to support execution of bidding processes; adoption of system of
         preventive internal controls, management information and social outreach;

2|Page
         refurbishment of ‘licitar’ information system.

 In terms of social safeguards, the proposed technical assistance project triggers OP.4.10
 on Indigenous Peoples given its focus on supporting State level activities in Early Childhood
 Education (ECD)/Social Assistance and vocational training, respectively (i) training for ECD
 coordinators and school principals; development, implementation, monitoring and evaluation
 of a pilot home-based parenting program; monitoring and capacity building for social
 assistance centers (CRAS); and (ii) methodology for training professional education
 instructors. In addition, the consultancies planned under the Water Quality Component, will
 support improved monitoring of environmental legislation in three Strategic Watersheds, one
 of which (Bacia Metropolitana) will also cover a municipality with IP Presence (Caucaia
 Municipality).


 There are about 23,000 indigenous people in the State of Ceará. They comprise 12 ethnic
 groups (Anacé, Anambé, Canindé, Gavião, Jenipapo-Kanindé, Kalabaça, Kariri, Pitaguari,
 Potiguara, Tabajara, Tapeba and Tremembé). Data from 2006 PNAD/IBGE show that 59.2%
 of the indigenous population lived below the poverty line. Currently the State’s indigenous
 population is scattered across 75 communities located within 16 municipalities. The impacts
 of the proposed activities on Indigenous Groups are expected to be positive, the triggering
 of OP 4.10 is intended to ensure that Indigenous Peoples are able to benefit from ECD
 interventions and that the key barriers identified during project preparation to their
 participation in State Level Vocational training programs are adequately addressed. Similarly,
 the implementation of an improved monitoring system for environmental legislation is not
 expected to have negative social impacts on Indigenous Groups. The policy is triggered (as in
 the case of TA elements relating to social services) to ensure that adequate consultations with
 Indigenous Groups take place as part of the participatory monitoring system put in place with
 local Watershed Committees in targeted areas.



   In addition, OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered. No civil works will
   be supported under the TA project. TA activities planned under the Water Quality
   Component that relate to land use planning will comply with the Brazilian Forest Code and
   Brazilian legislation on protected areas (SNUC - Law 9985 of 2000, Decree 4340 of 2002 and
   Decree 5758 of 2006) and addendum 2166-67 to the Brazilian Federal Law 4771/65, which ensure
   access to water resources in these protected areas for livelihood activities. All TA advice will be
   fully compliant with World Bank Policy 4.12. Specific activities to address downstream impact have
   been duly assessed an included in the ESSA Plan of Action. Finally, downstream impacts from
   changes in current waste management (construction of new sanitary landfills or closure of
   existing open dumps) require adequate environmental and social assessment and
   management. In particular, waste pickers that currently are organized and depend on
   existing open dumps for livelihoods could be adversely affected if alternative livelihood
   programs are not implemented. These impacts are downstream and beyond the scope of the
   TA project, advice provided through the Project’s Technical Assistance will be fully in line
   with the Bank’s Environmental and Social Safeguards policies. In addition, the ESSA has
   identified that existing policies and programs in place at State Level require the

3|Page
   development of alternative livelihood activities for waste pickers and that these programs be
   designed and implemented in close partnership with Waste Picker Cooperatives.


 The specific activities that will be undertaken to address the safeguards issues raised above as
 they relate directly to the TA component are detailed in Table 6 below. Given that the TA and
 Program for Results will both contribute to the implementation of the same programs in the areas
 relevant for Social Safeguards, these actions will be implemented under the ESSA Program of
 Action. They are as follows:


    (i)     Relating to the ECD Component: Given the barriers noted and discussed with IP and
            Quilombola groups during project preparation, a specific outreach strategy, including an
            “active search” feature will be developed for outreach to these groups. The strategy will
            be developed in consultation with IP groups and associations at State level, with the
            participation of the Governor’s Office Coordenadoria for Racial Equality and Human
            Rights and following FUNAI’s advice. The consultative process will be in line with the
            free, prior and informed consultation process required by OP 4.10. Broad support for the
            design of the strategy will be sought and documented. This activity has been included in
            the ESSA PAP to ensure that the team can adequately monitor its implementation through
            World Bank team supervision mission and revision of ToRs for the consultancies
            involved.

    (ii)    Relating to Vocational Training: The primary objective of this component is to fill
            critical gaps observed during project preparation and technical discussion with the Client
            between skills in demand on the part of the private sector and the profile of graduates for
            TVET. This key feature has, therefore, driven the focus areas and topics for professional
            training. The PforR and, therefore, the TA project that supports it have not included a
            focus on topics such as rural education where a specific outreach strategy for IP areas
            would make sense. Given the above, the project will ensure that critical barriers identified
            by IP and Quilombola Groups to participating in TVET overall are addressed by: (i)
            providing information on available courses, locations; grants; and (ii) ensuring adequate
            training of staff in terms of cultural sensitivity to avoid discriminatory practices.

            The consultative process for the design of communication activities and teacher training
            will be in line with the free, prior and informed consultation process required by OP 4.10.
            Broad support for the design of these two outputs will be sought and documented. This
            activity has been included in the ESSA PAP to ensure that the team can adequately
            monitor its implementation through World Bank team supervision mission and revision of
            ToRs for the consultancies involved.


 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
 (if known)
 The geographical scope of project activities varies. The early childhood development and
 skills development will have an influence on activities conducted throughout the state. For
 instance, as of 2010, there are 505 indigenous or Quilombola children aged 0 to 4 years old in
 the 13 municipalities where the home based parenting program will be piloted. In terms of
 impact on Indigenous Groups (as it relates to the triggering of OP 4.10) it is important to note

4|Page
    that the services will be provided on-demand to indigenous and Quilombola groups. Even
    though PADIN program will not especially target indigenous or Quilombola communities,
    specific outreach strategies will be developed in consultation with Indigenous People (IP)
    with a focus on enabling them to take advantage of the benefits of the early education/social
    assistance and vocational education programs.1 An overview of IP presence in Ceara State is
    presented in map 1 in the Annex to the ISDS. The water quality program will have an
    influence on activities concentrated in three strategic watersheds (Metropolitan Region
    Fortaleza, Acaraú, Salgado). These are represented on map 2 in the Annex. The municipality
    of Caucaia (with presence of IP Tapebe groups) will be covered under this intervention.

    5. Team Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists




    6. Safeguard Policies                     Triggered?        Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP            Yes               The project will have no direct impact on the
    4.01                                                        ground. Some activities will build municipal
                                                                capacity      to    execute     environmental
                                                                management functions. The TORs for these
                                                                and for the Strategic Environmental
                                                                Assessment will reflect considerations related
                                                                to natural habitat, forest, pest and physical
                                                                cultural resources management.
    Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04               No                There is no potential for conversion or
                                                                degradation of critical or other natural
                                                                habitats.
    Forests OP/BP 4.36                        No                The project will not affect the rights and
                                                                welfare of people and their level of
                                                                dependence on or interaction with forests. Nor
                                                                will it aim to bring about changes in the
                                                                management, protection, or utilization of
                                                                natural forests or plantations, whether they are
                                                                publicly, privately, or communally owned.
    Pest Management OP 4.09                   No                The project will not support the purchase or
                                                                increased use of pesticides and other
                                                                agricultural chemicals as defined under the
                                                                policy. Nor will it include any support for
                                                                forest plantations or other agriculture that
                                                                would promote pest management.

1
  The current network of indigenous schools in Ceara comprises 37 units located across the 15 municipalities where
the home based pilot will be implemented. In 2013, these schools enrolled 5,974 students in the preschool through
high school (including youth and Adults Education.) There are also 31 quilombola communities with certifications
issued by the Palmares Foundation with one state school focusing specifically on this group.

5|Page
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP   No    The project will not have any negative impact
 4.11                                      on archeological or physical cultural
                                           resources.
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes   The project includes support for early
                                           childhood and skills development activities
                                           that will be provided at State level (and
                                           therefore cover indigenous groups on an on-
                                           demand-basis).

                                           The early childhood development program
                                           will include an outreach strategy to ensure
                                           that project benefits are extended to
                                           indigenous      peoples    and     Quilombola
                                           Communities. The skills development
                                           program will include training for course
                                           instructors on the needs of indigenous peoples
                                           and Quilombolas. A focus on monitoring the
                                           success of these programs in including
                                           indigenous groups has been included in the
                                           PforR Environmental and Social Strategic
                                           Assessment (ESSA) Action Plan.

                                           In addition, the TA project will support the
                                           strengthening the monitoring environmental
                                           legislation to regulate the use of water
                                           resources in strategic water-sheds. This
                                           activity will follow the current Forest Code
                                           that affords adequate protection (in terms of
                                           access to water resources) to households
                                           without legal titles/relying on these resources
                                           for livelihoods. In order to ensure that
                                           legislation is followed in practice, the ESSA
                                           Action Plan will ensure that a detailed
                                           screening of potential social impacts of
                                           improved monitoring of legislation and a
                                           framework put in place for the adequate
                                           compensation of any affected households. The
                                           process will be undertaken in a highly
                                           participatory manner with water-shed
                                           management committees and will be based on
                                           extensive,     free    prior   and    informed
                                           consultations with communities. Particular
                                           attention will be paid to documenting the
                                           process followed in the Caucaia municipality
                                           with Tapebe Indigenous Groups.

                                           The social analysis carried out for the
                                           preparation of the ESSA focused on
                                           understanding existing barriers by indigenous
                                           groups     (and   other     vulnerable    and

6|Page
                                            marginalized groups) in accessing the range of
                                            services supported under the current TA and
                                            PforR programs. It included a series of
                                            preliminary consultations with IP and
                                            Quilombola Associations and with the key
                                            Federal and State Institutions to understand
                                            the key bottle necks and design the ESSA
                                            Action Plan. The proposed activities
                                            including:      (i)     development       and
                                            implementation of a cultural sensitivity
                                            training module for TVET instructors and
                                            broad dissemination of information about
                                            TVET program to IP groups, (ii) the design of
                                            an outreach strategy (including active search
                                            of vulnerable and marginalized groups) for the
                                            ECD and Social Assistance component, and
                                            (iii) the establishment of a consultative
                                            process to identify any social impacts on the
                                            improvements in monitoring environmental
                                            legislation and development a compensation
                                            framework in line with the Federal Forest
                                            Code where based on consultations with IP
                                            groups and resulted in broad support for the
                                            proposed interventions as documented in the
                                            ESSA consultation report.



 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   No   The project will not support civil works. It
                                            will cause neither involuntary physical
                                            resettlement nor negative impacts on
                                            livelihoods. The monitoring system and early
                                            alert system have no bearing on land property
                                            or use rights, including indigenous rights.
                                            Classification of reservoirs by use will be
                                            undertaken in line with the Brazilian Forest
                                            Code. The land use restrictions of Permanent
                                            Preservation Areas (APP) and Legal Reserves
                                            (RL) have been applied to private
                                            landholdings since 1965 and impose no access
                                            restrictions to natural resources. Activities
                                            supported by the project will comply with the
                                            Brazilian Forest Code and Brazilian
                                            legislation on protected areas (SNUC - Law
                                            9985 of 2000, Decree 4340 of 2002 and
                                            Decree 5758 of 2006). They will be carried
                                            out in accordance with addendum 2166-67 to
                                            the Brazilian Federal Law 4771/65, which
                                            allows for sustainable agroforestry activities
                                            in small rural properties as long as they do not
                                            change the overall character of the forest

7|Page
                                                          cover and do not alter ecosystem functions in
                                                          the area.
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No              The project will neither support the
                                                          construction or rehabilitation of dams nor will
                                                          it support other investments related to existing
                                                          dams.
 Projects on International Waterways      No              The project will not affect international
 OP/BP 7.50                                               waterways.
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP         No              The project will not be implemented in
 7.60                                                     disputed areas.


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
 A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project. Identify and describe
 any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
 The project does not entail any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative impacts.
 The potential impacts of the PforR component of the Operation are addressed through the ESSA
 instrument. The key features of the TA component which trigger OP 4.10 are highlighted in Section 6
 above.
 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
 the project area:
 The project is not expected to cause any long-term negative impacts on the ground. On the contrary, it
 will strengthen the capacity of municipal government to manage social and environmental risks.
 3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
 impacts.
 Not applicable.
 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
 assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
 The laws and guidelines for environmental assessment and management in Ceará are comprehensive
 and generally well-structured. The state has updated its policies on forestry management, adopted
 measures for climate change adaptation and to combat desertification and developed a policy on
 environmental education. Some gaps still exist, for example in the division of licensing responsibilities
 between the state and municipalities and in the legal frameworks for sanitation and solid waste
 management, but these are being addressed.

 The law and procedures regulating expropriation and resettlement are also generally adequate to avoid
 and/or mitigate adverse social impacts. They differ from Bank policy, however, in not allowing for
 compensation to be made to people without legal title to property; nor do they provide for the
 restoration of livelihoods. Arrangements to address these two issues have been put in place as part of
 the ESSA Action Plan: (i) an initial/thorough screening of potential resettlement impacts to be
 undertaken and (ii) a detailed assessment of the social impacts of the proposed re-classification of
 areas surrounding reservoirs.

 The main challenge is that the agencies responsible for enforcing these laws and regulations lack the

8|Page
 resources to do so properly. In the case of environmental protection, state agencies are understaffed
 and the existence of multiple institutions with overlapping mandates and jurisdictions is confusing and
 inefficient. A similar situation exists with respect to expropriation and resettlement. The agency
 responsible for indigenous peoples’ affairs, for example, lacks the staff to carry out its responsibilities
 adequately.

 The inclusion of IP and ethnic minority groups in social services has been a focus area for Ceará State
 with particular attention paid to: (i) health, education and social assistance; (ii) poverty reduction. An
 overview of State Policies and programs in the areas supported by the TA and PforR programs and a
 profile     of       Indigenous         Groups       in     Ceará        can       be      found      here
 http://www2.ipece.ce.gov.br/SWAP/swapii/salvaguardas/marco_logico_indigenas.pdf.               As     with
 Environmental Legislation the key bottle-neck is the implementation/roll-out of programs to these
 groups (rather than their design). Based on consultations with IP and Quilombola groups, the ESSA
 Action Plan has therefore focused on support the extension of ECD services to these vulnerable groups
 and strengthening the training of TVET instructors.

 As the project is a relatively minor element of the broader PforR Operation, comprising 10 percent of
 total loan value, the safeguards implications associated with project activities will be dealt with
 through the Operation’s ESSA instrument rather than separately.
 5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
 safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
 Project stakeholders are the staff of state and municipal agencies responsible for planning,
 implementing, monitoring and evaluating interventions in early childhood and skills development,
 water and solid waste management.

 Ceara State has recently established a Unit attached to the Governor´s Office on Racial Equality and
 Human Rights (similar Offices exist for Gender Mainstreaming Purposes), whose role it is to work
 with Indigenous and Quilombola Groups and State Agencies (such as SEDUC, SDTS responsible for
 the implementation of Education and Social Assistance programs respectively) to ensure adequate
 attention is given to IP and Quilombola groups in the implementation of State Programs. The
 Coordenadoria complements the State Level Ombudsman Network and hears complaints from IP and
 Quilombola groups, as well as broader complaints pertaining to human rights violations. The TA and
 PforR programs will use this same structure for the additional consultation process that will result in
 the development of the three key outputs outlined in Section 6. The Bank team will review the Terms
 of Reference for these consultancies to monitor compliance with OP 4.10 and that the principles of
 free, prior and informed consultations are followed and board community support for the approaches
 put in place documented.



 B. Disclosure Requirements
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                                     N/A
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                 N/A
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                                  N/A
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
 EA to the Executive Directors

9|Page
  Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                 N/A The ESSA which
                                                                                 includes     the    key
                                                                                 actions    to    ensure
                                                                                 project benefits are
                                                                                 extended to Indigenous
                                                                                 Groups was disclosed
                                                                                 in Country on 27th of
                                                                                 August      (Translated
                                                                                 into Portuguese)
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 N/A     The     revised
                                                                                 version of the ESSA
                                                                                 including the outcomes
                                                                                 of    the    in-country
                                                                                 consultation process
                                                                                 will be submitted to
                                                                                 the Info-Shop on 4th of
                                                                                 September 2013.
  If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
  respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
  Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
  If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
  finalized by the project decision meeting)
  OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ ]        No [ ]     NA [ ]
  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager Yes [ ]         No [ ]     NA [ ]
  (SM) review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in Yes [ ]        No [ ]     NA [ ]
  the credit/loan?
  OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
  Would the project result in any significant conversion or Yes [ ]                No [ ]     NA [ ]
  degradation of critical natural habitats?
  If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation Yes [ ]     No [ ]     NA [ ]
  of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
  mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
  OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
  Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as Yes [ ]            No [ ]     NA [ x ]


10 | P a g e
  appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
  Peoples?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ ]         No [ ]     NA [ ]
  Sector Manager review the plan?
  If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been Yes [ ]      No [ ]     NA [ ]
  reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit
  or Sector Manager?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ ]        No [ ]     NA [ ]
  Bank's Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ]            No [ ]     NA [ ]
  place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
  to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional Yes [ ]               No [ ]     NA [ ]
  responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
  related to safeguard policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in Yes [ ]         No [ ]     NA [ ]
  the project cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include Yes [ ]         No [ ]     NA [ ]
  the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
  safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with Yes [ ]           No [ ]     NA [ ]
  the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
  legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
  Task Team Leader:              Name: Thomas Kenyon
  Approved By:
  Regional Safeguards            Name: Glenn Morgan                             Date: Sept 12, 2013
  Coordinator:
  Sector Manager:                Name: Subrahmanya Pulle Srinivas               Date: Sept 12, 2013




11 | P a g e
                                  Annex 1 –
                                    Map 1
               Presence of Indigenous Groups in Ceará (FUNAI)




12 | P a g e
                                  Map 2
               Strategic Watersheds in the Ceará PforR – IPF




13 | P a g e
