                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/24/2012                                     Report No.: 83838
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P106768                 Original Project Name: Rio de Janeiro
                                             Public Sector Modernization
Country: Brazil                              Project ID: P126735
Project Name: Rio State TAL AF - PROGET
Task Team Leader: Alessandra Campanaro
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 28, 2012 Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2013
Managing Unit: LCSDU                         Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance
                                             Loan
Sector: Sub-national government administration (34%);Public administration- Other
social services (25%);Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection
(25%);General education sector (8%);Health (8%)
Theme: Other urban development (34%);Other social development (25%);Natural
disaster management (25%);Health system performance (8%);Education for all (8%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            48
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                         0.00
                                                                          0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []             Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                     Yes [ ]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed Additional Financing operation reflects the vital need to support the
integrated delivery of services at the state level. The objective is to improve service
delivery through introducing performance-based management, information technologies
and an integrated territorial development approach in key public services.

3. Project Description
The restructured and scaled up project will be organized into seven thematic components,
plus an eighth small component to support overall project administration. The proposed
activities will encompass the following areas: public sector management, public financial
management, metropolitan and territorial governance, housing and land regularization,
education, health, the environment and disaster risk management, and social
development. The proposed changes and new activities are presented below according to
the project components. The original project will be restructured to include all the new
components and make changes to the original components, as described below.

 Component 1: Core government systems and management tools for improved
performance and efficiency (restructuring from US$11.87 to US$7.65 million). This
component supports activities to revise and strengthen existing public sector management
procedures and administrative systems and introduce results-based management
practices. This component will support the following three lines of activities: (i)
introduction of results-based management; (ii) improvement of real estate management;
and (iii) strengthening the management of the social security system.

 Component 2: Strengthening education management capacity and secondary school
quality (scaling up from US$2.77 million to US$7.83 million). This component supports
activities to strengthen SEEDUC's technical capacity for evidence-based policy-making,
the management of school infrastructure and the quality of secondary education. The
component will be scaled up to include activities to support diagnostic studies, the
benchmarking of relevant experiences, and the strengthening of the school infrastructure
management practices.

 Component 3: Health Management and Information Systems (scaling up from US$3.21
million to US$8.37 million). This component supports four activities for strengthening
health monitoring and to improve evaluation processes and hospital information systems.
This component will support the design of business intelligence systems (BI) required to
support the improvement of internal hospital processes and workflows by generating and
managing information and enhancing routines and protocols.

 Component 4: Strengthening metropolitan management through integration and
coordination in urban development, housing, and transport (US$13 million). This
component will support activities for the development of a framework for metropolitan
governance and structural studies in the areas of housing, transport, and land tenure. This
component will trigger a collective learning process among private and public
stakeholders in the metropolitan region, involving policy roundtables, strategic planning
processes, workshops, and study tours coordinated by the state government in the three
sectors mentioned above.

  Component 5: Strengthening the state's disaster risk management capacity (US$10.4
million). This component supports activities aimed at improving DRM capacity as well
as the state's early warning system for high rainfall events. DRM activities will include
support for the development of a disaster risk management policy/program, which will
entail a participatory process to institutionalize DRM in the state. The activities will
include preventive measures, institutional capacity improvements, technical support for
risk reduction, and improved risk communication.

 Component 6: Improving living conditions in the most vulnerable social settings (US$
9.9 million). This component will support activities aimed at strengthening the capacity
of the Secretariat of Social Assistance and Human Rights (SEASDH) to implement an
integrated and evidence-based medium-term social development strategy and to support
activities by the Public Prosecutor (MP) to combat drugs in the municipalities. The
component will have two main subcomponents. The first will focus on activities carried
out by the Secretariat of Social Assistance and Human Rights (SEASDH), including (i)
organizational restructuring and formulation of a strategic planning process; and (ii)
support to the five strategic priorities of SEASDH. The second subcomponent will
strengthen the capacity of state and municipal governments to treat drug addiction by (i)
mapping the supply of and demand for the network of specialized drug treatment centers;
(ii) building capacities within the Public Prosecutor and drug user attention network; and
(iii) monitoring and evaluation of prevention measures adopted by the municipalities.

 Component 7: Strengthening core finance and taxation functions (US$ 6.1 million). This
component supports the State Secretariat of Finance (SEFAZ) in carrying out studies and
adopting new practices aimed at strengthening tax administration and financial
management systems. Activities under this component will strengthen procedures needed
to maintain fiscal discipline and strategic allocation of resources that is aligned with
Government priorities and efficient service delivery, including tax policy, tax
administration and public investment management and costing.

 Component 8: Support for project management (US$2.323million; allocation of US$0.6
million from the original loan and US$1.723 million from additional financing). This new
component will finance activities related to the overall administration of the project. The
original project allocated funds to the expenditure category "operating costs" to cover
project administration costs. However, some of the required expenditures are related to
goods, consultant services, non-consultant services, and training. Therefore, a new
component will be created and reallocations between expenditure categories made to
adequately reflect the project's administration needs.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Rio de Janeiro Metropolitan Region environmental problems are diverse and
comparative to its magnitude. Key environmental issues in the RJMR are related to a
massive urban development in an environmentally sensitive area. The RJMR area is
characterized by a diverse topography, with high mountains separating the coastline from
the west side lowlands (Baixada). A significant portion of the Region is formed by
mountains and low lands, with unfavorable conditions for urban development. Natural
vegetation remains in the mountains and steep terrains. Most low land has urban use.

  The RJMR faces numerous environmental problems, such as unplanned occupation of
steep slopes and river margins, water quality degradation, air quality problems in specific
areas and progressive degradation of the remaining preserved Atlantic Forest spots. The
recent landslides in Niteroi and Nova Friburgo reinforce the importance of the ongoing
State policies to improve urban development planning, environmental management and
risk mitigation.
 The RJMR has Atlantic Forest ecosystems with high rates of biodiversity. Natural
vegetation still responds for approximately one fourth of the area, including forests,
mangroves, salt marshes and beaches, essential to the environmental equilibrium. The
most significant remaining forest and conservation units are located in the foothills of the
central mountainous region or close to the shoreline, in swampy areas in the vicinity of
the Guanabara Bay, and the western city of Rio de Janeiro. The forests, marshes and
mangroves are located in regions where physical obstacles placed limits on expansion of
economic activities or where they have stagnated due to socioeconomic realities and
political conditions, allowing native vegetation to regenerate.

 The RJMR shares with other metropolitan areas in Brazil the problems of water
pollution, and the need to improve sanitation, solid waste collection and disposal.
Problems with sewerage and solid waste collection services are aggravated by the region
topographic conditions. Sanitation coverage is not universal. It is higher in the affluent
and consolidated portions of the RJMR, but deficient in peri-urban areas, slums (favelas),
occupied mainly by lower-income populations.

 In summary, urban expansion in RJMR takes place in a unique and fragile natural
environment, characterized by diverse topography and encroachment of urban settlements
into environmentally sensitive areas, causing progressive environmental degradation. The
GORJ sector policies addressed by this TAL focus on the region urban degradation
causes, improving urban planning and environmental management.

 During preparation, the Bank undertook a social analysis to explore the potential social
impacts of the project on different stakeholder groups. It relied on secondary sources –
mostly social assessments and poverty and social impact analyses carried out for previous
DPL operations with the state and municipality of Rio de Janeiro. These previous
assessments relied on demographic and census data, ethnographic studies of the
conditions of daily life of poor people, youth, women and vulnerable groups, and
consultations with key stakeholders. They show that, despite having recently begun to
turn the corner after decades of economic stagnation and social deterioration, the State of
Rio de Janeiro and its metropolitan region have not been able to convert economic
growth into widespread, improved social well-being. Although the proportion of poor and
extremely poor people in the State's population is smaller than in the rest of the country,
social and economic inequality remains high in the state of Rio de Janeiro. Both
metropolitan and non-metropolitan regions present relevant challenges to further reduce
poverty and improve well-being.

  These assessments tend to concur with the proposition that lower incomes, poverty and
extreme poverty are closely and meaningfully correlated with race, generation and gender
issues, lower levels of education, more limited access to public services, inadequate
housing and higher vulnerability to violence and crime. Also, there is strong evidence
that poverty and extreme poverty are considerably more widespread in the metropolitan
region and disproportionately and overwhelmingly affect female-headed households with
children (a trend towards a feminization of poverty) and afro-descendants who reside in
precarious settlements and at-risk areas. The metropolitan region has expanded in the last
decade toward peripheral zones and vertically within the favelas in a unique and fragile
natural environment. The absence of a formal housing market and state policies for low-
income housing has led poor families to locate themselves in underserviced peripheral
areas. These "solutions" have increased social exclusion and promoted "favelization" in
most peripheral areas. Thus, the percentage of people living in substandard housing under
precarious conditions and in at-risk areas has increased and, in recent years, at a rate three
times faster than the growth rate of the city's population. Additionally, the available data
show that, since 1985, increasing numbers of precarious, poor and informal settlements
have fallen under the rule of drug lords and militias, with devastating effects for the
residents. Crime and violence are focused in these settlements and surrounding areas, and
victimize young people the most. Finally, this research, consultations with stakeholders
and public opinion polls have pointed out rampant violence and criminality – closely
related with drug dealing and addiction – are conceived of as the main social concerns
and the key obstacles to new business attraction, economic recovery and social
development in the state.

 Previous research and consultations with key stakeholders – reviewed on the social
assessment for this operation – show the metropolitan population agrees that (a) social
and economic inequality is the main issue in the metropolitan region of Rio de Janeiro
and (b) it is reflected in a spatial distribution of inequality that is reinforced by the lack of
state investments in public services and infrastructure in most settlements. The data
available from qualitative research and consultations with key stakeholders show broad
public support for policies driven towards urban upgrading of favelas and the reduction
of settlements in at-risk areas. Many studies also suggest that the metropolitan population
agrees that the re-taking of informal settlements previously controlled by drug dealers
and militias was essential for improving the living conditions of poor residents,
recovering their citizenship rights, and improving their participation in civil society.
Finally, the available sources reveal that the metropolitan population and, in particular,
the people living in violence ridden communities previously or currently controlled by
drug dealers and militias strongly support the view that police activities should be
complemented with other social interventions, including policies to improve low-income
housing, upgrade informal settlements and promote social development. Thus, the
feedback from residents of informal settlements about UPP policies has been mostly
positive, but they remain concerned with the potential migration of crime and violence to
other neighborhoods. They express fears that UPP interventions may not endure and that
drug traffickers and militias might return and retaliate against residents. They also fear
that traffickers might prevail over both government and nongovernment programs that
promote social and youth development, strengthen citizenship rights among a population
that has been socialized under the culture of violence, and return drug users to their
everyday family life.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN)
   Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSSO)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project does not entail any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible
negative impacts.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
A number of studies included under the housing and metropolitan governance aspect of
the project could potentially have indirect environmental and/or social impacts. These
studies will be developed in accordance to the Environmental and Social Management
Framework guidelines, taking into consideration the Bank Social and Environmental
Safeguards.

 Adverse social consequences and disputes may arise from the government's disaster risk
management and urban territorial development policies that could involve the
resettlement of families living in precarious settlements and/or areas at very high risk of
massive landslides. The State of Rio de Janeiro s current practices of resettlement – as
defined by State Decree 41.148/2008 (and its complementary legislation) and
implemented in large programs such as PAC – have been assessed in the preparation of
the Urban and Housing Development Policy Loan (P122391). The gaps between these
practices and their regulatory framework have been properly addressed and covered at the
project s Involuntary Resettlement Policy Framework.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Rio de Janeiro State is making significant progress to improve its environmental
management system. The Environmental and Social Management Framework proposes
institutional capacity strengthening measures and an institutional arrangement to
implement the Project. INEA is the State Environmental Agency and is fully involved in
the preparation of the project. It will also be responsible for Component 5 which might
have potentially impact natural habitats.

 Each Project Implementation Unit is responsible for their environmental management
and will follow the guidelines established in the ESMF under guidance from INEA. Each
Secretariat has its own environmental staff and the Project implementation will have staff
dedicated to following compliance as stipulated in the ESMF and also according to State
and National legislation.

 The state of Rio de Janeiro has notably improved its involuntary resettlement legislation
and procedures in the past few years. Decree 41148/2008 introduces as its main
guidelines: (a) the participation of the affected people in all stages of the resettlement
process; (b) the provision of resettlement options; (c) strong mechanisms of
communication with the population; and, (d) extensive consultation processes with main
stakeholders to address their concerns during implementation. These procedures,
guidelines and mechanisms potentially advance socially responsible resettlement
processes and are in accordance with most of the provisions of the Bank's resettlement
policies. However, they have been recently introduced in state practices in a learning-by-
doing basis and there are still some gaps between this state regulatory framework and the
Bank s Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP/BP 4.12), that have been properly addressed
at the project s Involuntary Resettlement Policy Framework.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The state of Rio de Janeiro has undertaken strong consultation with people in informal
settlements that may be affected by the Rio State Metropolitan Urban and Housing
Development Policy Loan (P122391). This process involved public consultations on
urban and housing upgrading and disaster management policies. A participatory method
for risk identification and assessment of families potentially subject to resettlement was
also developed. In addition to this, the state has a well-developed environmental policy
framework and the necessary environmental institutional capacity to minimize any
negative impacts that may be associated with the project. As mentioned above, the ESMF
emphasizes the use of consultative processes.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/13/2011
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/19/2011
 Date of submission to InfoShop                              08/22/2012
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  12/06/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              12/20/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               08/22/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Alessandra Campanaro                      05/07/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Gunars H. Platais                         12/19/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa                12/19/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan                           08/15/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Anna Wellenstein                          07/07/2012
  Comments:
