                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC6289


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/02/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Brazil                             Project ID: P126372
Project Name: Recife Swap Education and Public Management
Task Team Leader: David Evans
Estimated Appraisal Date:                   Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2012
Managing Unit: LCSHE                        Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                            Loan
Sector: Pre-primary education (30%);Public administration- Other social services
(30%);General transportation sector (20%);General finance sector (20%)
Theme: Education for all (60%);Other public sector governance (40%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):         130.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                     360.00
                                                                     360.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The Project Development Objective is to expand coverage of improved early child education,
create conditions more conducive to learning in primary education, and improve municipal
public management.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The project will have two components, the first of which will co-finance existing eligible
government programs in early child and primary education via a SWAp approach, and the
second of which will provide technical assistance to strengthen public sector management.
 Component 1: Strengthen coverage of Early Child Education and quality of Primary Education
(Estimated total cost: US$360 million; Bank: US$100 million). This component will expand
coverage to improved early child education and create conditions more conducive to learning at
the primary education level. It will also improve cross-sectoral articulation of services for young
children.
 At the early child education level, this will be accomplished through (a) the construction of 40
new Municipal Early Child Education Centers (CMEIS), which include both creche (age 0-3)
and pre-school (age 4-5); (b) expansion and rehabilitation of a series of existing creches and pre-
schools; (c) development of clear criteria for private creches and preschools to be contracted for
provision of public education; (d) the establishment of one-stop shops for early child services,
based at Early Child Education centers, where children can receive referrals for health and social
assistance services, all in one place; and (e) the pilot of a home-based education and health
program to reach the most vulnerable young children.
  At the primary education level, this component will create conditions more conducive to
learning via the following activities: (a) expansion of the school day with two additional hours of
focused education in mathematics and Portuguese, (b) implementation of a revised in-service
teacher training program, (c) expansion of early-grade remedial literacy programs Acelera and
Se Liga, (d) implementation of a late-grade accelerated learning program; and (e) school-based
projects with financing linked to results.
  Component 2: Strengthen institutions for more efficient and effective public management
(Estimated total cost: US$30 million; Bank: US$30 million). This component will strengthen
management of systems in the municipality in five areas: education, human resource policy,
public management, financial systems, and transport.
  In education, this component will improve planning and management through the expansion of
a new education information system, which has been piloted in 14 schools and which provides
detailed information on student histories, teachers, and school infrastructure. It will also support
implementation of the municipal student evaluation program (Sistema Municipal de Avaliação
da Rede # SMAR) to complement the state student evaluation system. Critical studies such as
identifying more effective ways to select school directors and to strengthen school development
plans will likewise be financed under this component.
  In municipal human resource policy, the project will support the following activities: (a) a
detailed study of human resource and payroll policies, (b) development of a new system of
personnel policy with revised salary structure and career paths, (c) the revision of human
resource policy (integration of policies and processes at the Administration Secretariat and other
Secretariats with HR and payroll processes), (d) updating and cleaning of the personnel database,
and (e) establishment of a permanent system for payroll audits.
  In public management, the municipality has adopted a new management system with a focus on
results. The project will (a) support the implementation of an information system that
automatically tracks progress towards established key goals, (b) strengthen capacity for multi-
year planning through a series of sectoral diagnostic studies, definition of priorities and results
indicators to measure success in each sector, and translation of priorities into a sector strategy,
and (c) support mapping, simplification, and automation of administrative processes to increase
efficiency.
  In financial systems, the project will finance (a) a study of the current tax administration system
and how it can be improved, (b) an enhanced central tax administration information system, and
(c) the development of a public debt module of the existing budget information management
system, improving on the current manual administration of public debt information.
  In transport, the project will finance a series of studies seeking to implement the goals of the
Municipal Mobility Plan of 2010: improving public transport (e.g., reprogramming traffic lights,
revising parking policies), updating origin-destination studies, integrating public transport
systems across neighborhoods, and managing traffic control.

D. Project location (if known)
Project activities will take place in the urban municipality of Recife.
E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The municipality of Recife has experience in implementing two Bank-financed projects carrying
environmental categories A and B, both operations involving environmental and urban
management activities. Such operations are much more complex than the proposed project,
which includes construction of new early child education centers and expansion of existing
schools. While construction and rehabilitation could have adverse environmental impacts, they
are likely to be minor, site-specific, and reversible.

  At this point, the team does not anticipate Borrower#s difficulties in addressing Bank#s
safeguard policies. However, the final analysis of the capacity of the Borrower and related
institutions in this area will be confirmed during next phases of project preparation by the
safeguards specialists, and reflected in the next stage documents. As needed, conceptual
frameworks and action plans to be implemented by the municipality will be developed during
project preparation for mitigating the impacts for each safeguard policy triggered. Supervision
work will be conducted by qualified Bank staff during project implementation.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Sarah Keener (LCSSO)
   Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
    This policy is triggered because the project includes small scale civil works - construction of
new early child education centers, and rehabilitation of existing schools, which could have
adverse environmental impacts. However, the impacts are likely to be minor, site-specific, short-
lived, and reversible.

      An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be developed to
include a typology of potential impacts, and guide the range of potential mitigation measures #
including policies, procedures, and practices to be applied for such potential impacts. The ESMF
will include the proposed education centers location eligibility criteria, looking to avoid
interference with natural habitats, physical cultural relevant sites, and other relevant aspects,
such as risk of flooding and landslide. Additionally, the ESMF will address the construction
activities environmental guidelines (Simplified Construction Manual) addressing impacts related
to construction, and appropriate mitigation measures.

     The scope of the ESMF will apply to all activities under the Eligible Expenditure Programs
(Component 1), and not only to the Bank-financed ones. Environmental and social
considerations will also be taken into account in the Terms of Reference for the transport studies
seeking to implement the goals of the Municipal Mobility Plan 2010 (Component 2). The ESMF
will also define an environmental and social conceptual framework for the Transport studies that
may be applied whether the studies bring environmental implications.

     Finally, the ESMF will incorporate a budget for the expected actions and an overview of the
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                           Yes            No          TBD
proposed institutional arrangements for such actions.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                         X
     This policy is not triggered because all project activities are located in the urban limits of the
municipality of Recife and do not interfere with natural habitats.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                  X
     This policy is not triggered because the project does not involve any activities related to
forests and do not interfere with forests.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                             X
     This policy is not triggered because the project does not involve any activities related to the
application, purchase, storage or use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                X
     This policy is triggered because the project includes civil works as described under
#Environmental Assessment Policy# above. Constructions are not expected to take place on any
known sites of cultural significance, but screening procedures, as well as chance-find procedures
will also be included in the ESMF on a precaution basis.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                       X
     This policy is not triggered because all project activities all project activities will take place
within the Recife city limits, where there are no indigenous peoples that satisfy the
characteristics outlined in paragraph 5 of the OP.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                               X
     According to the information provided by the Borrower at this stage of project preparation,
all plots for school construction have been identified and do not require resettlement. However, it
is not clear if (i) there may be a need for involuntary land acquisition resulting in adverse
impacts on assets or livelihoods # whether or not the affected people have to physically move #
under the entire EEP; or (ii) if there might be any instances of squatting or encroaching on
already acquired plots (or those not yet identified but on which construction will happen under
the broader SWAp program) that would require people to move before construction can take
place. These questions will be answered as project preparation evolves, which will determine if
this policy will need to be triggered. If so, either a Resettlement Plan or Abbreviated
Resettlement Plan would be prepared, depending on the amount of people that would be
resettled. If this policy, as defined, is found to be ineligible, then criteria to clearly ascertain that
it has not and cannot occur will be included in the ESMF.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                           X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                      X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                               X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 07/15/2011
B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr David Evans                                                 05/31/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Glenn S. Morgan                                             05/31/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Ms Chingboon Lee                                               05/31/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
