                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                 CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                               Report No.: AC6390


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/20/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Brazil                               Project ID: P126620
Project Name: Alagoas Extreme Poverty Eradication Project
Task Team Leader: David Ian Walker
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 5, 2012       Estimated Board Date: July 24, 2012
Managing Unit: LCSHS-DPT                      Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: General education sector (20%);Health (20%);Other social services
(20%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%);Sub-national government
administration (20%)
Theme: Social safety nets (50%);Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring (50%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):          200.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                       50.00
                                                                       50.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed PDO is to reduce the exclusion of poor households and communities in Alagoas
from good quality education, health and income support programs; to enhance protection against
vulnerability to violence and disasters; and to increase opportunities for productive work. This
will be achieved by strengthening the provision of the relevant services. The target group is
families entitled to Bolsa Familia (with per capita income under R$140 a month).
  The candidate indicators for key results (outcomes of the project) that will contribute to the
PDO include: (1) increased participation of extreme poor households in Bolsa Familia; (2)
increased coverage of good quality institutional births; (3) reduced grade-age distortion in
primary education and increased enrollment in secondary education; (4) increased protection
against vulnerability to violence and natural disasters for extreme poor households; (5) increased
employment and training opportunities, access to finance; and profitability for productive
ventures supported. The choice of indicators will be finalized during preparation, and the final
set of five results indicators will reflect decisions taken about the choice and design of the project
components. The definitions, sources, baselines and indicative targets will be defined in a logical
framework workshop, provisionally planned for August 2011.
C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed instrument is a conventional SIL, since weak capacity could limit the effectiveness
of a DPL or of a SIL with a SWAp framework. The team will consult with federal agencies and
other states to identify best practices. Provisionally, 4 components are being considered:

 1. Reducing exclusion, protecting against vulnerability and guaranteeing minimum rights to
income education and health (US$75-$100 million): (i) strengthening the outreach capacity of
the social assistance reference centers (CRAS) of the social assistance (SUAS) network for
#active search# to register families in the single cadastre (Cadeunico); enroll them in eligible
programs; monitor compliance with co-responsibilities; and offer support to those with
difficulties; (ii) strengthening protection against violence and developing disaster response plans
for poor families in high-risk communities; (iii) developing a decentralized maternal and child
health network in Alagoas, focusing on the under-served Macro Region II, organized around
referral hospitals in the cities of Arapiraca in the Agreste and Santana do Ipanema in the Sertao.
Prenatal care in the surrounding municipalities will be intensified, using incentives to health
providers to increase prenatal consultations and to improve risk identification and appropriate
referrals to the higher level facilities. The team will explore options for output based finance
along the lines of Argentina#s Plan Nacer; and (iv) reducing age-grade distortion in upper
primary education by funding catch-up programs to get children back into the right grade for
their age; and expanding the number of places in secondary education in the under-served
interior regions, second chance programs for drop-outs and adult literacy programs linked to
work opportunities.

 2. Promoting economic inclusion (US$60-$80 million): (i) support for work placement by
strengthening agencies and programs such as SINE (Sistema Nacional de Emprego) in secondary
towns and cities; (ii) support for school to work transitions for youth from poor families that
complete secondary education; (iii) support for micro financing services for productive activities
channeled through AFAL (Agencia de Fomento de Alagoas); and (iv) support for sustainable
productive transformations for small scale producers through extension services that strengthen
market linkages, and provide training, technical assistance, access to appropriate technology
(such as irrigation) and affordable credit.

 3. Institutional strengthening (US$15-$25 million). The Project will work with the public
management secretariat, building on the work of the DPL, to enhance capacity and deliver
quality and value-for-money in the central administration, education and health, through: (i)
human resources management, planning, training policies and pensions; (ii) budgeting and
performance management (linking budget to performance and stronger accountability of
providers to clients); and (iii) Modernization of asset management and quality control for
equipment and infrastructure purchases.

 4. Project administration and monitoring (US$5-$10 million). This component will fund the
program coordination office, the MIS system and the program evaluation.

D. Project location (if known)
The project will support activities to improve services delivery in the State of Alagoas. Specific
locations for targeting investments are not yet known. Additionally other key factors will be
studied to contribute to an appropriate selection of investment and technical assistance targets
and potential areas, such as the carrying out of a stakeholder analysis and a social assessment.
Preparation studies will be carried out by the borrower with the World Bank support.

 Environmental issues: Alagoas is one of the smallest States of Brazil, with with a surface area
of about 28,000 km.2 Alagoas can be divided in three natural zones: (i) the coastal zone,
including the Atlantic Forest; (ii) the sertão, arid region covered with underbrush and cacti
(caatinga), in the western extreme; and (iii) a transition zone, called agreste, in between the other
two, shrubby savanna parkland (cerrado). Its coastline is about 138 miles (220 km) long. The low
altitudes predominate in Alagoas; about 60 percent of the State is lower than 200 m, and about
90% are lower than 300 m.

  The main water courses of the state are the Rio Sao Francisco, Rio Paraiba Munda, and the Rio
do Meio. At the east and on the coasts, the climate is tropical humid. To the west and the interior,
the climate is semi-arid. Close to the coast, the climate is hot (average 24 Degrees Celsius), with
rains concentrated on the Brazilian autumn and winter (April - August). In the sertão, the climate
is semi-arid, with higher temperatures and amplitudes (17-33 Degrees Celsius), and
predominance of dry seasons.

 The Convention of the United Nations for Fight Against Desertification (UNCCD)
conceptualizes desertification as the process of degradation of land in arid, semi-arid and sub-
humid dry regions, owing to factors such as entropic action and climate changes. This
degradation is the loss or reduction of economic or biological productivity of dry ecosystems
caused by soil erosion, deterioration of hydro resources and loss of natural vegetation. Alagoas
has a surface area of about 6,256 Km2 (22.5%) considered as moderately affected by
desertification (Cirilo, J.A. 2008).

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The State has demonstrated some limited capacity to implement safeguards policies in previous
Bank-financed projects such as in the Rural Poverty Reduction Project-RPRP (1986-1996) as
well during preparation of a follow-on RPRP (2000-2003) which later was cancelled. However,
since public administration in the State is relatively weak, technical assistance would need to be
considered if safeguards are triggered, as well as additional capacity-building and close
supervision.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Judith M. Lisansky (LCSSO)
   Ms Maria Bernadete Ribas Lange (LCSEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                     Yes          No        TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                             X
    The investment program envisaged by this project does not foresee infrastructure works with
significant environmental or social impacts. However, the investments to be included under the
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                            Yes         No          TBD
project are still to be fully identified. Illustrative types of small-scale investments that might
include some environmental adverse effects are: (i) improvement of agriculture (and other)
production technologies; (ii) improvements to small producers# farm and off-farm infrastructure;
and, (iii) rehabilitation of schools and hospitals.
     Environmental and social impacts are expected to be localized and preventable through
responsive mitigation measures. However, some small-scale investments could potentially have
adverse environmental impacts. As the exact type and nature of projects activities would not be
known ex ante, the Borrower should prepare an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF). The ESMF will provide guidance on: (i) identifying the potential impacts
associated with the sector specific investments/activities; (ii) minimizing potential impacts for
productive and/or infrastructure activities; and (iii) addressing identified impacts during sector
specific activities implementation. The ESMF will establish proper safety protocols for
construction workers, dust and noise control and the institutional arrangement for supervision.
The ESMF will include a budget, safeguards training activities, and implementation schedule.
The ESMF will also include screaming process, and a negative list of excluded types of activities
that will not be eligible for financing under the project.
     In addition to OP 4.01, two additional safeguard policies are noted below as TBD. Whether
they are in fact triggered or not will be clarified during project preparation, as the investment
activities becomes clear.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
    The proposed project would support sustainable agriculture and other rural activities. It
would promote the use of better land and water management practices including the protection of
remnant natural vegetation within rural landscapes. Project activities will not take place in
protected areas and are not expected to significantly modify or degrade natural habitats.

     Activities resulting in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats
will not be allowed, and are not planned for Areas of Permanent Preservation (APP) and Legal
Reserves (RL) . Activities under the agriculture sector should nonetheless lead to positive
impacts on natural habitats, through the direct protection and rehabilitation of these areas,
following the provisions of the Brazilian Forest Code. All planning activities that may affect
natural habitats must follow World Bank policies, identifying monitoring and management
activities to prevent or mitigate any possible negative impact.

     The proposed ESMF should include clear guidance regarding direct and indirect impacts on
natural habitats.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                           X
    The project is not expected to have negative impacts on native forests rather impacts are
expected to be positive. Activities with the potential for conversion or degradation of natural
forests or other natural habitats will not be allowed. Although the project is not expected to have
negative impact on native forests, the ESMF should include clear guidance regarding the
screening and monitoring of project-supported activities in order to avoid such impact.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                            X
    The project would not finance any pesticides or other chemical amendments that would
trigger OP 4.09. Nevertheless, minor amounts of pesticides would probably continue to be used
in the short term by a small portion of agriculture sector targeted small-scale farms. The Project
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes         No          TBD
would encourage the control of pest populations through the integrated pest management
framework within the ESMF. The proposed ESMF approach further would improve the
sustainability of agro-ecosystems by focusing on the knowledge and skills of farmers to better
enable natural resource management.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                          X
    It appears very unlikely that project implementation would cause any negative impact on
known physical cultural resources (PCR). Proposed activities with expected direct and negative
impact on known archeological, paleontological, historical or other culturally significant sites
would not be eligible.
      The State of Alagoas has historical and archeological sites. Brazil has a well-developed
legislative and normative framework, which is under Federal oversight by the National Institute
for Protection of Historical and Archeological Sites (IPHAN). Alagoas also has the Secretaria da
Cultura, tasked with the identification, restoration and protection of PCR in the State (CHECK).
      The #chance findings# procedures would be included in the Project Operational Manual for
guidance during project implementation, particularly in regions with PCR sites already mapped
by Regional IPHAN. The project implementation unit may engage Secretaria da Cultura or
others entities with the proven experience to implement #chance findings# procedures.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                        X
    A preliminary social assessment/screening of Alagoas, which is one of the poorest of
Brazilian states with a predominantly non-modernized agricultural economy, concluded that
there are approximately 100 quilombola communities and 12 indigenous communities in the
state. With respect to indigenous peoples, FUNAI reports a total population of about 6,000
indigenous peoples comprised of seven ethnicities: Cocal, Jeripancó, Kariri-Xocó, Karapotó,
Tingui-Botó, Wassú, and Xucuri-Kariri. Six indigenous lands are regularized, one delimited, and
one still under study. With respect to quilombola communities, the State of Alagoas reports an
estimated population of about 6,200 families. Sixty-four quilombola communities have been
officially recognized by Fundação Cultural Palmares, four of which have their land titling
processes begun with INCRA, but no quilombola communities in the state yet have their
collective titles. Generally these ethnic minorities have some of the worst poverty indicators in
Brazil. Given the focus of the operation on the eradication of extreme poverty, it is highly likely
that quilombola communities will be one of the targeted beneficiary populations. It is not yet
clear if the project activities and geographic targeting will include indigenous peoples. As such,
during the preparation of the project, the client will undertake a more comprehensive social
assessment focusing on characteristics and needs assessment of the poor and extreme poor, with
special attention to the most vulnerable populations, ethnically distinct populations and the
traditionally excluded with the objectives of contributing to improved project design and
targeting. If it appears likely that the project will affect indigenous communities in the state but
site-specifics are not yet known, the client would in that case prepare an Indigenous Peoples
Planning Framework (IPPF), prior, informed consultations would be carried out and the IPPF
publicly disseminated.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                           X
    It is expected that the new operation will not cause physical resettlement or economic
displacement. It also appears unlikely that it will involve land acquisition. Nonetheless, as the
scope and content of project become clearer, the team will evaluate if OP 4.12 should be
triggered, and if it is, the client would prepare the appropriate instrument which would be
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                              Yes              No             TBD
consulted and publicly disclosed.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                     X


Environmental Category: C - Not Required

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 02/08/2012

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Launched: September 2011; Completion estimated: January, 2012.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr David Ian Walker                                            07/18/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Glenn S. Morgan                                             07/19/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Ms Helena G. Ribe                                              07/20/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
