                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/19/2011                                    Report No.: AC6515
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Burkina Faso                         Project ID: P120517
Project Name: Decentralized Development
Task Team Leader: Serdar Yilmaz
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 29, 2011      Estimated Board Date: October 24, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTPR                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Sub-national government administration (100%)
Theme: Decentralization (75%);Managing for development results (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             60.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            6.00
                                                                      6.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed project seeks to harness emerging government commitment to local
government reforms by supporting the implementation of critical aspects of fiscal and
administrative decentralization in six of the 13 regions of Burkina Faso. The primary
objective of the project is to strengthen the central government#s capacity for
administrative and fiscal decentralization and the institutional capacities of communes in
six regions, and to improve accountability linkages between local policy makers and
citizens in the six regions.

3. Project Description
Component 1 - Establishing the foundations of robust administrative and fiscal
intergovernmental institutions. This component will support the central government
agencies to further develop a transparent and rule-based intergovernmental fiscal
framework and robust intergovernmental administrative systems. It will support the
government in making a gradual shift from existing ex ante controls to ex post
monitoring, as the capacity of communes increases to exercise their discretion. It will
provide support to a high level policy making process (Vision Prospective de la
Decentralisation-VPD) and assist the Ministries of Economy and Finance and Territorial
Administration, Decentralization and Security to develop their coordination and
managerial capacity.
  Component 2 - Strengthening institutional capacities at the local level to manage local
development. To address capacity constraints at the local government level, the project
will provide support to local communes to address their core institutional development
requirements for socio-economic development through institutional development grants.
Annual grant allocations to each commune will, in part, be based upon the commune#s
performance in establishing their institutions.
  Component 3 - Improving accountability linkages between local level policy makers
and citizens. This component aims to empower local councils and populations by
strengthening their capacity to participate in local decision making processes related to
their socio-economic development and monitor local authority performance. At the same
time, it aims to support local councilors in their oversight and representative function and
to strengthen the capacity of local communes to communicate with local populations and
account for their performance. The component will also reward communes in all 13
regions that demonstrate excellence in engaging communities in local development
decision-making processes, through the provision of small grants on a competitive basis,
and will ensure that the practices are disseminated as a motivation to other communes.
  Component 4 - Project management and evaluation. This component will provide
project management support to the Ministry of Territorial Administration,
Decentralization and Security (MATDS) in project implementation and support regular
project evaluations as well as procurement and safeguards reviews, and financial
reporting and auditing.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
140 commune governments in six selected regions (Cascades, Sahel, Center North,
Center South, Center East, and Center Plateau) are eligible to receive the institutional
development grant, but each commune will be assessed each year to ensure it meets
access and performance criteria before getting an allocation. Therefore, the specific
geographical location for the project is not known, and the specific use of the grant funds
is also not known apriori.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS)
   Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN)
   Mr Emmanuel Ngollo (AFTPR)
   Ms Asli Gurkan (SDV)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

 This is a category B project. The social impacts of the proposed project activities are
expected to be positive. The activities to be undertaken by the municipalities will
improve their capacity to deliver better services, be transparent and use resources
effectively, thereby improving the living conditions of their respective communities. The
concept of social accountability is strongly embedded in project activities. Together with
other interventions, it is expected that the project will enhance development and ensure
greater engagement of project beneficiaries in local decision-making processes.

 The overall environmental impact of the project is expected to be positive. Significant
positive impact on the natural and socioeconomic environments is likely to result from
the implementation of activities on the part of participating municipalities. By developing
institutional capacity, the capacity of the municipalities to deliver quality services will be
improved. However, some negative impacts may arise during project implementation.
Such negative but limited impacts on soil, air, water, noise environments and surrounding
communities, could occur essentially during construction. These impacts will be
temporal, localized, and with proper mitigation measures during the implementation of
the project, they be could minimized or even eliminated.

 From a social safeguards perspective, some of the sub-projects involve construction and
minor public work activities, therefore the World Bank policy on involuntary
resettlement, OP 4.12 is triggered, for which the government has prepared a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) to guide the response to any potential social impacts. The RPF
has been prepared through a consultative process and disclosed in the country as well as
at the World Bank#s Infoshop.
  From an environmental safeguards perspective, at the time of project preparation, the
exact location, nature and number of investments and/or services are not known. Thus,
the appropriate environmental safeguards instrument, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF), has been prepared to ensure that all investments are
adequately screened for their potential environmental and social impacts, and that correct
procedures are followed to mitigate and minimize any potential negative impacts arising
from these investments. The ESMF has been prepared through a consultative process and
disclosed in the country as well as at the World Bank#s Infoshop.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No long term or indirect impacts are foreseen.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Borrower has prepared an EMF and a RPF to address any potential adverse
environmental and social effects of the project interventions. Environmental Management
Plans and Resettlement Action Plans will be prepared as and when necessary during
project implementation. These documents will be disclosed through newspaper
advertisement, public forum and public notices. Issues raised during the consultation
processes will be incorporated into the documents.

 At the national level, the borrower's capacity for safeguards is acceptable. The Ministry
of the Environment and Livelihood is responsible for implementation of environmental
policies. The Ministry of the Environment and Livelihood is familiar with the Bank's
safeguards policies and has good working relationships with the Bank and Bank-funded
projects. The project coordination unit (PCU) will hire an environmental and social
specialist or a consultant(s) that will follow up on environmental and social issues,
especially implementation of the safeguards instruments as and when necessary during
project implementation. Other capacity building initiatives will be launched for
communes to upgrade their knowledge on safeguards. In addition, the safeguards
specialists in the Bank team will provide guidance as the project evolves.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders for processing the EMF and RPF will be the PCU who will work in
collaboration with communes and MATDS. The EMF and RPF have been developed
through a consultative process with stakeholders (including sample communities) in
selected, representative communes and disclosed in the country as well as at the World
Bank's Infoshop prior to appraisal. Among the stakeholders are commune governments,
the Ministry of the Environment and Livelihood staff, traditional leaders and NGOs,
some of whom are representatives of communities.
 The project coordination unit has organized six regional consultation workshops to
discuss both RPF and ESMF with the project stakeholders, including regional and local
government representatives and civil society organizations. The participants of the
workshops demanded that the representatives of communities (members of CVD,
COGES, etc.) to be informed about project components and its possible adverse social
and environmental impacts. PCU will hire a communications specialist to be in regular
close contact with the communities.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 03/07/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/09/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/30/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/04/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             08/08/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              09/08/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          N/A
  review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
  credit/loan?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Serdar Yilmaz                             09/01/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Amadou Konare                             09/01/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni                        09/01/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms Asli Gurkan                               09/01/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Anand Rajaram                             09/01/2011
  Comments:
