                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/31/2011                                    Report No.: AC6299
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Burkina Faso                         Project ID: P119662
Project Name: Burkina Faso - Bagre Growth Pole Project
Task Team Leader: Djibrilla Adamou Issa
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 28, 2011 Estimated Board Date: June 23, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTFW                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Agricultural marketing and trade (30%);General industry and trade sector
(30%);Micro- and SME finance (20%);Agro-industry (20%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%);Other financial and
private sector development (30%);Small and medium enterprise support (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            115.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             8.70
         Local Sources of Borrowing Country                            10.00
         Financing Gap                                                  0.00
                                                                       18.70
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to contribute to increased economic activity in the
Bagré Growth Pole, resulting in an increase in private investment, employment
generation and agricultural production.

3. Project Description
Component I: Improvement of institutional capacity for better zone management and
investment climate in Bagré (US$20.5 million). The objective of this component is to
help improve the zone management and business environment and reduce the costs and
risks of doing business in Bagré. This will be done by building the institutional capacity
of the Government and the Bagré Contracting Authority (MOB), which is the
Government entity that has been managing Bagré for the last 20 years. The MOB will
provide services to the private sector, tackle cross-cutting investment climate issues, and
address a critical mass of constraints blocking development of Bagré. To this end, the
project will: (a) support the strengthening and the restructuring of the existing MOB to be
an efficient growth pole authority that will design, develop and manage the Bagré Zone
during phase a) above; (b) finance private operators that will help the MOB in these
functions, including irrigation water service delivery, efficient promotion and operation
and maintenance (O&M) of the zone. Two firms have been selected under the PPA for
the implementation of these activities during phase a) and b); (c) support the local branch
of the Maison de l'Entreprise du Burkina Faso (MEBF) established in Bagré in 2009 by
building its capacity as an information and orientation center and as a Business
Development Services (BDS) provider for entrepreneurs who will settle in Bagré during
phase a); (d) facilitate access to land and property title by helping resolve land tenure and
land re-allocation issues and financing a flexible land management and lease mechanism
(inclusive of local population and small holders) during phase a); (e) support
environmental and social management planning for sustainable land security, biodiversity
conversation and environmental offset measures; (f) fund the adaptation and development
of vocational training using the existing training facility in Bagré during phases a) and b);
(g) fund advisors to the Government to attract private sector and help structure
transactions with private operators for the concession of existing infrastructure and for
the acquisition/lease of land for investment; during phase a); (h) support the activities of
the Presidential Investor Council (Conseil Présidentiel pour l'Investissement - CPI) and
the Investment Promotion Agency (Agence de Promotion des Investissements-API) with
a specific focus on investment promotion in Bagré; and (i) finance for the Government,
studies, policy notes and technical assistance for the coordination of institutions and
policies on growth poles in Burkina.

  Component II: Development of Critical Infrastructure (US$78.5 million) - The objective
of this component is to complete public infrastructure in the Bagré concentration zone
and to promote agricultural development. The design and implementation of a phased
irrigation and transport infrastructure development plan and a site development plan
funded by the PPA is underway (during phase a) and will inform the sequencing of
project activities under this component. The component will finance remaining missing
infrastructure to complement investments already made by the Government i.e.: (i)
primary irrigation network for the irrigation of at least 15,000 ha; (ii) works and
equipment for livestock in the herding areas; (iii) works and equipment for conservation
of fish; (iv) access road to and within the irrigated area; and (v) extension of electricity
distribution and water supply from the hydroelectric power station to the production area.
Implementation of works will start only when land rights issues have been resolved under
Component I of the Project during phase a).

 Component III: Development of Critical Services and direct support to smallholders and
SMEs: Fonds d'Appui aux Services à Bagré (Matching Grant) (US$12.5 million) - The
objective of this component are: (i) to promote the provision of critical services to Bagré
by the private sector through co-financing technical assistance and capacity building,
which will help alleviate cost for private providers of these critical services to operate in
Bagré, and (ii) stimulate the establishment of small-scale enterprises by helping small
holders to improve their capacity to be able to respond to the need of markets and
increase their competitiveness. Through a Matching Grant program (FASBagré) the
project will: (i) provide conditional partial co-financed grants for service providers; and
(ii) co-finance business development services to smallholders and their associations in
each of the irrigation sites. The FasBagré operating manual is being developed (as a part
in the project implementation manual) to highlight the operating principles and
procedures of the fund, as well as the governance and internal control mechanisms. In
particular, the Matching Grant component will comply with the following key
requirements: (i) the Beneficiary must (a) procure the goods and services for its
subprojects in accordance with the Bank's procurement guidelines, (b) assure that the
subproject is based on and comply with the Project's safeguards instruments; (c) comply
with the Bank's Anti-corruption Guidelines and to this end, (d) maintain an appropriate
financial management system and be prepared to have its project accounts audited by
independent auditors acceptable to the Bank; and (ii) the threshold Matching Grant
amount above which Bank prior approval should be sought is CFAF 50 million. Annex 2
provides a detailed description and functioning of the Matching Grant including
eligibility criteria.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project will be located around the catchment and the command areas of the Bagré
hydro-power dam, the second largest dam in Burkina Faso, and located 240 km south-
east of the capital city, Ouagadougou. The overall Bagré Development Zone covers about
500,000 hectares around the lake created by the dam, with 57,800 hectares of irrigable
land downstream the dam, called "zone de concentration" (ZC), of which 7,400 hectares
can be irrigated through gravity irrigation, i.e without pumping. So far, this potential has
not been fully tapped and only 2,380 hectares have been developed by the Government,
including 1,880 hectares with donors' funding. In addition to the dam which generates 16
MW to the national grid and the irrigation schemes, other investments in the area include
a fish farming facility, an animal food production plant and an ecotourism center. The
Development Zone also includes two pastoral development areas covering 7,000
hectares, and one protected wildlife area of about 10,000 hectares, and which house 900
crocodiles and around 100 hippopotamus.

 Although the Project's intervention areas is delineated (in the 50,000 hectares), specific
investments, irrigation sites and their precise location will come out of the Zone
Development Plan of the Bagré broader area that is being prepared by the Government,
and along with the specific Development Plan for the concentration zone. The specific
boundaries and location of the sites to be developed by the Project, as well as of the other
investments proposed under Project Component II, including livestock related
investments, upgrading transformers and extension of the power grid, improving and
extending water supply and road networks, and developing the industrial/business
platform, will be defined by the aforementioned Zone Development Plan. This Zone
Development Plan is being prepared based on soil quality, optimal location aiming at
maximizing economic and financial benefits, whilst minimizing negative environmental
and social impacts.

 The main environmental safeguards issues for the Project are related to air and water
pollution, construction waste management, water abstraction and changes to water
outflows from the rivers and associated impacts on downstream human needs and aquatic
habitats, and biodiversity.

 The project will provide financing for the implementation of selected infrastructures
subject to the finalization of the Zone Development Plan, and the completion of
feasibility studies and technical designs. Once the sites and the scope of works are
identified, ESMPs and RAPs will be prepared, consulted upon, reviewed by the Bank and
disclosed.

 The most important social safeguards will be related to land use and allocation, and
associated compensation resettlement issues. The Bagré development zone has attracted a
cosmopolitan population, including a variety of local ethnicities (in addition to the local
Bissa population) and foreigners (e.g. Togolese and Ghanaian). The delicate social
equilibrium risks becoming unstable with increased demand for and value of land in the
Zone resulting from the Project and from a significant demographic expansion. Local
population may perceive the influx of migrants and immigrants as a threat to their
communal and customary interests. Although it is expected that the Project will have
major positive social impact through the creation of thousands of qualified jobs, the
social impact assessment will be completed and updated by Board date to assess the
social as well as to recommend mitigation measures. Particular attention will be given to
the linkages between the small holders and large agribusiness firms, the impact on the
fauna and flora, a communication strategy and consultation and complaints handling
mechanisms.

 The project aims to introduce, along the process of preparing the Zone Development
Plan, an inclusive decision-making process whereby keys stakeholders, namely the
private sectors, local communities, the Government at central and local levels, are part of
decisions that involves the (re-)allocation of land and water resources, as well as the
access to the project benefits, in particular the matching grants. The project's design
allows for flexibility in the number and size of the sites, whereby each site will be
adapted to the category of beneficiaries agribusiness firms, small farmers/producers and
their associations, small enterprises, service providers etc.- and their respective business
plans. Local communities have conveyed their agreement on this approach after a number
of information events have been conducted.

  The treatment of environmental and social issues is consistent with the project's
approach, which provides a framework with sufficient detail to attract private partners,
but flexibility to adjust the final sites and conditions to respond to interests of the private
sector. For that reason, although the general Project area has been identified, the specific
sites will be selected and approved under component 2 during Project implementation
and it is impossible at this stage to prepare the site specific environmental and social
safeguard documents. Accordingly, the environmental and social Management
framework and the resettlement framework documents are the appropriate instruments in
this case. Both framework documents have been prepared, consulted upon and disclosed
in country and at the Infoshop.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS)
   Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                   X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project will finance primary and secondary canals for small, medium-to-large scale
irrigation and associated demand driven subprojects in the Concentration Zone
downstream the existing Bagré Dam. It will also finance the construction/rehabilitation of
paved and feeder roads, as well as the establishment of an industrial park. Some of these
infrastructures may have major environmental and social impacts. Technical feasibility
studies are scheduled to be carried out during the first year of project implementation, as
part of the preparation of the broader area's Zone Development Plan and the
concentration Zone's Development Plan, and will include site specific land use and water
resources management plans. The main environmental safeguards issues for the project
relate to air and water pollution, construction waste management, water abstraction and
changes to water outflows from the rivers and associated impacts on downstream human
needs and aquatic habitats, and biodiversity.

  Environmental Categorization and Safeguard Policies Triggered. The project is
classified as a Category A operation, because of key investments in large scale irrigation,
mainly, and other sectoral activities. These irrigation investments may have adverse but
limited environmental impacts on water resources, for the most part, and will require the
resettlement of some local communities. The project triggers the following safeguard
policies: (1) OP/BP 4.01 for Environmental Assessment; (2) OP/BP 4.04 for Natural
Habitats; (3) OP/BP 4.09 for Pest Management; (4) OP 4.11 for Physical Cultural
Resources; (5) OP/BP 4.12 for Involuntary Resettlement; (6) OP/BP 4.37 for Safety of
Dams; and (7) OP/BP7.50 for Projects on International Waterways.

 The Environmental Assessment Policy (OP/BP 4.01) is triggered because of direct
potential impacts associated with irrigated agriculture development such as soil and water
pollution during construction, construction waste disposal issues, burrowing and
impoundment of water and significant changes to the environment. The Borrower has
prepared an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to address the
potential environmental and social adverse impacts of the Project. These include water-
borne diseases, especially malaria, as health threats in the area may be exacerbated by
irrigation extension. Irrigation may have also a negative impact on the water quality
associated with the use of fertilizers and pesticides, as well as on the water-table level and
contamination due to a poor drainage. The proliferation of aquatic invasive plants is also
a threat with irrigation investments that will require close monitoring, prevention and
treatment. The ESMF provides guidance and measures, with the associated
implementation arrangements and cost outlays for preventing and mitigating all these
potential impacts.

 The Natural Habitats Policy (OP/BP 4.04) is triggered because unmitigated irrigation
development may have an impact on the remnants of natural habitats, mostly downstream
of the command area where deforestation and land clearing activities may be expected.
The implementation of the Project would ultimately lead to the conversion of at least
21,000 ha of shrubby savannah in the Zone de Concentration into vast irrigation schemes.
These irrigation schemes will have adverse impacts on natural habitats in the project
intervention area, though the baseline analysis, does not define this area as critically
sensitive natural habitats. Two sanctuaries commonly known as Refuges des
hippopotames de Woozi, were created and established into Protected Areas (Pas) after the
construction of the Bagré Dam in 1993. The construction of the dam created a 25,500 ha
reservoir that submerged the Lenga pond, which was the area of predilection for the
hippos. Today deprived of their real habitats, the hippos wander along the river banks in
search for a new balance and this leads to competition between local communities and the
hippos for survival. The cohabitation of local communities/hippopotamus is increasingly
becoming a problem, born of the creation of the reservoir of the Bagré Dam, which has
submerged, the vital domain of hippos.

  In addition, although a buffer zone (100 m width around the lake) has been delineated,
by law, as the minimum distance of the river banks from any agricultural production
lands, it has not been really implemented. Indeed, some farmers are still gardening within
the buffer zone. As a measure to offset some of the impacts of irrigation development in
the Zone de Concentration, the Project (see description under Component I) will finance
an integrated natural resources management initiative that aims to promote long-term
local development ensuring the preservation of natural resources, reducing conflicts
between men and hippos through integrated management of natural resources. It will help
reconcile the conservation of the Woozi hippos and local populations and their socio-
economic activities and livelihood and prevent the degradation of the reservoir by
siltation. This initiative includes (i) the implementation of a natural resources
management i.e. developing the infrastructures, building communities, rural communes
and private operators capacities, creating awareness and stimulating them to invest in
developing and promoting ranching and ecotourism activities; and (ii) the restoration of
selected sensitive areas through reforestation and grassing, as well as the enforcement of
the buffer zone. Also, to minimize the potential risks to natural habitats for the remaining
irrigation perimeters planned under this Project, preservation of such habitats will be a
central focus in feasibility and EAs/EMPs studies to be undertaken.

 The Pest Management Policy (OP 4.09) is triggered due to potential expansion,
intensification of agricultural activities, and diversification into high-value crops that
often require usage of more frequent and combinations of agro-chemicals, though
procurement of pesticides is not envisaged under the Project. A Pest Management Plan
(PMP) has been reviewed by the World Bank and published in Country and at the World
Bank Infoshop. The PMP adopted will be included in the implementation manual to
address pest management issues that may arise in Project site due to both area expansion
under irrigation and expected increased productivity associated pesticide use. Resources
have been allocated to implement the pest management plan.

 The Physical Cultural Resources Policy (OP 4.11) is triggered because Burkina Faso, as
a country, is viewed as a rich cultural heritage area. Though it is unknown at this time
which sites may contain such resources, it was judged prudent to use caution when
implementing the productive investments, especially with the prospect of large irrigation
schemes, where land resources will remain flooded for a long period. Dispositions taken
for subsequent environment and social due diligence will involve ensuring that ESIAs
consultants and contractors are able to do the due diligence on, or are teamed up with
Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) experts to ensure that impacts on PCR are assessed
and mitigation measures commensurate to those impacts, including proper handling of
chance finds are implemented in the design, in accordance with national and World Bank
policies.

 The Project team and implementers will ensure that the proposed mitigation measures
are derived from Projects and subproject specific ESIAs/EMPs, and more specifically: (i)
have been discussed and agreed upon by concerned parties; (ii) include an assessment of
the capacity to implement the measures; and (iii) are acceptable within the national
regulatory and legal framework, including laws and regulations concerning cultural
heritage and antiquities.

  The Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) is triggered because the irrigation network
(primary and secondary canals), the land development and possible land consolidation by
the project, the construction/rehabilitation of paved and feeder roads, as well as the
development of an industrial park may all have major resettlement impacts. OP 4.12 is
triggered not only when land acquisition is evident but also where there is no physical
relocation and project activities impact assets or restrict access to other natural resources
or negatively impact on livelihoods.

 In particular, the ESMF, the Resettlement Policy Framework and a Social Impact
Assessment prepared by Government anticipated a number of safeguards related issues,
in connection with the future development of the area. One of those is related to land
management, compensation and resettlement issues
  The potential re-settlement of local populations and the allocation of land for State and
private investors pose substantial risks to the Project. Annex 9 of the Project Appraisal
Document (PAD) deals specifically with land related issues. This annex identifies major
issues that the Project will be addressing including the legacy issues and the treatment of
local customary rights, discusses the legal framework, and outlines the main criteria and
milestones that will border the land allocation process, which will further be detailed in
the Project Implementation Manual. In particular, in addition to providing adequate
compensation to project affected people (PAPs), the Project will facilitate the inclusion
of local population through various provisions outlined in the PAD and support to
existing and resettled occupants of land with valid land rights claims to obtain formal
legal title to the land that they are allocated. Indeed, A key role of the project will be to
ensure that the land allocation and titling process is properly handled within the relevant
legal framework and in compliance with the Bank’s OP 4.12.

  To support the land allocation process, the project has already funded the following
studies that will be delivered during the first year of project implementation: (i) a zone
development plan (Schema directeur), with land allocation map, prefeasibility and
feasibility studies (APS), as well as full-design (APD) for irrigation scheme, inland
valleys, roads, electricity, and bidding documents (DAO); and (ii) a zone promotion, and
assistance to the zone development in order to attract potential investors, facilitate
linkages between private sector and small holders and local population.

 Also, a Political Economy and Governance Diagnostic of the Bagre Growth Pole Project
was conducted with the Governance Partnership Facility funds and its recommendations,
which were based on local consultations, have been incorporated into the design of the
process for land allocation under the Project, including the establishment of a Grievance
Redress mechanism.

  Furthermore, since the scope and other details of site to be developed including the
exact locations of the infrastructure are not yet determined, a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) has been prepared and disclosed both in country (February 1, 2011)
and at the Bank’s InfoShop (February 9, 2011) respectively. Based on discussions on
land tenure issues during appraisal and post-appraisal, and also taking into account
Project activities to support the land allocation process in the Project Area and their
implications for local populations, the RPF was revised and re-disclosed on May 18,
2011. The RPF document outlines the principles and procedures for resettlement and or
compensation of subproject-affected people, and establishes standards for identifying,
assessing and mitigating negative impacts of program supported activities. In addition,
the RPF will guide the preparation and implementation of resettlement action plans
(RAPs) for each individual site that triggers the involuntary resettlement policy.

 The resettlement action plans would be prepared in consultation with the affected
individuals and communities. Any Project affected people will be entitled to have access
to the benefits attached to the irrigation scheme at least equivalent in value to the use and
benefits they were receiving from the land, or be compensated for loss of income and
provided alternative land if they do not want to be part of the scheme. Additional
compensation for loss of assets and other losses due to scheme implementation will be
delivered in accordance with OP 4.12, as set out in the RPF and eventual RAPs.
Compensation and resettlement issues will be funded from government funds as indicated
in the RPF. A users’ register and internal grievance mechanism will be maintained by the
existing Nakanbe Water User Committee (Comité Local de l'Eau du Nakanbé) thus
providing the smallholder farmers with contractual rights to use land and to transfer these
rights to their heirs. RAPs preparation and implementation are based on existing laws and
regulations of Burkina as well as the World Bank Policy (OP/BP 4.12). MOB staff will
be provided with training necessary to equip them with the skills to screen investments
activities for impacts, prepare RAPs, and implement activities set out in the RPFs and
subsequent RAPs.

  The Dam Safety Policy (OP 4.37) is triggered because the proposed Project is tightly
associated with the proper functioning of the Bagré Dam, which is the second largest dam
in Burkina Faso. In compliance with OP 4.37, and in addition to the routine inspection
by SONABEL, a dam safety inspection including a review of the dam's Emergency
Preparedness Plan (EPP), has been carried out and cleared by the World Bank. The
inspection concluded that (i) conditions of the works (weir and associated works) is
satisfactory, and the safety assurance system operated by SONABEL is satisfactory; and
(ii) hydrological safety of the dam has recently (2007) been upgraded with the
construction of an ancillary spillway. It recommended that inundation studies, associated
with potential uncontrolled release of water from the reservoir need to be carried out for
updating the Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP), including setting up of an emergency
committee, and conducting a workshop on site to train operational staff and members of
the emergency committee within the in the use of the EPP. Costs for needed equipment
and the study are estimated at US$100,000. Both are being purchased under the PPA.
The implementation by the Recipient of the study's recommendation, including the
creation of the emergency committee and workshop, will be required during the first year
of Project implementation by September 30, 2012.

  The International Waterways Policy (OP/BP 7.50) is triggered by the Project because
the Nakanbe River, upon which the Dam was built, is shared by other countries. It is the
World Bank assessment that the Project will not cause appreciable harm to the other
riparian states, and will not be appreciably harmed by the other riparians' possible water
use, given the small size of the Project and the planned development under its funding.
The Government has notified the riparians of the Project activities and their impact on
water use and sought their no objection through the Volta Basin Authority (VBA), the
authority representing the Nakanbe River riparians. The notification process has been
completed, with the issuance of a no objection letter by the VBA on April 4, 2011. The
team has prepared a Memo to the Africa Region Vice President through the Burkina Faso
Country Director to provide an update of the status of this activity and seek approval to
proceed with Board submission. This approval has been obtained.

 The VBA is an institution established on July 16, 2006 in Lomé, by the Ministers in
charge of water resources of the riparian countries. The Convention of the VBA was
signed by the Heads of State of the riparian countries (Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte
d’Ivoire, Ghana, Mali and Togo) at their first assembly held in Ouagadougou on January
19, 2007 under the auspices of the Government of Burkina Faso.

 According to Title III, Article 6 of the Convention on the Status of the Volta River and
Establishment of the Volta Basin Authority, its mandate is to: (i) promote permanent
consultation tools among the parties for the development of the basin; (ii) promote the
implementation of integrated water resources management and the equitable distribution
of the benefits resulting from their various utilization; (iii) authorize the development of
infrastructure and projects planned by member countries that could have significant
impact on the water resources of the basin; (iv) develop joint projects and works; and (v)
contribute to poverty alleviation and the sustainable development of the Parties in the
Volta River Basin, for better socioeconomic integration in the sub-region.

 The VBA has developed an Integrated Water Resource Management system, which
provides specific guidelines for governance and dialogue, information sharing, resource
management through knowledge building, data compilation, and provision of the
necessary infrastructure for sustainable social development across the basin.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Irrigation investments in Bagré, may have a medium to long term impact on water
cumulative off-takes from the Nakanbé River. The long term social impact is also of
importance, as agricultural development may lead to intense migration within the project
intervention area. One of this operation main thrust is promote water saving irrigation
system and technologies. This will be further supported by sustained dialogue on water
management in Bagré and the proposed measures aimed at reducing water consumption
for irrigation. This will include different measures and incentives to facilitate the
adoption of water saving techniques, as well as a more transparent planning of public and
private investments in the coming years. The objective is also to ensure that Burkina will
respect its international obligations, as set out in the framework of the Volta Basin
Commission, with the other riparian countries.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
During the actual site selection process for irrigation schemes, all alternatives will be
considered and the ESIA studies to be conducted for each of these sites will present all
possible alternatives.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An ESMF, RPF and Pest Management Framework have been prepared for the project
because of lack of site-specific information about the potential scope of specific
investments, including any adverse environmental and social impacts before the
completion of site-specific technical feasibility studies which will be carried out during
the first year of project implementation. The ESMF lays out procedures for screening and
mitigating impacts from construction and operation of the irrigation schemes, and
includes the following: (a) checklists of potential environmental and social impacts and
their sources; (b) procedures for participatory screening of proposed sites and activities
and the environmental and social considerations; (c) procedures for assessing potential
environmental and social impacts of the planned project activities; (d) institutional
arrangements for mitigating, preventing, and managing the identified impacts; (e) typical
environmental management planning process for addressing negative externalities in the
course of project implementation; (f) a system for monitoring the implementation of
mitigation measures; and (g) recommended capacity building measures for environmental
planning and monitoring of project activities. The RPF document outlines the principles
and procedures for resettlement and or compensation of subproject-affected people, and
establishes standards for identifying, assessing and mitigating negative impacts of
program supported activities. In addition, the RPF will guide the preparation and
implementation of resettlement action plans (RAPs) for each individual sub project that
triggers the involuntary resettlement policy.

 Specific ESIAs and RAPs will be prepared for relevant activities before project
implementation along with Environmental Management Plans (EMPs). The ESIAs will
provide mitigation measures for all the potential impacts as a result of the triggering of
the above mentioned safeguard policies.

  The MOB will (except as noted in the following paragraph) carry out the screening for
all investments included in the Project and will determine the actions necessary to
comply with environmental and social safeguard issues. It will determine whether an
environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) and/or resettlement actions plan
(RAP), or both, will be required. The BUNED and its decentralized structure will prepare
appropriate safeguards instruments for each of the sub-projects. The MOB will
commission the preparation of detailed EAs/EMPs and RAPs to be carried out by
independent consultants, based on TORs to be reviewed by BUNED and the World Bank.
The MOB will be responsible not only for the overall implementation of the PMP,
ESMF, RPF and specific safeguard instruments required for specific Project activities
(i.e. ESIAs and/or RAPs), but also for the internal monitoring of proposed mitigation
measures. All site specific safeguard instruments will be submitted to BUNED for
decision before submission to the Bank for review, clearance and disclosure in-country
and at the InfoShop.

 Safeguard related issues (ESIA and RAPs) on business plans and sub-projects
undertaken by Beneficiaries of Matching Grants will be handled by MEBF who will
recruit an environmental and social safeguard specialist. The development and
implementation of safeguards instruments for the subprojects financed under Matching
Grants will be required as part of the Matching Grant application process, through a
standard screening form attached to the ESMF. As in the case of infrastructure financed
under the MOB, the safeguard unit of MEBF will screen all subprojects for
environmental and social categorization to be confirmed by the BUNED who is part of
the matching grant selection committee. All subproject requiring further environmental
and social work (ESIA and/or RAP) will prepare these instruments to be reviewed by
BUNED before submission to the Bank.
 Responsibility and oversight of project’s overall compliance with national and World
Bank safeguard policies will be devolved to the environmental and social specialists
within the MOB and MEBF, as the main persons in charge of project implementation and
monitoring of safeguard aspects. They will be working in close collaboration with
BUNED. BUNED will not only conduct periodic monitoring of project’s compliance with
proposed mitigation of changes, but also changes in environmental resources (i.e., water
and soil quality, flora and fauna, vector ecology, soil erosion etc.) from the baseline.

 Further, all civil works, for developing or expanding irrigation schemes; construction
and rehabilitation activities of other types of infrastructure, will be contingent on broad-
based and sustained consultation with local communities in project’s intervention area.
Mitigation measures for identified environmental and social impacts, including avoiding
or sparing cultural and historical resources and other environmental clauses, will be
properly implemented by contractors, as specified in the safeguard instruments and
bidding documents. Selected contractors and their Resident Engineering Teams will be
required, each, to hire an environmental and social expert, whose role is to ensure
specific environmental and social clauses are fully and adequately implemented and
reported on.

 An agreement setting out the respective responsibilities of MOB and the BUNED on the
one hand and of MEBF and BUNED on the other hand will be concluded, a condition of
effectiveness. The BUNED will be responsible for ensuring the Project activities are
implemented in accordance with national and World Bank environmental and social
management policies. They will work closely with the MOB and MEBF based on an
agreed work plan and deliverables. A budget, has been earmarked to allow BUNED to
carry out its monitoring activities of safeguard measures over the Project’s lifespan. These
cost outlays have been reflected in the PAD.

 In particular, as part of its efforts to mitigate or offset some of the negative impacts, the
project will invest in biodiversity conservation activities. The project will mainly focus
on (i) developing the infrastructures (i.e., water pound, salines, wells , barriers) needed to
increase the growth and reinforce the safety of wildlife populations in the selected
ecosystems within or near the project intervention area, (ii) building communities, rural
communes and private operators capacities, creating awareness and stimulating them to
invest in developing and promoting ranching and ecotourism activities and facilities in
and around the Bagré area; and (iii) supporting the initiation of a sustainable financing
mechanism to ensure mobilization and allocation of public, private, community and
donor resources for investment for the conservation of biodiversity and protected wildlife
areas in Bagré. In addition, the project will promote an environment-friendly irrigation
and production technologies in project sites and includes resources (US$2 million) for
TA to assist the Growth Pole authority built the safeguard unit and capacity for a
sustainable management of resources (indicated above).

 Safeguard Monitoring Mechanisms. Successful implementation of project safeguard
requirements and performance measurement requires regular monitoring and evaluation
of activities to comply with national and Bank safeguard policies. This will also help
ensure that implementation of project safeguard measures are systematically carried out
all throughout the life of the project. To do so, the following verifiable indicators will be
measured, as part of the project global monitoring plan, because environmental and social
management in this operation is, for the most part, governed by safeguard frameworks:
(i) Number or % of sub-projects screened on environmental and social safeguard
grounds; (ii) Number or percentage of subprojects needing specific ESIAS and/or RAPs;
(iii) Number or percentage of ESIAs conducted with costed Environment Management
Plans (EMPs) and/or Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs); (iv) Contractor bidding
documents with specific environmental and social clauses; (v) Number/Frequency of
annual Safeguard supervision and project reviews undertaken; and (vi) Number training
programs carried out for safeguard capacity strengthening.

 Borrower capacity. The Borrower is familiar with World Bank safeguards policies and
has reasonable capacity implementing numerous bank-funded projects in nearly all
sectors and, in particular after several generations of irrigated agricultural projects. With
this operation, the Project is not only building on many years of experience implementing
World Bank-funded projects, but also on lessons learned from implementation of those
operations. This provides the Project Team and relevant actors a good framework for
smooth implementation of safeguards measures. The safeguard instruments include
further provisions for capacity strengthening at all levels for the successful
implementation of the Project safeguard measures, in compliance with national and
World Bank safeguard policies. Specific attention is taken to strengthen the MOB and
MEBF to adequately implement and monitor safeguards measures, with the assistance of
BUNED.

  Arrangements for Safeguards Supervision. In case RAPs are implemented in the context
of specific project activities, a final evaluation of the RAP implementation will be
prepared by an independent consultant after all civil works implementation. The
supervision of safeguards implementation for the Project will be done as part of the
overall project implementation, by the social safeguard specialists of MOB and MEBF in
conjunction with the BUNED. World Bank supervision teams will also include the
environmental and social safeguards specialists on the team. To ensure effective World
Bank supervision, the Project Environmental and Social Unit will prepare and update
detailed reports on the implementation of ESMF, RPF and PMP, as well as activity
specific EMP and/or RAP, whichever is applicable, before World Bank supervision
missions. Appropriate budget for project supervision will be included in the Project
financial evaluation. Given the categorization of the project and the level of corporate
risk involved in this operation, the Bank will allocate sufficient resources for safeguard
supervision through the availability of a safeguard specialist within the country.

  Safeguards Requirements in Project Legal Documents. As will be specified in the FA,
the Recipient shall implement the Project in accordance with the guidelines, procedures,
timetables and other specifications set forth in the relevant safeguard documents.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The preparation of the safeguard documents (i.e. ESMF, PPM, and RPF) followed a
broad-based and in-depth consultation approach with and interviews of relevant
stakeholder groups in the public and private sectors and civil society. On January 28,
2011, a workshop was convened in Burkina, in which representatives of all the
stakeholders took part. These include Producer Organizations, particularly those within or
in the vicinity of the project intervention area, key Ministries and Government agencies,
in particular Ministries of Agriculture, Environment, Health, Energy, private sector
associations (Maison de l’Entreprise, Chamber of Commerce), the Maitrise d’Ouvrage de
Bagre (MOB), SONABEL, the Plant Protection Agency, pesticides wholesalers and
retailers; Bureau National des Evaluations Environnementales (BUNED), the national
agency in charge of review and enforcement of environmental legislation and regulations;
health care personnel and NGOs. This approach was triangulated with: (i) the review of
existing PMP prepared in the context of completed and on-going Bank-funded projects;
(ii) field work, (surveys, investigations, situation analysis of the study area).

 While local populations were enthusiastic about and confirmed their interest in the
proposed investments, they nonetheless raised a few issues that prevail in current
exploitation and management practices of the Bagré area. Producers and local
Government representatives have requested to be fully involved in the design and
implementation of land allocation process. Chief among the issues participants raised are:
the unavailability of veterinary medicines in the Bagre area; fostering marketing and
commercialization of agricultural produce domestically, as well as in the sub-region;
Fostering a dynamic framework for dialogue and consensus building between crop
producers and livestock producers, strengthened by binding laws and regulations
designed to avoid/minimize conflicts between them; concerted efforts and synergy among
sectoral agencies for environmental sustainability in the project intervention area. In
particular, participants wished close involvement of the forestry and nature conservation
departments in the project implementation, in order to minimize deforestation, river
banks degradation; poaching and protected area misuse and mismanagement in the
project intervention zone; proliferation of water borne diseases; existence of prohibited
pesticides, inadequate storage and misuse of pesticides; lack of opportunities of women
in productive agriculture. These concerns have all been reflected in the documents and
appropriate recommendations have been formulated.

 All project safeguard policy instruments (i.e. ESMF, PMP, RPF) have been reviewed
and approved by BUNED and key entities involved in the project safeguard function.

 The ESMF and RPF and PMP have been cleared and disclosed in country on February
1, 2011 and at the Bank's InfoShop on February 9, 2011. In compliance with the triggered
OP 4.37, and in addition to the routine inspection that SONABEL a Dam safety
inspection, assorted with an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP), has been carried out
cleared by the the Regional Safeguard Advisor (RSA). The inspection concluded that (i)
conditions of the works (weir and associated works) is satisfactory, and the safety
assurance system operated by the SONABEL is satisfactory; (ii) hydrological safety of
the Dam has recently (2007) been upgraded with the construction of an ancillary
spillway. It recommended that inundation studies, associated with potential uncontrolled
release of water from the reservoir need to be carried out for updating the Emergency
Preparedness Plan (EPP), including setting up of an emergency committee, and
conducting a workshop on site to train operational staff and members of the emergency
committee within the in the use of the EPP. The necessary equipments is estimated by the
report at US$100,000 are being purchased under the PPA. The creation of the emergency
committee and workshop will be done during the first year of project implementation,
before September 2012.

  Specific ESIAs and RAPs will be prepared (as part of annual work plans for the Project
to be furnished to IDA for its prior approval) for relevant Project activities before their
implementation along with Environmental Management Plans (EMPs). The ESIAs will
provide mitigation measures for all the potential impacts as a result of the triggering of
the above mentioned safeguard policies. The process for conducting subsequent ESIAs,
ESMPs and RAPs for specific project investments, derived from the screening procedures
outlined in the ESMF and RPF, will be conducted following the same participatory
framework, consistent with the approach adopted at the project inception. They will be
prepared, reviewed by the Bank, consulted upon, and disclosed both in-country and at the
Bank’s InfoShop. Executive summaries of the ESIAs will be submitted to the Executive
Directors. Relevant provisions from the various sets of safeguard documents will be
reflected in the PIM.

 Borrower commitment to implement the provisions of the safeguards instruments will
be included as specific covenants in the project legal documents, including a dated
covenant with respect to preparation of ESIAs and RAPs in a form and substance
satisfactory to IDA. Signed entitlement certificates will be issued to people to be resettled
under the project.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01/21/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  02/01/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   02/09/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01/21/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  02/01/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   02/09/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 01/21/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             02/01/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              02/09/2011
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                      Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                     Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or    Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
  OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
  Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                           Yes
  Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts      Yes
  (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
  Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements        Yes
  been made for public awareness and training?
  OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
  Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         Yes
  If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           No
  requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
  to the RVP prepared and sent?
  Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        No
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Djibrilla Adamou Issa                     05/31/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Amadou Konare                             05/31/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni                        05/31/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                     05/31/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Vincent Palmade                           05/31/2011
  Comments:
