                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC5131


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/31/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Burkina Faso                          Project ID: P119662
Project Name: Burkina Faso - Bagre Growth Pole Project
Task Team Leader: Djibrilla Adamou Issa
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 28, 2011 Estimated Board Date: June 23, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTFW                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: Agricultural marketing and trade (30%);General industry and trade sector
(30%);Micro- and SME finance (20%);Agro-industry (20%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%);Other financial and
private sector development (30%);Small and medium enterprise support (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):          115.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               8.70
        Local Sources of Borrowing Country                              10.00
        Financing Gap                                                    0.00
                                                                        18.70


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed project development objective is to support the Government of Burkina Faso in
developing Bagre as a functional model of agribusiness growth pole.

 The PDO’s related performance indicators is the (i) increase in private investment -domestic
and foreign- as a result of improved physical conditions and business environment in the Growth
Pole; (ii) number of jobs created; (iii) value of production in Bagre. During project preparation
the team and Government will agree on key PDO indicators based on available baseline and
M&E system.

 Intermediate key outcomes indicators will be: (i) number of irrigated hectares developed (ii)
number of enterprises created; (iv) number of firms benefiting from the matching grant.
 This will be achieved through (i) strengthening Burkina institutional capacity for investment
and export promotion; (ii) providing critical infrastructure and services in Bagre; (iii) providing
incentives for attracting international and private investors in Bagre.

 With the proposed project, Burkina would start implementing its accelerated and sustainable
growth strategy based on the growth pole approach.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
Overall approach. It appears from the various policy and strategy documents that to support the
private sector-led growth in commercial agriculture, actions need to be taken in a number of
mutually-supportive areas to create a minimum platform for private sector development. This
platform is a combination of elements including (i) strengthening support for technical and
business management skills thereby improving productivity at the firm level; (ii) strengthening
the linkages with the regional/global economy as well as promoting a conducive business
environment including financial services especially reducing high cost of finance and
improvement of access to finance, trade and investment facilitation regulations and institutions
and; (iii) development of critical infrastructure and services such as energy (electricity, fuel),
roads, communication/connectivity, banking facilities; input suppliers; maintenance and repair of
equipment; collective productive infrastructure (storage, cold chain); technical advisory services
(quality), labor both skilled and unskilled.

  The Bagre Growth Pole Project will be a Government supported growth Pole where additional
public investment will be made to complement what has been already made by the Government
(the dam, the lake, the irrigated area etc.) during the past decade, to promote private investments.
The project is seen as a pilot that will have spillover effects to the rest of the economy and could
serve as model for other growth poles included in the Government development plan (Lake Bam,
Sourou Valley etc.).

 Primary target groups: the project will focus on private operators and investors, producers and
their organizations, SMEs, public institution in charge of export and investment promotion and
agriculture private sector development. The ultimate beneficiaries will be rural and urban
household living in and around the growth pole. A spillover demonstration effect is also
expected from the project. The project is designed around the following components:

 Component A -Improving Investment Climate and Institutional Capacity for Investment and
Export Promotion: The objective of this component is to tackle key investment climate issues
that constraints the development of private investment and exports, especially from the Bagre
Growth Pole. In this regard, the project will support the followings:

 a) The setting up of a New Zone Authority to implement the special regime of Bagre (Zone
d'Utilité Publique) granted by the Government. The new institution will include the current
Bagre Development Agency (MOB) and its design will be based on an integrated, multi-sector
approach drawing support from across line ministries and agencies, utility companies as well as
regional and local authorities and the private sector and have authority. A private company for
the management and the operation of the zone under the oversight of a New Zone Authority will
be also supported and funded by the project. The New Zone Authority will have the mandate for
all aspects of promotion, the planning, development and management of the zone including the
legal mandate to allocate land titles and enter into lease contracts. In addition, the New Zone
Authority will be accountable for the private provision of all utilities and services through the
private company funded by the project that will be responsible for managing the zone. The
project will provide resources for training, technical assistance, and institutional support, which
will help build lasting capacity of the New Zone Authority, and Government and non-
governmental entities involved in the project.

 (b) The strengthening of institutions for investment promotion: the project will complement
PSD project focusing on strengthening the capacity of MEBF in the area of agribusiness and
improving its ability to deliver adequate services to investors aiming at settling in the Growth
Pole. The Project will support (i) consulting services and workshop to MEBF for business
planning , training of its staff, organizing investors forum, designing and implementing M&E
system for tracking volumes, quality an impact of private investments in the growth pole;
development of communication and promotion tools; (ii) consulting services, works, training,
equipment and furniture, and operating cost for at least two year for establishment and
functioning of a MEBF Branch to be hosted by the New Zone Authority in Bagre;

 (c) Support to implement a PPP regulatory framework: A PPIAF fund has been secured to assist
in designing the PPP regulatory framework. The project will fund subsequent work and technical
assistance associated with the implementation of Bagre Growth Pole. The project will also assist
the Government in monitoring the implementation of the PPP framework once adopted and help
in identifying and taking corrective measures as necessary. The project will also collaborate with
IFC and the PSD Project in their efforts to address other business environment related issues
such as investment legislation, tax and Customs regimes, governance, cross-border trade
facilitation, and implementation of the new land tenure legislation .

 Component B - Development of Critical Infrastructure: The objective of this component is to
design and finance key public infrastructures in support to private investments, and develop an
effective management framework for its sustainable management. Such infrastructures will
complement investment already made by the Government in terms of primary irrigation network,
road and electricity grid. During preparation, the Government will review and update the existing
Bagre development plan, and will revisit the zone boundaries (which appear to be demarcated
rather arbitrarily now), to ensure its agro-ecological and administrative cohesiveness. Under this
component, the project will support the following activities:

 (a) Development of a land and natural resources monitoring and management tools: this would
entail the establishment an integrating GIS-based management system including zoning and land
use plans, land registration and transaction monitoring database, ground and surface water as
well as flora and fauna monitoring network. The project would support the New Zone Authority
through consultant and non consultant services, equipment and operating costs for the design and
the implementation of the system, which will also be used to gauge the area resilience to climate
change.

 (b) Designing and implementation of a phased irrigation and transport infrastructure
development plan and a site development plan. The project will finance the irrigation primary
network for land to be allocated to private sector, the construction of complementary paved
(15km) to connect the production areas, and the rehabilitation of the road to Ghana Border.

 (c) Designing and implementation of a phased extension of the electrical grid to production
areas. The project will facilitate the electricity connection from the dam to the irrigated areas by
funding the necessary infrastructure/equipment to make industrial power available. Connection
to affordable electrical service will induce change in irrigation technologies toward costless and
environment friendly pumping technologies, and is key to ensuring reliable cold chains and to
agro-processing activities.

 Component C - Incentive Fund for Development of SMEs and Critical Services: The objective
of the a matching grant Fonds d'Appui aux Services à Bagré (FASBagré) is to encourage soft and
small investments to help alleviate cost for private service providers and encourage them to
operate in Bagre. The fund consists of the following windows:
 (a) Window for services providers: it will provide technical assistance and small investments
to covers start up cost, marketing or product design; professional training etc. for companies that
provide services in the areas of communication/connectivity (internet providers), input suppliers,
providers of maintenance and repair services, energy providers (fuel services etc.), banking
facilities and facilitation of access to finance for long-term investments;

  (b) Windows for small farmers, their association and agribusiness SMEs: this window will
part of the cost associated with collective productive infrastructure such as equipment and
secondary and tertiary irrigation networks, storage, packaging and other cold chain facilities;
technical advisory services (business planning, extension, quality and standards, facilitation of
out-growers schemes etc.). It will also help small holders to make the necessary investment and
capacity development to be able to respond to the need of larger firms and markets and increase
competitiveness. The following investment expenses are eligible on a cost sharing basis, as long
as the SMEs can demonstrate that they lead to an increase in competitiveness and generate
revenues and or employments: new equipment and equipment upgrading; infrastructure
upgrading; non financial services, such as marketing or product design; professional training and
a mix of the above investments.

 Initially, the FASBagré is solely funded by the Bagré Growth Pole Project and will focus on
enterprises that will be operating in Bagré. It will be managed by the local Branch of the MEBF
which will be established under Component A.
 Component D- Project Coordination: The project will support the Growth Pole Inter-ministerial
Steering committee and its secretariat with the Ministry of Finance in its mandate to coordinate
and supervise activities of the implementing agencies (MEBF and NZA-MOB). The project will
support consulting services and workshop for project activity planning, supervision and
evaluation, and provision for technical studies for two other growth poles (Sourou Valley and the
Bam Lake) to set the stage for their future development based on Bagre experience.

D. Project location (if known)
While capacity building activities and institutional strengthening of investment and export
promotion will benefit the country as a whole, investment activities will take place in the Bagre
Growth Pole, which will covers an area of 500,000 hectares in the administrative regions of
Tenkodogo.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Borrower knows and has already experienced Bank safeguard policies with other bank-
funded projects in the agriculture and rural development sector. However, institutional capacities
for Safeguard Policies implementation and supervision remain uneven at projects level, and will
be assessed during project preparation. Specific capacity building activities will be included in
project implementation.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS)
   Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No           TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
    Although the project intervention area is delineated around the Bagré Dam, options for public
infrastructures and scale and substance of sub-projects under the Development services Fund are
not yet known. Therefore and Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will
be developed. The ESMF will formulate standard methods and procedures, along with
institutional arrangements for screening, review, approval and implementation and monitoring
specific Environment Management Plans (EMPs) for sub-project under the Incentive Fund. An
Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) will be carried out for each irrigation infrastructure, road
and energy infrastructure once determined. The ESMF will be submitted to ASPEN for
clearance and will be disclosed in-country and Infoshop before appraisal and a 120 days before
Board.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                    X
    The potential for triggering OP 4.04 will be assessed in the context of the preparation of the
ESMF.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                               X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                              X
    Although procurement of pesticides is not envisaged under the project, it is expected that the
necessary intensification of cultivation techniques and the diversification into marketed crops
will possibly lead to an increased use of pesticides, as well as that of inorganic fertilizers. The
Government of Burkina Faso has recently developed a Pest Management Plan for the PFASP
which also be applicable to this project. It is also expected that the project export orientation
will facilitate introduction of world standard in sanitary and phytosanitary standards. The project
will update existing PMP and submit it to ASPEN for clearance. The PMP will be disclosed in-
country and InfoShop before appraisal and 120 days before Board, in compliance with the Pelosi
Amendment.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                           X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                    X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                  X
    Given that the specific sites or impacts of envisioned physical investments are not known, a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) consistent with OP 4.12 will been prepared by the
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes          No          TBD
Borrower, reviewed and cleared by ASPEN and disclosed in-country and at Bank InfoShop prior
to appraisal. The RPF will be used as a guide to conduct specific Resettlement Action Plans
(RAPs) as needed, as they relate to land acquisition and loss of economic activities issues, as
well as compensation measures to minimize negative impacts on Project Affected People
(PAPs). The RPF will be submitted to ASPEN for clearance and will be disclosed in-country
and Infoshop before appraisal and a 120 days before Board.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                         X
    As the project success will depend on the proper functioning of the Bagre Dam, the
Government will prepare a Dam Safety Measures report, to ensure that such facilities are
designed, built/rehabilitated, operated and maintained safely and to ensure that a suitable
emergency/disaster response regime that secures life and property, is in place. The Dam Safety
Measures report, will also be disclosed in Burkina, and sent to the Bank for disclosure at the
Infoshop, prior to Bank appraisal of this project.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                    X
    The Government will notify its fellow Riparians in compliance with this policy, prior to
Bank appraisal of this project.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                          X


Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 06/08/2010

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.

        The EIA will be launched in April 2010 once investment options for public infrastructure
       are determined. First draft report will be available for the QER. Final report will be submitted
       for ASPEN review and disclosure around August 20, 2010 before appraisal to comply with
       the four-month period prior Board presentation.




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Mr Djibrilla Adamou Issa   05/31/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   05/31/2011
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Mr Vincent Palmade         05/31/2011
   Comments:
