                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC6008


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/30/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Burundi                               Project ID: P097974
Project Name: Multisectoral Water and Electricity Infrastructure Project
Task Team Leader: Peggy Mischke
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change               Global Supplemental ID: P117225
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 30,        Estimated Board Date: February 3, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: AFTEG                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: District heating and energy efficiency services (100%)
Theme: Climate change (67%);Infrastructure services for private sector development
(33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              2.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                1.30
        GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - Associated IDA Fund                         29.50
                                                                         30.80


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The project’s global environmental objective is to selectively improve the energy efficiency of
buildings in Bujumbura city and to strengthen the policy frameworks for energy efficiency. The
project will result in GHG emission reductions from the energy saved through the use of energy
efficient equipment.

 The GEF energy efficiency project will be operationally blended with electricity sector
investments under the IDA financed Multisectoral Water and Electricity Infrastructure Project
(MSWEIP). The MSWEIP was approved by the World Bank Board of Directors on May 13,
2008, and is currently been implemented by the energy and water utility REGIDESO.

 The project development objective of the MSWEIP is to: (i) increase access to water supply
services in peri-urban areas of Bujumbura; (ii) increase reliability and quality of electricity
services; (iii) increase water supply quality and reliability in Bujumbura; and (iv) strengthen
REGIDESO#s financial sustainability. The MSWEIP is helping REGIDESO to restore its
financial and commercial viability and the quality and continuity of services in the face of the
increasing demand from individual consumers and economic agents. The MSWEIP has been
designed to provide a balance between immediate needs and medium- to long-term planning. It
addresses to the urgent need to fill the current gaps between supply and demand in both
electricity and water supply. At the same time, the project supports long term planning activities
and studies, as well as the strengthening of the operational capacity of the main sector
institutions in order to avoid or effectively reduce future gaps.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
GEF financed activities will scale up the scope and effectiveness of REGIDESO#s demand side
management program, that represents Burundi#s first consistent and coordinated energy
efficiency program since the end of the country#s long term conflict. GEF resources will be
targeted to scale up the distribution and promotion of compact fluorescent lights (CFLs) and
other energy efficient technologies and appliances, support the implementation of energy
efficiency measures identified from a utility energy audit and the promotion of energy efficiency
investments to large consumers, and introduce standards, labels and guidelines for energy
efficient appliances. Continuous advisory support and technical assistance will be provided to
increase technical, managerial and organizational capacities for energy efficient technologies and
practices. GEF resources are also allocated to ensure proper project management, monitoring and
evaluation.

  The proposed GEF components include:
  #      Component A1: Scaling up distribution and promotion of compact fluorescent lights
(CFL) # the first phase of the distribution and promotion of 200,000 CFLs under the IDA-
financed MSWEIP will be scaled up, additional 200.000 CFLs will be procured and distributed
  #      Component A2: Scaling up media and awareness raising campaigns for energy efficiency
products - the first phase participatory media and awareness raising campaign under the
MSWEIP (including advertisement tools such as leaflets, radio and television spots, newspaper
supplements, and banners in public places, disseminated both in French and translated in the
local language Kirundi) supported by the MSWEIP will be scaled up to provide continuous
capacity building and consumer advise on the use of a variety of energy efficient products,
including environmental, economic, safety, and health aspects.
  #      Component A3: Scaling up technical and managerial capacity building # including
workshop series to raise awareness of government agencies (ministries, regulatory and inspection
authorities), private sector players, and standardization institutes on energy efficient products and
appliances
  #      Component B2: Technical Assistance and small scale energy efficiency investments in
buildings to implement energy efficiency measures - small scale energy efficiency investments
identified in an utility energy audit (ongoing under the MSWEIP) might include electronic
ballasts, timers to regulate the use of air conditioners, and solar water heaters in public
institutions (such as government and institutional buildings)
  #      Component C1: Energy efficiency advice to large public institutions, commercial and
industrial consumers # including technical assistance to build capacity of local auditors and
REGIDESO staff to provide energy efficiency advice to large public institutions, commercial
and industrial consumers
 #      Component C2: Develop standards, labels, and guidelines for energy efficient equipment
and an appropriate energy efficiency building code # including the development of a energy
standards and labels program for energy efficient lighting and air-conditioning; guidelines for the
use of solar water heaters; and the development of an appropriate energy efficiency building
code.
 #      Support to project management.

 A summary of the MSWEIP components is provided below:

 MSWEIP Component 1 - Electricity (US$ 29.5 million). This component focuses on restoring a
quality electricity supply by financing major rehabilitation of the backbone transmission and
distribution grid and increasing generation capacity while financing demand side activities to
increase efficiency and reduce consumption at peak hours. In addition, the component addresses
medium to long term energy needs by supporting technical studies on alternative energy sources
and the preparation of bidding documents for the next increments of small and large sized
hydropower plants.

  MSWEIP Component 2 - Water (US$14.1 million). This component will focus on reducing
leakage, selectively rehabilitating and expanding production facilities and networks, extending
the service to unserved peri-urban areas of Bujumbura and preparing technical studies and tender
documents for some secondary centers. An update of Bujumbura#s water master plan, which was
done as part of project preparation, will guide the implementation of the sub-components below.
In addition, the project will fund a study to support the development of improved sanitation in
urban areas.

  MSWEIP Component 3 - Institutional (US$3.3 million). The objective of this component is to
enhance the ability and effectiveness of the public-public partnership between REGIDESO and
the Government to deliver improved electricity and water services. Specifically, the component
is helping REGIDESO to (i) meet specific performance indicators to improve operational and
financial performance, through the execution of a performance contract with the state; (ii) assist
REGIDESO in launching a delegated standpost kiosk management program in the periphery of
Bujumbura to improve service delivery at existing and new standposts; and (iii) improve the
planning and monitoring capacities of the MWEM and its ability to provide support to
REGIDESO when needed.

D. Project location (if known)
The project will be implemented in Bujumbura city.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
All energy efficiency activities of the proposed GEF project are fully aligned and similar to the
activities already covered under the MSWEIP safeguard instruments.

 The borrower plans to utilize the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
which has already been adopted for the parent project (MSWEIP). Under the MSWEIP the
following safeguard instruments were prepared and found satisfactory to the Bank: (i) an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and (ii) a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF). The "in-country" disclosure took place on February 6, 2008, and the
documents were submitted to the World Bank#s Infoshop on February 21, 2008. Both documents
were re-disclosed in country and at the World Bank#s Infoshop on June 15, 2010. No long term
adverse impacts were identified in the MSWEIP safeguard instruments, specifying that the
MSWEIP will not fund activities that would cause an adverse effect on the environment or any
form of land acquisition, loss of valuable assets and/or restriction of access to sources of
livelihoods. The potential environmental and social impacts of water and electricity
infrastructure expansion and rehabilitation sub-projects under MSWEIP components 1 and 2 are
assessed as small-scale and site-specific; and thus easily remediable typical of category B
projects. With regards to the demand side management program under the MSWEIP component
1, which includes a first phase of CFL distribution and promotion, no potential negative impacts
on the environment and impacts on people living and/or working on or near the project areas
were identified in the project#s safeguards frameworks. Environmental and Social Management
Plans will be prepared as and when necessary during implementation. Where MSWEIP project
activities will potentially impact negatively on people living and/or working on or near the
project areas, the procedures as described in the project#s resettlement policy framework are
applied. Subsequently, a comprehensive resettlement action plan will be prepared, reviewed and
disclosed accordingly and people will be compensated and/or resettled for any loss that they may
incur due to project activities.

 Significant negative environmental and social impacts are therefore not anticipated from the
implementation of the GEF energy efficiency project. Potential minor environmental and social
impacts of GEF energy efficiency activities are due to the increase of specific solid waste
resulting from the replacement of old, low standard small scale appliances through more energy
efficient ones (such as replacement of incandescent bulbs through compact fluorescent lights), as
well as the tangible management (storage and transformation/destruction) of the CFLs. The
Borrower will ensure that appliances (including CFLs) are disposed properly according to
provisions in the environmental and social safeguard framework (ESMF). In addition, media and
awareness raising campaigns for energy efficiency products will include consumer advice on
potential environmental, safety, and health impacts of CFLs. The No GEF energy efficiency
activities are planned that would result in potential negative social impacts on people living
and/or working on or near the project areas, such as land acquisition and potential physical
resettlement and/or loss of valuable assets.

  An environmental and social specialist is already in place in the REGIDESO PIU and would be
supervising the implementation of the additional energy efficiency components financed by
GEF. The REGIDESO PIU is following up safeguards issues as and when they arise during
project implementation. Capacity building sessions are provided by the MSWEIP safeguards
team or consultants to ensure smooth implementation of key recommendations and safeguards
compliance. MSWEIP safeguard supervision confirms that all safeguard aspects are overall
implemented in a satisfactory manner by REGIDESO.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
   Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTEN)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes         No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                               X
    Significant negative environmental are not anticipated from the implementation of the GEF
energy efficiency project. Potential minor environmental impacts are due to the increase of
specific solid waste resulting from the replacement of old, low standard small scale appliances
through more energy efficient ones, as well as the tangible management (storage and
transformation/destruction) of these appliances.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                   X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                            X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                       X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                        X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                 X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                     X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                         X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   05/30/2011

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   It is proposed that the GEF energy efficiency project will use the existing environmental
   safeguard framework (ESMF) which has been developed and disclosed under the IDA-
   financed MSWEIP first in 2008 and then re-disclosed in 2010.




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Ms Peggy Mischke           06/14/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   06/14/2011
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Ms Anna M. Bjerde          06/14/2011
   Comments:
