                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/01/2012                                      Report No.: AC6691
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Burundi                             Project ID: P126742
Project Name: Health Sector Development Support - Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Andrew Sunil Rajkumar
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 2, 2012        Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2012
Managing Unit: AFTHE                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Health (79%);Public administration- Health (21%)
Theme: Health system performance (29%);Child health (21%);Population and
reproductive health (21%);Malaria (21%);Public expenditure, financial management and
procurement (8%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
         Results-Based Financing                                      14.80
                                                                      14.80
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Additional Financing will keep the original project’s development objective which
is: “to increase the use of a defined pack health services by pregnant women and children
under the age of five. In that regard, the proposed project is fully consistent with both the
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) and the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) as
it aims to increase the access of the population, especially the most vulnerable ones, to
basic health services.?

3. Project Description
The proposed project will be closely integrated with the ongoing decentralization policies
and strongly district focused. It will achieve its development objectives of increasing the
use of a defined free package of health services by pregnant women and children under-
five.

  The proposed Additional Financing (AF) would go mostly towards Result-Based
Financing (RBF) payments for the health sector in Burundi, with a particular emphasis on
free basic health care for pregnant women and under-five children, in line with the
health-related MDGs. The remainder of the AF funds would go towards verification
activities for the RBF payments.

 The ASF will consist of:
 •      Component 1 (US$11.9) – Transfer of Resources to Health Facilities to Pay for
Health Services on Basis of RBF: The proposed A will support the same activities as
Subcomponent 1A of the parent project, and will be administered using the same
implementation, fiduciary and safeguards arrangements. The transfers will reimburse
health facilities for the provision of the specified services, which will comprise
preventative and curative services that are a part of the national RBF program and are
specified in the Program’s Manual. As in the parent project, these will include, in
particular, primary health care and preventative services for pregnant women, delivery of
babies and post-partum care, care for under-five children, family planning services, and
malaria treatment. The activities under this component will follow the implementation
details specified in the national RBF Program Manual, and changes to this Manual will
have to be approved by the Bank.

  •     Health facilities will be paid a pre-agreed tariff for each of the services specified
under the program, in accordance with contracts to be signed by the health facilities. The
tariff will reflect an estimate of the incremental recurrent cost of providing the service
and other indirect costs. Because health facilities in many remote and disadvantaged
areas have a harder time attracting staff, these facilities will receive additional equity
payments. In addition, payments given to health facilities will be adjusted according to a
quarterly quality score. Health facilities will have substantial autonomy to spend the RBF
payments but based on pre-agreed guidelines. There will be strict controls and a solid
verification structure for the reported levels of services and of quality (see below), to
minimize the risk of falsification or errors. All of this is in line with what was agreed
under the original parent project and what is now happening on the ground.

 •       Additional Financing for Component 2 (US$2.9 million) – Supporting
Verification Activities for Results Based Financing Payment This component of the
proposed Additional Financing will support a subset of the activities already supported by
Component 2 of the existing parent project – namely verification activities for the
reported levels of services and for the quality score. This includes: (i) internal
verifications – conducted by verification teams under the newly created Provincial
Verification and Validation Committees (PVVCs) – and validation activities on the part
of the PVVCs, as well as associated activities supporting these units and strengthening
their capacity to perform their functions; and (ii) third-party external verifications
conducted quarterly by an external agency, on a randomly selected sample of health
facilities, and on patients selected randomly from the registers of these health facilities.
This external agency will, among others, verify whether invoices from the facilities
correspond with the amounts that appear in the registers, and visit the homes of the
selected patients to verify if they exist and if they received the reported services. As in
the case of Component 1, this is all ongoing and was agreed under the parent project, and
the same ongoing arrangements will be used for implementation as well as fiduciary and
safeguards aspects.
 The proposed Additional Financing will not cover the activities under Component 2 of
the parent project that are not related to verification for the RBF-supported services.
These activities are not eligible for financing under the HRITF Trust Fund. Similarly, the
Additional Financing will not cover the activities of Subcomponent 1B of the parent
project, which are also ineligible for HRITF financing.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project activities will be implemented throughout the whole country, targeting, in
particular, the most vulnerable groups’ neighborhoods.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Hocine Chalal (AFTEN)
   Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The parent Project had triggered two safeguards policies, namely OP/BP 4.01
(environmental Assessment) due to the generation of biomedical waste at designated
health centers, and OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) due to the potential impacts and
span of coverage of the project which includes the poor and most vulnerable groups
among whom Indigenous Peoples such as the Batwa population. Consequently, the
project has been assigned the environmental and social safeguards category B. The
parent project and this AF operation are not financing the rehabilitation or construction of
medical waste plants or incinerators; however, incinerators will be financed under the
new Burundi: East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project (P129551)
Additional Financing project. Since the issue of medical waste is still relevant to the
proposed AF, the Medical Waste Management Plan prepared for the parent project has
been revised and updated in compliance with O.P. 4.01 requirements. During supervision
of this project proper attention will be given to the implementation of health care waste
management measures prescribed in the MWMP.

 Also, in compliance with O.P. 4.10, the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) developed under
the parent project has been updated to take account of the specific circumstances of this
AF project. When the IPP of the original parent project was formulated, indigenous
peoples such as the Batwa population had very low levels of utilization of health services,
and they were largely excluded from health committees and local associations. The focus
of the original IPP was thus mainly on: (i) sensitizing the indigenous peoples as to the
benefits they could gain from using health services more; and (ii) including them in the
health committees and local organizations. Now, utilization levels among the indigenous
peoples are much higher and they are much more integrated in the health committees and
local organizations. Thus the focus of the updated IPP under the AF is now more on
awareness raising of the indigenous peoples’ rights regarding health care (e.g. the right
for pregnant women and under-five children to have health care fo free under the Free
Health Care policy, and knowing how to use redress mechanisms). Proper attention will
be given to the implementation of core measures, such as ensuring free provision to
indigenous peoples of identity cards and birth certificates which are needed to prove that
a child is aged under five (to be able to benefit from the Free Health Care policy), and
ensuring that the indigenous peoples are aware of their rights (e.g. for under-five children
and pregnant women to have access to the Free Health Care policy), prescribed in the IPP
during supervision missions.

 Moreover, bearing in mind the linkages with the new Additional Financing (for
Burundi) to the East Africa Public Health Laboratory Network Project, the Health Sector
Development Project will refer to and use, as needed, the Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) developed under this regional project and already
disclosed on March 20, 2012 since they target almost the same areas of coverage.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Future activities at health centers’ facilities to be supported under the project are not
expected to have long term detrimental effects, especially as waste management and
environmental and social concerns are being addressed through the MWMP, the IPP and
related documents such as the ESMF developed for the East Africa Public Health
Laboratory Project (parent and AF) that includes rehabilitation /construction of healthcare
waste incinerators.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
As stated earlier, the Government of Burundi has updated its existing MWMP and IPP
prepared under the existing Bank-financed Health Sector Development Support Project
(PADSS- the parent-project) which is being implemented satisfactorily. Together with
the ESMF from the East Africa Public Health Laboratory Network Project, the MWMP
and IPP have been disclosed prior to Appraisal. There is already a dedicated team of
staff in the Ministry of Health (MoH) working on social and environmental safeguards
issues for the PADSS. The same team will be entrusted to further implement
satisfactorily the safeguards for this AF Project. As already is the case, the Social &
Environmental Team (SET) will be guided by and work closely with the World Bank
safeguards team during supervision and throughout the project life cycle. Moreover, as
already agreed upon during the mid-term review mission (MTR), the SET will work in
tandem with “Union pour la promotion des Batwa? (UNIPROBA), a well established
national civil society organizat specialized in working with the Batwa to successfully
implement the IPP, as per the terms of the new memorandum of understanding (MOU)
signed between UNIPROBA and the PADSS. The team and UNIPROBA will further
benefit from additional technical capacity building provided by the Bank team through
series of workshop and in-field training.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The primary beneficiaries are medical practitioners and local communities benefiting
from and using medical facilities, including the poor and most vulnerable groups such as
the Batwa. The update of the two safeguards instruments, namely the MWMP and the
IPP (in additional to the ESMF/ESMP for the East Africa Public Health Laboratory
Network Project) involved series of participatory public consultations to raise awareness,
build ownership to foster more social accountability throughout the life of the project.

  The primary beneficiaries are medical practitioners and local communities benefiting
from and using medical facilities, including the poor and most vulnerable groups such as
the Batwa. More specifically, discussions were held with a number of key stakeholders
starting with members of the project implementation units of the other member countries
and their Burundian counterparts, staff of the World Bank Resident Mission responsible
for the project, staff of the National Institute of Health and the staff of the University
Hospital in Bujumbura. These meetings provided detailed information on the project
design, proposed implementation plan and the safeguards documents prepared for the
Burundi Health Sector Project (IPP &MWMP) and the Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) of the East Africa Laboratory Network Project (that
includes Burundi) plus other important project related information afferent to this AF
project. Additional important discussions were also held at the University Hospital and
INSP (Institut National de la Santé Publique) on the effective and responsive planning
and management of medical waste and the sustainable implementation of the existing
MWMP under the ongoing Burundi Health Sector Development Project and the new AF.
Discussions were also held on the IPP and the continued implementation of the IPP plan
under the proposed project with the effective support from UNIPROBA (Union pour la
Promotion des Batwa, one of the leading national civil society organizations on the
Batwa) recently procured to streamline the sustainable inclusion of BATWA.
  Field investigations comprised visits to some of the selected sites in Bujumbura,
Kayanza and Muyinga in the north, and Rumonge and Makamba in the south of the
country. Discussions were held with hospital and laboratory staff at the National Health
Institute in Bujumbura, the National Tuberculosis and Centre for Disease Control also in
Bujumbura and all hospitals visited in the different parts of the country. The team then
had detailed discussions with the staff of the Burundi Health Sector Development Project,
(i.e. the TTL and resident Health Specialist) and Bank experts in Maputo and Washington
on the safeguard documents and their revision and implementation.

 Hence, as stated above, the update of the two safeguards instruments, namely the
MWMP and the IPP involved series of participatory public consultations to raise
awareness (to gain familiarization with the project and with the existing health
establishments, laboratory facilities and their operations), build ownership to foster more
social accountability throughout the life of the project.

 As consultation and participation is rather an iterative process, thus there will be more
consultation with contractors and implementation units at subproject level, precisely
during implementation of each of the sub projects.

 Finally, under the Additional Financing, the safeguards mechanisms to be used for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies will be those already existing in
Burundi which will be updated as needed to ensure the new activities and populations are
covered.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04/03/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  04/05/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   04/16/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04/03/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  04/05/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   04/16/2012
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Andrew Sunil Rajkumar    03/08/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Hocine Chalal            03/18/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna       03/16/2012
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Alain-Desire Karibwami   03/08/2012
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi    04/30/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Jean J. De St Antoine    04/30/2012
  Comments:
