                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 04/04/2012                                        Report No.: 67914
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P111556                 Original Project Name: East Africa Public
                                             Health Laboratory Networking Project
Country: Africa                              Project ID: P129551
Project Name: Burundi Public Health Laboratory Networking Project
Task Team Leader: Sheila Dutta
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 26, 2012 Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2012
Managing Unit: AFTHE                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Health (100%)
Theme: Health system performance (70%);Tuberculosis (15%);Malaria
(10%);HIV/AIDS (5%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             15
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Additional Financing will keep the original project’s development objective which
is: “To establish a network of efficient, high quality, accessible public health laboratories
for the diagnosis and surveillance of TB and other communicable diseases?.

3. Project Description
The original project includes three mutually reinforcing components which assist Kenya,
Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda to diagnose TB and other communicable diseases of
public health importance and to share information about those diseases to mount an
effective regional response. This additional financing will add Burundi, the only East
African Community member (EAC) not yet included in the original project. The
Additional Financing will follow the same components as the initial project, but will also
include a new activity – a Results-based Financing (RBF) pilot under Component 1:

 Component 1 - Regional Diagnostic and Surveillance Capacity - provides support to
create and render functional a regional laboratory network which aims to enhance access
to diagnostic services for vulnerable group, improve capacity to provide specialized
diagnostic services and conduct drug resistance monitoring; and to strengthen laboratory
based disease surveillance to provide early warning of public health events. With the
additional financing, this component will support five satellite laboratories in Burundi (at
the district hospitals of Kayanza, Rumonge, Makamba, Muyinga, and at the Anti-
Tuberculocis Center of Bunjumbura (CATB)), in addition to the National Reference
Laboratory (in Bunjumbura). Component I will include the following three sub-
components:
  a. Diagnostic Services for Vulnerable Populations in Cross Border which will support
the five satellite laboratories in Burundi to expand access to diagnostic services for
vulnerable groups in cross border areas and to serve as sentinel surveillance sites to
monitor hot spots for disease transmission. Financing will include rehabilitation,
expansion, and/or construction of laboratories at existing hospitals; provision of
laboratory equipment and materials, including waste management equipment and
protective gear to ensure the safety of laboratory personnel; acquisition of computer
equipment, software, and technical support for integrated laboratory information systems
  b. Reference and Specialized Services and Drug Resistance Monitoring which will
bolster the capacities of the Central Public Health Laboratories in the participating
countries and network them to share information, conduct joint training and research, and
collaborate in harmonizing policies and strategies. The project will finance
rehabilitation/construction and lab equipments and materials; computers and
videoconferencing equipment to facilitate sharing of information and link into existing
telemedicine installations where appropriate; TA to support accreditation of satellite labs
and standardization of procedures and protocols; and provision of operating funds.
  c. Disease Surveillance and Preparedness which will complement ongoing regional and
global initiatives to improve Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response (IDSR)
country systems. Bank financing will support strengthening etiological confirmation of
pathogens and promoting active participation of laboratory and other health personnel in
disease surveillance and disease outbreak investigations; establishing and maintaining an
integrated data management system; and facilitating sharing of relevant data across the
sub-region.
  d. Results-Based Financing: The proposed Additional Financing will include an RBF
pilot. This pilot would focus on financial incentives for the national laboratory and five
satellite lab/district hospitals that would aim to strengthen the quality of laboratory
services. Financial incentives would be linked to improving access to quality laboratory
services and introducing quality improvements towards accreditation.

  Component 2 - Joint Training and Capacity Building - aims to support training and
capacity building for laboratory personnel, in order to increase the pool of experts in the
sub-region and to improve the effectiveness of public health laboratories. With the
additional financing, the Bank project in Burundi will finance attendance at training
courses at national and regional institutes; laboratory attachments, fellowships, and
regional exchanges at recognized centers of laboratory excellence; (selective graduate
training required to support specialized services; TA to review and develop standards and
training curricula; and (v) regional workshops to facilitate knowledge sharing.
  Component 3 - Joint Operational Research and Knowledge Sharing/Regional
Coordination and Program Management - will finance operational research and
knowledge sharing activities, which aim to evaluate the impacts of the new TB diagnostic
technologies, assess drug resistance patterns for endemic diseases, and ascertain
feasibility of using mobile phone technologies for surveillance reporting; and support
regional coordination and program management functions.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The initial project countries are Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda. The additional
financing will add Burundi to this list. The project activities are located primarily in cross
border areas of these four countries and/or in densely populated peri-urban areas where
poverty is rampant and slum conditions serve as a breeding ground for the spread of
communicable diseases.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Hocine Chalal (AFTEN)
   Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTHE)
   Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                 X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The East Africa Public Health Laboratory Project had triggered two safeguards policies,
namely OP/BP 4.01 (environmental Assessment) and OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples)
due mainly to the planned construction/rehabilitation of laboratories, as well as the
generation of medical waste at laboratories and the potential impacts on Indigenous
Peoples (Batwa) respectively. Consequently, the project has been assigned the
environmental and social category B. Like in Kenya, in the case of Burundi, the project
has also triggered the Indigenous Peoples Safeguard (OP/BP 4.10)due to the span of
coverage of the project which includes poor and vulnerable groups among whom
indigenous people such as the Batwa population
  The visit to the field during the pre appraisal mission, confirmed that OP 4.12 on
Involuntary Resettlement which was suspected to apply in the case of this project due to
the potential land acquisition for the construction of the laboratories is definitely not
triggered as all construction works will take place within the fenced premises of the
selected hospitals which sites have been reserved for potential future expansion.
Moreover, even within the fenced premises there are no activities that could be viewed as
supporting livelihood.

 During the preparation of the original project, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) that includes an Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP) was prepared to ensure proper assessment and mitigation of
potential adverse environmental and social impacts. The ESMF outlines the steps to be
followed by the borrower in the Environmental and Social Screening Form (ESSF), and
includes Social and Environmental Clauses/Guidelines (SEC/G)for Contractors, a
summary of the Bank's safeguard policies, an Environmental and Social Checklist,
generic Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) terms of reference to be
applied in the event that the screening process results indicate the need for a separate site
specific ESIA that also include an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP).

 In addition, during the preparation of the Burundi Health Sector Development Support
Project, a Medical Waste Management Plan (MWMP) was prepared as well as an
abbreviated Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (IPDP)that was inclusive of the poor
and most vulnerable groups.

 In light of the above, the proposed Burundi Additional Financing will follow the same
safeguards approach as the original project and build pretty much on the ongoing Health
Sector Development Support Project (known as PADSS) to which it is technically linked.
Thus, this Lab. Project will now include revised versions of the Burundi MWMP, the
IPDP and the ESMF of the main parent project as the requisite safeguards documents to
be disclosed and implemented by this project .All three safeguards documents (ESMF,
MWMP and IPDP) have been reviewed and found satisfactory to the Bank.
Consequently, they all have been disclosed in-country and at the World Bank InfoShop
on [Place holder for the respective dates] respectively.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Future activities at these laboratory facilities to be supported under the project are not
expected to have long term detrimental or cumulative effects, especially as waste
management and social and environmental concerns are being addressed through the
ESMF, MWMP and the IPDP.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The “no project? alternative would actually cause serious harm since it would prevent the
health clinics from fighting efficient against debilitating and often lethal infectious
diseases, as well as the appropriate ways of dealing with medical waste, especially in
communities where poor and vulnerable groups such as the Batwa live.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
As is been the practice used in other participating four countries (Kenya, Uganda,
Rwanda and Tanzania) Burundi has now also updated -along the main parent project
ESMF (East Africa Public Health Laboratories Project)- its existing MWMP and IPDP
which were prepared under the on-going Bank-financed Health Sector Development
Support Project. There is already a dedicated team of staff in the Burundi Ministry of
Health (MoH) working specifically on both social and environmental safeguards issues.
The same team will be entrusted to satisfactorily implement the safeguards for this Lab.
Project. As already the case, the Social & Environmental Team (SET) will be guided by
and work closely with the World Bank safeguards team during supervision and
throughout the project life cycle. The SET will also benefit from additional technical
capacity building provided by the Bank team through series of workshops and/or in-field
training.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The primary beneficiaries are medical practitioners and local communities benefiting
from and using medical facilities, including the poor and most vulnerable groups such as
the Batwa. More specifically, discussions were held with a number of key stakeholders
starting with members of the project implementation units of the other member countries
and their Burundian counterparts, staff of the World Bank Resident Mission responsible
for the project, staff of the National Institute of Health and the staff of the University
Hospital in Bujumbura. These meetings provided detailed information on the project
design, proposed implementation plan and the safeguards documents that were prepared
for the Burundi Health Sector Project (IPDP &MWMP) and the Environmental and
Social Management Framework of the East Africa Laboratory Project (that includes
Burundi) plus other important project related information. Additional important
discussions were also held at the University Hospital and INSP on the effective and
responsive planning and management of medical waste and the sustainable
implementation of the existing MWMP under the ongoing Burundi Health Sector Project.
Discussions were also held on the IPDP and the continued implementation of the IPDP
plan under the proposed project with the help of UNIPROBA (Union pour la Promotion
des Batwa, one of the leading national civil society organizations on the Batwa).

 Field investigations comprised visits to the six selected sites in Bujumbura, Kayanza
and Muyinga in the north of the country and Rumonge and Makamba in the south.
Discussions were held with hospital and laboratory staff at the National Health Institute
in Bujumbura, the National Tuberculosis and Centre for Disease Control also in
Bujumbura and all hospitals visited in the different parts of the country. We then had
detailed discussions with the staff of the Burundi Health Sector Project, the TTL of that
project and Bank experts in Washington and Maputo on the safeguard documents and
their revision and eventual implementation.
 Hence, as stated above, the update of the three safeguards instruments, namely the
ESMF/ESMP, MWMP and the IPDP involved series of participatory public consultations
to raise awareness (to gain familiarization with the project and with the existing
establishments, laboratory facilities and their operations), build ownership to foster more
social accountability throughout the life of the project.

 As consultation and participation is rather an iterative process, thus there will be more
consultation with contractors and implementation units at subproject level, precisely
during implementation of each of the sub projects.

 Finally, under the Additional Financing, the safeguards mechanisms to be used for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies will be those already existing in
Burundi which will be updated as needed to ensure the new activities and populations are
covered.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  03/07/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              03/19/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               03/19/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  03/07/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              03/19/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               03/19/2012
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Sheila Dutta            02/29/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Hocine Chalal           03/01/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna      03/01/2012
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Serigne Omar Fye        03/01/2012
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   03/07/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Jean J. De St Antoine   03/05/2012
  Comments:
