                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/22/2012                                Report No.: ISDSA559
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P112998                 Original Project Name: Public Works and
                                             Urban Management Project
Country: Burundi                             Project ID: P127262
Project Name: Public Works and Urban Management Project - Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Deo-Marcel Niyungeko
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 13, 2012 Estimated Board Date: May 8, 2012
Managing Unit: AFTUW                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Health (20%);General education sector (20%);Roads and highways
(20%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (20%);Other social services
(20%)
Theme: Urban services and housing for the poor (80%);Municipal finance
(15%);Municipal governance and institution building (5%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             15
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                        0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []            Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective of the proposed Public Works and Urban
Management Project (PWUMP) is to increase access to basic socio-economic services in
targeted areas and to short-term employment opportunities. This would be achieved
through the combination of demand-based and trunk infrastructure investments programs
covering urban centers of all provinces and targeted municipal support programs to
strengthen municipal management and fiscal performance at the local level in the three
main cities, Bujumbura, Gitega, and Ngozi. The development objective of the original
project will remain unchanged with the proposed AF.

3. Project Description
The original project in the amount of SDR 30.1 million (US$45 million equivalent) was
approved by the Board on June 9, 2009, and became effective on September 30, 2009.
The original project is a logical continuation of the closed Public Works and Employment
Creation Project, especially with regard to the execution of demand-driven subprojects
through labor-intensive approaches for job creation. In addition, the project focused on
selected cities (Bujumbura, Ngozi, and Gitega) to address the need for gradual
institutional development in municipal management and to prepare for effective
decentralization. The project included three components:

 Component A: Infrastructure (Base cost: IDA US$33 million). This component
supports the rehabilitation and expansion of demand-driven infrastructure in all urban
communes of the country and trunk infrastructure in Bujumbura, Gitega, and Ngozi in
order to improve their effectiveness as economic growth poles.

 Component B: Municipal and Urban Management (Base cost: IDA US$2.3 million).
This component is targeting principally the three main cities of Burundi (Bujumbura,
Gitega, and Ngozi) to improve governance, municipal management, and fiscal
performance through the provision of technical assistance, training, and equipment.

  Component C: Institutional Strengthening, Monitoring, and Evaluation (Base cost: IDA
US$3 million). This component supports activities aimed at strengthening: (i)
institutional partners to better support and monitor communal development; (ii) the local
construction private sector to improve its capacity to deliver quality infrastructure; and
(iii) monitoring and evaluation of project results, support to project management, and
targeted training for the Technical Secretariat and ABUTIP staff.

 The success of the previous project and the current IDA-funded PWUMP has attracted a
lot of interest from many constituencies and stakeholders in Burundi. Additional requests
for sub-project financing have been submitted by municipalities and communities and the
required beneficiary contributions have been committed.

 The proposed Additional Financing (AF) will allow the Public Works and Urban
Management Project (PWUMP) to: (i) implement an additional lot of works that will
scale up the project’s impact (Component A: US$14 million equivalent), and (ii) continue
supporting institutional reforms and municipal management practices and policies that
affect the sustainability of the investments (Component B: US$1 million equivalent).

 About 1,100 additional requests for sub-project financing have been submitted by
municipalities and communities and the required beneficiary contributions have been
committed. The total requests for funding far exceed the available resources under both
the original project and the AF. The specific sub-projects out of all the sub-project
requests received will amount to a total of US$14 million which will be allocated to
component A to support cost associated with additional investments proposed that are
totally consistent with the investments under this component in the original project.
These sub-projects have not yet been selected.

 Based on the current project average unit cost, an initial review of the sub-project
requests received, indicates that this AF will support the following: (i) cobblestone paved
roads (around 30 to 32 km), (ii) markets (around 9), (iii) secondary schools (around 2),
(iv) health and social center (around 1), and (v) basic earth roads including drainage
system for low income urban areas (around 4 sub-projects). Using criteria established
under the original project, the process of selecting the specific projects and identifying
their physical locations has begun and will continue during appraisal. Furthermore, the
AF will also support an additional capacity building program on resource mobilization in
the three selected cities (Bujubura, Gitega and Ngozi).

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
As mentioned above, based on the current project average unit cost, an initial review of
the sub-project requests received, indicates that this AF will support the following: (i)
cobblestone paved roads (around 30 to 32 km), (ii) markets (around 9), (iii) secondary
schools (around 2), (iv) health and social center (around 1), and (v) basic earth roads
including drainage system for low income urban areas (around 4 sub-projects). These
sub-projects have not yet been selected. The physical locations of future infrastructure
sub-projects sites as well as their potential localized adverse environmental and social
impacts could not be identified prior to the appraisal of this proposed AF.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
   Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed additional financing is likely to incur negative environmental and social
impacts due to the planned construction/rehabilitation activities under component A.
Likely adverse impacts may include air, soil and water pollution, loss of vegetation, soil
erosion, traffic accidents, generation of medical waste at the planned health centers, and
potential loss of livelihoods and/or land required for future infrastructure investments.
 Given the poor quality of existing water supply distribution system in the country, and
taking into account the experience from the previous project, it is possible that a number
of sub-projects will involve water supply systems. These systems could use either surface
water, ground water, but mostly gravity systems.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The planned infrastructure sub-projects under the proposed additional financing are not
expected to incur potential indirect and/or long term impacts.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Implementation of the parent project activities was rated as highly satisfactory and done
in a participatory manner with beneficiary communities including the poor and most
vulnerable groups. So, since the proposed additional financing project will follow the
same footsteps as for the original project, therefore project alternatives that would not
rely on demand-driven approach and involvement of beneficiary communities were not
considered.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
For the parent project, since at this juncture the exact physical locations of future
infrastructure sub-projects as well as their potential localized adverse environmental and
social impacts could not be identified prior to appraisal, the Borrower has prepared both
the ESMF and the RPF. The RPF outlines the policies and procedures to be followed in
the event that resettlement action/compensation plans will need to be prepared to mitigate
potential adverse social impacts due to land acquisition. The ESMF outlines an
environmental and social screening process for future sub-projects to ensure that they are
environmentally and socially sound and sustainable. The ESMF also includes (i)
provisions for public consultations and participation among relevant stakeholders,
including potentially affected people; (ii) Environmental and Social Clauses/Guidelines
for Contractors; and (iii) a Medical Waste Management Plan for the health centers to be
funded under the proposed project. Both safeguard documents ESMF and RPF have been
disclosed prior appraisal in the country on 12/25/2008 and InfoShop on 01/05/2009.
 Under the parent project implemented successfully, the Social and Environmental Team
(SET) within the PIU has done a fantastic job and shown convincing facts of its good
grasp of the operationalization of World Bank Safeguards policies. Throughout, all
subprojects underwent a thorough screening process which led to the preparation by the
PIU of the appropriate social and environmental instruments, namely site specific Social
and Environmental Impacts Assessment (ESIA) and Abbreviated Resettlement Action
Plan (ARAP), all disclosed ultimately in-country and at the InfoShop. Moreover, the
team (SET) has also managed to include local beneficiary communities through open and
fairly participatory public consultation. This transparent approach has not only resulted in
more ownership from beneficiaries, but most importantly, it has fostered a much greater
social accountability which is shown by the sustainability of the already completed
infrastructure.
  During the implementation of the parent project, each year, the borrower did prepare a
separate set of ESIA with a detailed and comprehensive Environmental and Social
Management Plans (ESMPs) and Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) for all
sub-projects to be financed. Both the ESMPs & ARAP were elaborated in compliance
with the guidelines and principles mentioned in the ESMF and RPF. Hence, 3 ESMPs
and 3 ARAPs were prepared, reviewed and approved by the World Bank. As for the
ESMF and RPF, they were all disclosed publicly in-country (i.e. sub-projects areas) and
at the Infoshop prior to implementation. Provisions of the successive ESMPs as well as
the ARAPs were duly integrated in each bidding document in the form of Social and
Environmental Clauses (SEC) and taken into consideration by the Contractors and
Supervisors.
  Implementation status of ESMPs and ARAPs with the corresponding mitigation
measures has regularly been assessed by the World Bank Social and Environmental
Safeguards Specialists during each supervision mission, and consistently rated as
Satisfactory. Additionally, an HIV-AIDS program had also been carried out by the
project team through locally-based NGOs to sensitize Contractors’ employees and local
communities living alongside/within the premises of project activities areas.
  Activities proposed under this proposed additional financing are similar to those already
completed under the parent project and the safeguards Category B thus remains
unchanged. The same safeguard policies remain triggered for this additional financing,
namely OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement and OP
7.50 Projects on International Waterways. No new social and environmental risks are
expected to arise under/during the implementation of this additional financing and the
proposed activities will not trigger any new safeguard policies. Since the sub-projects
have not yet been selected with their physical locations and this additional financing
builds upon the ongoing parent project, it will be using the same safeguards instruments
and institutional arrangements for a more tangible environmental and social management
throughout project implementation.
  Therefore, the initial safeguard instruments, ESMF and RPF, approved by the Bank for
the original project remain applicable for the proposed activities under the additional
financing. Since these documents don't require any modifications, therefore they will be
ultimately re-disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal.
  The proposed Additional Grant does not require additional implementation capacity
beyond what is already in place. The existing implementing structures (ABUTIP) and the
Technical Secretariat (TS) have performed satisfactorily and will carry out and oversee
the execution of the Additional Grant. The PIU is composed of a knowledgeable and
operational Environmental and Social Specialist responsible for implementing social and
environmental safeguards measures. The proposed additional financing aimed at further
strengthening the activities of the parent project by reaching out to more communities to
enable access to basic social services. In that regards, and as it’s been the practice led by
the Social and Environmental Team (SET) up until now; thus each subproject would
undergo a social and environmental screening process to determinate both the category
and type and depth of the safeguards instrument to be prepared. Hence, since the
activities would be alike, it is obviously clear that the SET of the PIU will facilitate the
preparation of site specific ESIAs and ARAPs throughout.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include beneficiary municipalities and communities, the Technical
Secretariat, the Environment and Social Department of the Ministry of Environment and
Public Works, ABUTIP and the private construction sector. Public consultation and
participation during the project preparation were conducted by the project team and
included various field visits and meetings with relevant representatives of the ministry in
charge of environment, governors, communal administrators and councils, technical
municipal services, local maintenance committees, potential beneficiary Community
Development Committees, direct potential beneficiaries (markets vendors, people along
roads susceptible to be paved, schools director, potentially affected people)and relevant
civil society organizations in the vicinity of the project area. The public consultations
and participation confirmed the high level expectation raised by the project among
beneficiaries and the satisfaction with the participatory process being implemented to
identify priority development subprojects and the preparation of local development plans.
 Preparation of the parent-project’s ESMF/ESMP and RPF, as well as the site specific
ESIAs and ARAPs were indeed undertaken via series of satisfactory in-depth
participatory approach, inclusive of women, the poor and most vulnerable groups.
Hence, the proposed additional financing would follow the same footsteps of its parent
project when it comes to prepare the relevant sites specific ESIAs and ARAPs once the
physical locations of the subproject activities are known.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     12/23/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 12/25/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  01/05/2009
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     12/23/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 02/01/2009
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  01/05/2009
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         Yes
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        N/A
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Deo-Marcel Niyungeko    03/20/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Paul-Jean Feno          03/06/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna      03/07/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   03/21/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Alexander E. Bakalian   03/21/2012
  Comments:
