                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/24/2013                                  Report No.: AC6968
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P102284                  Original Project Name: Cambodia Second
                                              Health Sector Support Program
Country: Cambodia                             Project ID: P146271
Project Name: Second Health Sector Support Program
Task Team Leader: Timothy A. Johnston
Estimated Appraisal Date:                     Estimated Board Date: July 1, 2013
Managing Unit: EASHH                          Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                              Financing
Sector: Health (44%);Central government administration (24%);Sub-national
government administration (24%);Other social services (4%);Compulsory health finance
(4%)
Theme: Health system performance (33%);Administrative and civil service reform
(17%);Child health (17%);Population and reproductive health (17%);Participation and
civic engagement (16%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                       0.00
         Free-standing Cofinancing Trust Fund                           8.50
                                                                        8.50
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed additional Grant in the amount of AUD 8.5 million (US$8.1 million
equivalent) as Additional Financing to Cambodia would finance existing and expansion
of activities that will scale up Program impact and development effectiveness under the
parent program. The program will continue to support the implementation of the
Government's Health Strategic Plan (2008-2015, HSP2) to improve health outcomes
through strengthening institutional capacity and mechanisms by which the government
and Program Partners can achieve more effective and efficient sector performance.

3. Project Description
The original program (HSSP2) has a health system strengthening focus, with components
that are aligned to the government's HSP2. It includes: (a) Strengthening Health Service
Delivery through (i) the provision of Service Delivery Grants and contracting for health
services at provincial level and below; and (ii) investments for the improvement,
replacement, and extension of the health service delivery network. (b) Improving Health
Financing which will support (a) health protection for the poor through the consolidation
of Health Equity Funds (HEFs) under common management and oversight arrangements
and expansion of health equity fund coverage; and (ii) supporting the development of
health financing policies and institutional reforms. (c) Strengthening Human Resources
will focus on (i) strengthening pre- and in-service training; (ii) strengthening human
resource management in the Ministry of Health. (d) Strengthening Health System
Stewardship Function by supporting (i) development of policy packages identified,
strengthening the institutional capacity (in particular meeting the demands from
Decentralization and Deconcentration); (ii) private sector regulation and partnerships;
(iii) supporting governance and stewardship functions of the national programs and
centers overseeing the three HSP2 strategic programs; and (iv) empowering new
structures for increasing local accountability of health care providers to citizens.

 The AF will support the following:
 •      Component A: Strengthening Health Service Delivery. Additional financing from
MDTF will allow financing of SDGs for 30 SOAs through June 2014, support for an
additional six SOAs and capacity building. In addition, financing will be provided for
scaling up of the multiple micronutrient supplementations of children under 2,
strengthening facility based screening and management of acute malnutrition (MAM) and
a system of community based MAM. Further, the AF will continue to support improved
service delivery and implementation of the Non-Communicable Disease (NCD) Strategic
Plan, support scaling up of dengue control, including financing of larvicide/BTI; and
continue support for avian-human influenza (H5N1) surveillance and response at
national, district, and community levels.

  •      Component B: Improving Health Financing. In addition to supporting the current
activities under the Component, the AF will support expansion of HEFs; i.e, from 43 to
57 Operational Districts (ODs). KOICA has expressed interest in financing the HEFs in
Kandal province, although decision to pool with HSSP2 or parallel financing is yet to be
finalized. The AF will also support further strengthening and developing an institutional
framework for health financing, including making progress toward the establishment of
national oversight institutions for HEFs and social health insurance.

  •     Component C: Strengthening Human Resources. The AF will provide additional
financing to support the original project activities of strengthening pre-service education
of health professionals and improving the pre-service education at the Regional Training
Centers (RTCs).

 •      Component D: Strengthening Health System Stewardship and Functions. The
current activities will continue to be financed with an increased focus on developing the
social accountability policy and framework, and scaling up of evaluation of social
accountability mechanisms (including community score cards), in line with government
plans for decentralization and democratic local governance. It will support further
strengthening of private sector regulation and monitoring, with support from other
HSSP2 partners.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Coverage will be national.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)
   Ms Nareth Ly (EASHH)
   Mr Makathy Tep (EASSD)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                       X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                 X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
 Environment. The AF will provide continuing financing to existing activities and widen
the geographical coverage of activities already on-going under the parent Project.

  Civil Works Impacts and Management: The program finances construction and/or
rehabilitation of small health care facilities such as health centers, hospitals and a Drugs
and Quality Control Testing Laboratory. The experience in HSSP2 confirmed that civil
works and the corresponding environmental impacts were minimal and temporary and
limited to the construction phase. The impacts included noise, air emissions and
generation of construction wastes. These are monitored by the construction supervision
firm and the task team.

 Health Care Waste Generation and Management: Government, with assistance from the
WHO, has developed comprehensive HCW Management Guidelines to address both
waste management and hygiene issues. The Guidelines incorporate best HCW
management practices and are intended for practical application at health care facilities.
A review of the performance of HSSP2, including the field visits, indicated that the
Guidelines are adequate to address the impacts and there is overall compliance with the
Guidelines as well as in the basic design of health care facilities. The same Guidelines
and basic health care facility designs will be adopted in HSSP2. Training of Trainers
(ToT) had been carried out by Department of Hospital Services (DHS) at provincial level
to enhance the ability of health care staff to adhere to the guideline while treating medical
waste. It is expected that this training, under AF of HSSP2, will be continued and the
capacity of health care staff enhanced.

  Asbestos Management: The main activities that could have implications for asbestos
generation and management of the construction of health care facilities. The ER
suggested that asbestos in Cambodia is a problem in existing building containing fibre
cement products. While clay roofing tiles are preferred in provincial and district HCFs,
fibre-containing ceiling sheets are still commonly used. However, since 2000 the Social
Fund of the government has banned the use of asbestos-containing fibre concrete
materials, and construction is closely supervised to ensure that contractors will not use
cheap asbestos-containing materials. The civil works contracts will also contain a
provision on the use of asbestos-free building materials. All constructions use clay
roofing tiles.

  Pesticide Use and Management: The Project support only supports purchase of
larvicides to control vectors of malaria and dengue. All products used are WHO Pesticide
Evaluation Scheme certified.

  Social :
  Ill health is a leading cause and consequence of poverty in Cambodia. Health care
remains for many expensive, of poor quality and of difficult to access. Key social
development issues pertaining to health in Cambodia, include: (i) uneven distribution of
growth and significant difference between urban and rural and rich and poor households'
access to health services and outcomes; (ii) different health needs and challenges among
women and men; (iii) high vulnerability to poor health and poverty among the poor and
ethnic minorities and in remote and difficult to access areas; and (iv) limited capacity for
community participation in health service delivery. HSSP2 aims to ensure improved and
equitable access to essential quality health care and preventative services. Target
beneficiaries are women, children and the poor, all of whom are exposed to high health
risks and are disadvantaged in accessing affordable health care. Given the program's
focus on maternal and child health, children and women of reproductive age in particular
are expected to benefit from the Project, which will extend the health network and
making it more affordable.

 Under HSSP, a social assessment was produced, and an Ethnic Minorities Development
Strategy (EMDS), and a Framework for Land Acquisition Policy and Procedures were
also prepared. The social assessment has been updated for HSSP2, to reflect
modifications to program objectives and procedures, as well as changes in the Cambodia
regulatory framework and World Bank policies. The updated social assessment takes
into account consultations with (a) MoH officials, program partners, and NGOs; (b)
recent analytical work on equity, gender issues and ethnic minorities; (c) evaluations and
monitoring of HSSP; and (d) analytical work commissioned for HSSP. The Framework
for Land Acquisition Policy and Procedures has also been updated to ensure compliance
with current World Bank policy and Cambodia laws.

  The coverage of the project area will expand from 47 districts under the original project
to 57. The AF will focus on areas that have been underserved in Cambodia. The original
project supported the construction and renovations of existing buildings on existing sites
(endorsed by valid MOH). An assessment was carried out by MoH and the task team on
land acquisition impact. No outstanding issues were found.

 Ethnic Minorities. Ethnic minorities face particular challenges in accessing health
services and tend to be particularly vulnerable to poor health. Many minority groups live
in rough-terrain - highland and border areas that are hard to reach, and are generally
poorer than average. The sheer physical geography of these settings poses special
challenges, as well as costs, in terms of accessing, providing and maintaining health care
services. By extending the health network and designing it in a way that addresses ethnic
minorities' particular needs and concerns, the AF will continue to have a positive impact
on ethnic minorities. The review of the original program carried out as part of the
preparation of AF did not find any outstanding issues or negative impacts on ethnic
minorities.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No negative long-term impacts are foreseen.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Program design under the AF will minimize financing of new construction, while
strengthening existing medical waste management systems.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The government has an HCW management strategy, as well as a ban on the use of
asbestos-containing construction materials since 2000. An updated EMP has been
prepared and measures to be implemented for HSSP2 to address environmental and
health impacts which are similar in nature and magnitude to those in HSSP. The updated
EMP is part of the bidding documents.

 With regards to indigenous peoples, HSSP2 extends program coverage to ethnic
minority provinces previously covered under other donors' projects. Hence, to ensure
compliance with current World Bank Policy (OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples), an IPPF
had been prepared in consultation with affected indigenous peoples. The IPPF sets out a
two step consultation process. The first step of this consultation process was completed
during the program preparation. As a second step, Community Scorecards and other
social accountability mechanisms have been under implementation to strengthen Health
Center Management Committees (HCMCs), citizen participation, and local complaints
mechanisms and monitoring. Community Scorecards are found to be a successful tool to
ensure that views and perspectives of ethnic minorities are captured and addressed, where
necessary, under the project. No outstanding issues are found under the original project
with regard to ethnic minorities. The community score cards will be expanded in the
provinces of Rattankairi and Modulkiri under the AF.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The primary stakeholders of the Project are MoH policy makers, program planners and
managers who will benefit from systems strengthening and capacity building activities, as
well as from the Project's endorsement of the MoH's HSP2. Ministry of Economy and
Finance continue to play an important role during implementation and monitoring. Civil
society and communities also play important roles in the monitoring of services to
increase public accountability. Civil society members are invited to attend important bid
openings and contract awards.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  05/02/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              05/02/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               05/02/2008
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  05/02/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              05/02/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               05/04/2008
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  05/02/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              05/02/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               05/04/2008
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  05/02/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              05/02/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               05/04/2008
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the     Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                  Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Timothy A. Johnston               06/10/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Makathy Tep                       06/17/2013
Social Development Specialist       Mr Satoshi Ishihara                  06/17/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Toomas Palu                       06/23/2013
  Comments:
