                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/02/2011                                     Report No.: AC6518
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Cameroon                                Project ID: P110177
Project Name: Cameroon - Kribi Gas Power Project
Task Team Leader: Astrid Manroth
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 27,          Estimated Board Date: November 10, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: AFTEG                             Lending Instrument:
Sector: Thermal Power Generation (80%);General energy sector (20%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (67%);Regulation and
competition policy (33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):               0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):                0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):                0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):                0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                        86.00
         IDA Guarantee                                                   82.00
         International Finance Corporation (IFC)                         86.00
         Bilateral Agencies (unidentified)                               30.00
         Foreign Multilateral Institutions (unidentified)                66.00
         Financing Gap                                                    0.00
                                                                        350.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                     Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to (i) increase the capacity of electricity generation
from the Kribi Gas Power Project and (ii) improve access to private finance for the
development of the Kribi Gas Power Project, including local currency financing.

3. Project Description
The Kribi Gas Power Project, which benefits from financing facilitated by the proposed
IDA Guarantee and the proposed IFC A Loan, consists of the development, construction,
and operation of a new 216 MW (nameplate) natural gas-fired power plant located near
the Mpolongwe village, 9 km north of the coastal city of Kribi in South Province of
Cameroon, and the development and construction of a new 100-km 225-kV double-
circuit transmission line between the Kribi power plant and the existing Mangombe
225/90-kV substation at Edéa in Littoral Province, including substations and
transformers. Electricity generated under the Project will be transmitted into Cameroon's
Southern Interconnected Grid. The Kribi power plant will run on natural gas using light
fuel oil (LFO) as backup fuel. Natural gas will be supplied from the offshore Sanaga
South gas field in Cameroon. Following construction, the transmission line will be
transferred to the Government of Cameroon (GOC) and operated by AES SONEL or a
successor transmission company.

  Associated infrastructure facilities required for the proper functioning of the power plant
include (i) the transmission line (including substations and transformers) after
construction completion and transfer to the GOC, (ii) the development of the Sanaga
South gas field by a joint venture between the National Hydrocarbon Company (SNH)
and Perenco Cameroon under a production sharing agreement and financed by Perenco
Cameroon; (iii) a Central Gas Processing Facility (CPF) being developed by Perenco
Cameroon; (iv) the marine and terrestrial gas pipelines, including a 14-km offshore gas
pipeline from the Sanaga South gas field to the CPF, a 14-km offshore glycol injection
pipeline between the gas field and the CPF and a 21-km offshore condensate/process
water pipeline from the CPF to the existing KB-4 well from where it will be connected to
the existing Ebome storing platform for exports, all financed by Perenco Cameroon; and
(v) an 18-km onshore gas pipeline from the CPF to the Kribi power plant at Mpolongwe,
financed by SNH.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Kribi Gas Power Project is a 216 MW nameplate capacity power plant using 13
reciprocating engines, located on a 16-hectare site near the Mpolongwe village, 9 km
north of the coastal city of Kribi in South Province of Cameroon, and a 100 km
transmission line in a 30-meter right-of-way between the Kribi power plant and the
Mangombe substation in Edea, Littoral Province. Associated facilities include the
offshore Sanaga South gas field, offshore pipelines (natural gas pipeline, a glycol
injection pipeline, and a condensate/process water pipeline), the CPF at Bipaga, and the
gas pipeline from the CPF to the Kribi power plant.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTEG)
   Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTWR)
   Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                    X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                               X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                             X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                        X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                 X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Biophysical impacts, pollution prevention and abatement (OP/BP 4.01, OP/BP 4.04, PS1,
3, and 6):

 Power plant site: The 16-hectare power plant site is located close to the main Edéa-Kribi
road. 150 meters of a new access road will be built to access the Mpolongwe site from the
main road. Direct land take for the construction of the power plant will be approximately
7.5 hectares and a total area of 16 hectares will be fenced off during plant operation. An
independent study for plant site alternatives by Power Planning Associates (2005)
confirmed the power plant site in Mpolongwe as the best alternative out of five potential
sites in the Kribi area, with respect to size, flatness, quality of soil, access roads,
availability of fresh water, land use. At the power plant site, the frequent transport of
material during the construction period may disturb the normal traffic and increase the
noise for nearby residents. To address this issue, measures have been taken to ensure
maximum utilization of the route during the evening and non-peak hours. Moreover,
special precautions including safety campaigns have been taken during construction in
order to prevent road accidents. In addition, well designed precautions have been taken to
prevent pollution of community water resources during construction. The contractors
have also been required to apply applicable World Bank Group EHS Guidelines.

 The plant during its operation will produce NOx and SOx from the combustion of
hydrocarbons. The Stack Height Assessment dated November 2009 concluded that, with
a stack height of 32 meters, both World Bank and World Health Organization guidelines
requirement for one-hour concentration of nitrogen dioxide (NO2) would be met,
furthermore, the annual mean sulfur dioxide (SO2), NO2, and particulate (PM10)
emissions would also satisfy World Bank requirements. The plant design will ensure that
emission levels are within international standards and in compliance with World Bank
EHS Guidelines. The impact with regard to water quality is not considered to be
significant. The project company, Kribi Power Development Company (KPDC), will
ensure that the EPC Contractor disposes of any construction effluents in a responsible
manner. The plant design is aiming to avoid the adverse impacts of oil and other
substances from plant equipment on water quality. The overall environmental impact at
the power plant site has been assessed as low due to the relatively small area of land take,
the low conservation status of the area affected and the current level of disturbance within
this area. KPDC and the power plant EPC contractor will establish systems to implement
the respective ESMP under KPDC's overall control to ensure proper management of
impacts. This management plan is based on final Project design specifications and was
developed by KPDC prior to starting construction and operation. The plant will employ a
maintenance program that consists of preventive, predictive, and planned maintenance.
The maintenance program will be managed using specialized software developed by the
EPC Contractor. Preventive maintenance plans are established based on standard industry
practice coupled with equipment history and overhaul schedules. KPDC has developed,
in coordination with the EPC Contractor, the site emergency preparedness and response
plans, including typical measures for reciprocating engine gas-fired thermal power plant,
and to effectively respond to emergency situations to minimize risks and impacts to the
environment and the surrounding communities.

  Transmission line: The route of the 100-km transmission line was chosen to minimize
environmental and social impacts. Several alternatives of the route were considered with
reference to existing houses, plantations, farmlands, and forest areas. The new
transmission line will be constructed within a corridor of 30 meters wide and will follow
the existing 90-kV Edéa-Kribi transmission line for approximately 90% of the distance.
As the existing and new line also follow the main road Edéa-Kribi, access to the
transmission line corridor will only require construction of a few, short access tracks to
the high voltage towers. Due to the level of existing disturbance it was concluded that the
overall environmental impacts of the transmission line corridor are low. KPDC and the
transmission line EPC contractor will establish systems to implement their respective
ESMP under KPDC's overall control to ensure proper management of impacts.

  Offshore gas infrastructure: The marine ecosystems affected by Perenco's offshore gas
infrastructure are part of the coastal fishery of Cameroon. The main identified risks to
marine biodiversity (such as marine turtles) and local marine ecosystem services
(especially fishing resources) arise from potential hydrocarbon leaks from the 21-km
condensate pipeline. According to international best practice, Perenco Cameroon has
prepared management plans to address health, safety, and environmental impacts of
offshore gas infrastructure. Perenco Cameroon's ESMP, as well as Perenco's
Environmental Policy, includes a requirement to prepare an Emergency Response Plan.
The Oil Spill Response Plan for the Ebomé Platform will be adapted to include the rights-
of-way for the offshore and terrestrial parts of the gas and condensate pipelines.
Significant minimization of the magnitude of the marine impacts for both biodiversity
itself and livelihoods is also possible through management of impacts and sensitive
timing of construction. Perenco's Environmental Policy includes a requirement to
establish a baseline on terrestrial and aquatic biodiversity, including fisheries, and to
monitor future changes against this biodiversity baseline during construction and
operation. Perenco Cameroon's ESMP also specifies actions to minimize impacts on
marine biodiversity and fisheries. In order to implement these mitigation measures more
knowledge will be required (biodiversity surveys) with regard to the presence,
reproduction and migratory behavior of protected marine turtles, whales and dolphins.
The Bank will work with Perenco Cameroon to make sure that this due diligence with
regard to the protection of the marine and terrestrial biodiversity will be undertaken as
part of the implementation of the ESMP.

  Central Gas Processing Facility: The environmental, health and safety impacts of the
CPF and their management are in included in the EIA/ESMP prepared by Perenco for the
Sanaga South Gas Field (see paragraph 12). The CPF will be located on a 3 ha plot which
is not being used nor occupied by people, so that no RAP is needed. The main
environmental, health and safety impacts during construction are: soil, groundwater and
surface water pollution in case of accidental spills, impacts on terrestrial biodiversity,
including on mangroves, public health impacts (i.e., HIV/AIDS) as a consequence of the
presence of a foreign workforce. Other construction impacts are similar to the impacts of
the Kribi power plant and are manageable. The environmental, health and safety impacts
during operation are: risk of gas explosion at the CPF, air pollution from gas flaring at the
CPF, increase in poaching of wildlife in the area surrounding the CPF. Perenco has
prepared management plans to address these environmental, health and safety impacts.

 Onshore gas pipeline: The environmental assessment undertaken for the 18-km onshore
gas pipeline between Bipaga 1 and Mpolongwe identified the following main
environmental and social impacts: risks of soil erosion, potential pollution of soil and
water bodies, noise, and impacts on health and security of local population with a
potential need for relocation. Benefits for local commercial activities are expected.
Appropriate mitigation measures to reduce those impacts to an acceptable level were
specified by SNH in the pipeline ESMP, including the optimization of construction
period and technology, awareness raising campaign with local authorities at the
beginning of the construction work, and the implementation of appropriate management
plans for resettlement/land acquisition and compensation, health, safety and
environmental management. The analysis of the different options of the route for the
onshore pipeline is ongoing and expected to be finalized soon.

  Natural habitats: The Project EIA states that the plant site and the transmission line
corridor are both situated within the disturbed habitats along the corridor of the Edéa-
Kribi highway and the existing 90-kV transmission line. The EIA for the Sanaga South
gas project, on the other hand, observes that protected species are present among the
terrestrial fauna and flora of the project areas, i.e., in the 25 hectares of forest land
allocated to develop the CPF (the CPF itself uses 3 ha), and also, that protected marine
species (marine turtles, dolphins and whales) may be present in the project area. The
additional Rapid Biodiversity Assessment financed by the IFC showed four habitats (near
shore pelagic waters, sandy shoreline, coastal humid forest, mangrove lagoon) of the
Sanaga South gas field project area harbor IUCN-listed species which inhabit, migrate,
and/or breed in these habitats. However, these natural habitats are not deemed to be
critical to the widespread survival of these specifies because (i) all the recognized IUCN-
listed species are of a relatively or very wide distribution and therefore the magnitude of
the impacts within the project area is comparatively small and could not be said to be of
global significance, and (ii) many of those species will probably continue to exist
alongside the planned developments if appropriate mitigation measures are put in place.
For example, careful forest management can reduce deforestation, and careful
hydrocarbon leak mitigation and anti-poaching programs can minimize impacts on
marine turtles. Based on this analysis, the habitats are not considered as critical natural
habitat under the World Bank Natural Habitat Policy OP 4.04 and IFC's PS6. Careful
mitigation measures and environmental management, as proposed in the Sanaga South
gas field project EIA, are essential to limit biodiversity impacts, particularly risks
concerning hydrocarbon leaks (see paragraph 12 above).

  The Regional Environmental Assessment (REA), which was done based on the Bank's
guidelines for cumulative environmental and socials impact assessments, has been
prepared to assess the magnitude of the cumulative development initiatives on the region.
The REA concluded that the impact of project activities is limited compared to the
regional industrial development plans. Regarding the follow-up on the REA, the Bank is
engaged in a dialogue with the GOC on including the Douala-Edéa nature reserve in the
list of protected areas which benefit from World Bank support under ongoing Forest and
Environment Policy Development Grant (PFSE). The GOC has initiated the process to
classify the Douala-Edéa reserve, including its marine part, as a National Park.

 Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): Archeological sites including a diverse human
settlement exist in the surface area of the Mpolongwe gas power plant site. An
archeological study (Physical Cultural Resources Assessment) was conducted for the site.
Archaeologists were consulted during construction works and a "chance find procedure"
has been included in both ESMPs and EPC Contracts. Articrafts were identified and
safely removed from the site by an archeological team.

  Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10): The Project area affects the livelihood of Indigenous
Peoples in particular pygmies in the Bankola and Bantou communities. The Community
and Indigenous Peoples Plan (CIPP) was developed to ensure that Indigenous Peoples are
involved in the project (both in terms of being consulted about and benefitting from the
project) and any adverse impacts on them are mitigated. Key issues in the CIPP include:
  . Defining the roles and responsibilities of KPDC staff, government, local authorities,
traditional community leadership, civil society and other stakeholders in relation to
implementing the CIPP;
  . Establishing legal recognition of ownership and usage of Bakola Land, developing a
strategy for continued interaction, consultation and sustainable livelihoods for the Bakola,
and preparing a Livelihood Development Strategy for the Bakola;
  . Promoting sustainable social and economic development in the Bakola and Bantu
Communities through community mobilization and training, microenterprise and micro
credit scheme, and social infrastructure microprojects;
  . Providing an overall framework and guidance to KPDC (and other stakeholders) on
how best to take a proactive and consistent stance on community development initiatives
that are linked to the project; and
  . Describing how the CIPP will be monitored, evaluated, and integrated into the social
and environmental management system of KPDC.
 Given that (i) that the Project will follow the road and thus affect the secondary forest
next to the road; (ii) there are only thirty households of the Kola group in the Project
area; and (iii) that only 78 hectares over a 65-km distance will be affected it is believed
that this impact is not very significant and is well localized to ensure mitigation in line
with World Bank Safeguard Policies and IFC Performance Standards.

 Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12):
 To mitigate the social impacts identified, KPDC has prepared a RAP consistent with
national and World Bank Group standards and is in the process of finalization its
implementation. The construction of the power plant and transmission line affects 682
people, whereof a majority of 647 people will be compensated for crops. Physical
resettlement due to the construction of the power plant and transmission line will be
required for 85 households. An independent valuation has been carried out and provided
a database that has determined the amount of compensation to be paid either in cash or in
kind. The valuation was conducted based on the "Fair Market Value" process for crop,
property, land, and other properties such as houses. The compensation of economically
affected people and the resettlement has been carried out before start of construction. The
cost for compensation and resettlement of affected people is estimated at US$9 million
and is included in the Project budget. Following World Bank Group policy, people have
been encouraged to take replacement land (land for land) rather than compensation. For
households who have to move as a result of the Project, KPDC offered to build a new
house of better quality or larger size within the same community. People may also choose
cash compensation at full replacement cost for the loss of their buildings. Out of 85
households to be physically resettled, only 22 accepted in-kind compensation, while the
other 63 preferred compensation in cash. KPDC recruited a witness NGO for oversight of
RAP execution who has confirmed the regularity of compensation payments. The
relocation of the 22 households that have opted for physical resettlement is planned for
October 2011. KPDC is facilitating access to new land for project-affected people. Where
the transmission line passes through a densely populated area before entering the
substation in Edéa, local residents expressed concerns about being able to find new land
for crops and housing. KPDC is ensuring access to land in this area.

 A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the associated 18-km onshore gas pipeline
between the CPF at Bibaga and the power plant at Mpolongwe has been prepared and
disclosed in country and in the InfoShop on March 8, 2010. An inventory of project-
affected people related to the construction of the 18-km onshore gas pipeline between the
CPF and Kribi power plant is being finalized. Following the final identification of the
onshore gas pipeline routing between the CPF and Kribi power plant, a RAP will be
prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed in-country and in the InfoShop. SNH and the
Government of Cameroon will finance and manage the compensation and eventual
resettlement, which will be carried out before construction of associated infrastructure
can start. The Government has confirmed, through a letter dated October 11, 2011, that
compensation will be paid in accordance with the Bank's applicable policies.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The wider Kribi area is one of the biodiversity hotspots in the world and an important
potential area for tourism development. The Cameroonian Government has selected the
Kribi area for industrial development based on the availability gas resources, a good site
for a new deep sea port, construction of new railways to export mining products, etc. The
cumulative environmental impacts on terrestrial and marine biodiversity and on potential
tourism development will be significant. Better regional planning could have minimized
these impacts, but is not being pursued by the Government of Cameroon. The
recommendations of the Regional Environmental Assessment (REA) to reconsider the
relocation of some of the associated project components will not be followed, since
investments had already been made on the Bipaga 1 site where the CPF will be located.
Social impacts of anticipated future activities in the project area are expected to be
positive through significant job creation.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): Environmental and Social Impact Assessments
(ESIAs) have been conducted for the power plant, transmission line, substation, marine
gas field, pipelines and CPF site. The ESIAs have been undertaken to both Cameroonian
legislation and internationally recognized guidance and standards adopted by the World
Bank and the International Finance Corporation (IFC). In addition, a Regional
Environmental Assessment (REA) was conducted to gauge the cumulative environmental
and social impacts of existing projects and projects under development in the Kribi
region. The REA has been publicly discussed in the Kribi area on February 14, 2008. The
above mentioned studies have received the certificate of conformity by the Ministry of
Environment and Protection of Nature and have been disclosed in the World Bank
Infoshop and in country on February 25, 2008. A supplementary EIA for the 18 km
onshore gas pipeline between the CPF site and the power plant has been prepared and an
acceptable final draft report has been published on March 8, 2010.

 KPDC developed a detailed Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for
the power plant, the transmission line and the substation in February 2009 building on the
draft EMP and SMP outlined in the ESIA as well as the subsequent environmental and
social reporting. The ESMP includes all aspects of mitigation, environmental and social
management and addresses health and safety concerns; monitoring and institutional
measures that will be undertaken by KPDC to ensure conformity with best practice
international standards and World Bank safeguard policies and Environmental, Health
and Safety Guidelines (2007). This management plan is based on final project design
specifications and was developed by KPDC prior to starting construction and operation.
The plant will employ a maintenance program that consists of preventive, predictive, and
planned maintenance. The maintenance program will be managed using specialized
software developed by the EPC contractor. Preventive maintenance plans are established
based on standard industry practice coupled with equipment history and overhaul
schedules. KPDC has developed, in coordination with the EPC contractor, the site
emergency preparedness and response plans, including typical measures for reciprocating
engine gas-fired thermal power plant, and to effectively respond to emergency situations
to minimize risks and impacts to the environment and the surrounding communities.

 KPDC is committed to ensure a timely and transparent consultation process going
forward. KPDC is also committed to involve local people in the Project as much as
possible. All required technological and safety checks will be carried out and monitored.
Water and electricity provision are outside of the scope of the Project and would be
addressed through national programs, such as the Rural Electrification Fund established
in 2009.

 Grievances involving project-affected people and KPDC will be addressed through a
designated KPDC contact point to ensure that the grievance will be addressed within a
fourteen-day period. If not, the EIA and RAP Coordination Unit of KPDC will take
responsibility for the grievance and ensure that is resolved within fourteen days. People
will still be able to take grievances to court if they are not satisfied with KPDC's
grievance process. The RAP establishes a monitoring and evaluation framework for
ensuring that the RAP activities are carried out as agreed.

 Consultation will be ongoing throughout the Project and in line with both Cameroonian
legislation and World Bank Group Safeguard Policies and Performance Standards.
Regarding the broader issue of addressing the Project's potential environmental risks and
impacts in its area of influence, i.e., all ancillary aspects of the Project in accordance with
OP 4.01, the team has engaged in a comprehensive dialogue with the GOC on managing
the environmental and social impacts of energy sector projects.

  The World Bank acknowledges that the geographic reach of the associated facilities of
the Project is wider than the Bank's immediate area of influence, since the proposed IDA
Guarantee is limited to the financing of the Kribi power plant, substation, and
transmission line. The Bank will use its existing dialogue with the GOC on
environmental issues as platform to monitor compliance with the World Bank Safeguard
Policies. In particular, the ongoing PRECESSE is providing TA to responsible line
ministries to ensure adequate supervision of safeguards aspects of the Project and other
large-scale energy projects.

 Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): A REA has been prepared to assess the magnitude of the
cumulative development initiatives on the region. A Rapid Terrestrial Biodiversity
Assessment for the Sanaga Gas Project area was carried out in January 2008 and was
disclosed in country and in the Infoshop on February 11, 2010.

 Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): An archeological study was conducted for
the site and disclosed in the World Bank Infoshop and in country on February 25, 2008.
 Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10): A Community and Indigenous Peoples Plan (CIPP)
have been disclosed in the World Bank Infoshop and in country on February 25, 2008.

 Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for the
power plant and the transmission line were prepared and have been disclosed in the
World Bank Infoshop and in country on February 25, 2008. KPDC is being assisted by
experienced NGOs in the management of compensation payments and oversight of the
RAP implementation. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the associated 18-km
onshore gas pipeline between the CPF at Bibaga and the power plant at Mpolongwe has
been prepared and disclosed in country and in the InfoShop on March 8, 2010. An
inventory of project-affected people related to the construction of the 18-km onshore gas
pipeline between the CPF and Kribi power plant is being finalized. Following the final
identification of the onshore gas pipeline routing between the CPF and Kribi power plant,
a RAP will be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed in-country and in the InfoShop.
SNH and the Government of Cameroon will finance and manage the compensation and
eventual resettlement, which will be carried out before construction of associated
infrastructure can start. The Government has confirmed, through a letter dated October
11, 2011, that compensation will be paid in accordance with the Bank's applicable
policies.

  KPDC will be responsible for ensuring safeguards compliance for the power house and
the transmission line during construction. KPDC appointed a management team with
significant experience in the development of power plants, including international AES
SONEL staff and trained local employees, to ensure sound construction management and
supervision of the project in compliance with applicable national legislation as well as
World Bank safeguard policies, IFC Performance Standards, and the applicable World
Bank Group Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) Guidelines. The applicable EHS
Guidelines are: General EHS Guidelines, Pollution Prevention and Abatement Handbook,
EHS Guidelines for Electric Power Transmission and Distribution, EHS Guidelines for
Onshore Oil and Gas Development, and EHS Guidelines for Offshore Oil and Gas
Development. A technical service agreement will allow KPDC to benefit from AES
Corporation's global, extensive experience in power plant operations, including
compliance with international best practice environmental and social standards. In
addition, technical and services agreements will allow KPDC to benefit from services
from AES SONEL and other AES affiliates, such as the provision of specialized staff and
IT services. KPDC is requiring the EPC contractors to implement the approved
environmental and social management plans in line with WGB safeguard policies.
KPDC will also facilitate coordination between sector actors as required and also be a
focal point for the World Bank supervision of the project. Following completion of the
transmission line construction, the transmission line will be transferred to the GOC and
operated by AES SONEL, at which time responsibility for compliance with the
transmission line ESMP will pass to AES SONEL, while the responsibility for
implementing the transmission line RAP and CIPP will remain with KPDC. AES
SONEL, of which The AES Corporation is the majority shareholder, has benefited from
IFI financing in the past and is therefore familiar with WBG safeguard policies on a
global level and in Cameroon.
 Perenco Cameroun is responsible for management and oversight of the environmental
and social management plan related to the Sanaga South gas field development, the
marine pipelines and the CPF. Perenco Cameroun is an international oil and gas
company with a track record of sustainable development of oil and gas fields in the
region. SNH will be responsible for the management and oversight of the environmental
and social management plan related to the gas pipeline between the CPF and power plant.
SNH through its environmental arm, the Comite de Pilotage et de Suivi des Pipelines
(CPSP) has gathered comprehensive experience in the environmental and social
management of large scale infrastructure projects in the context of the Chad-Cameroon
pipeline and has benefited from capacity building under previous World Bank projects.

 Regarding the broader issue of addressing the project's potential environmental risks and
social impacts in its area of influence, the team has engaged in a comprehensive dialogue
with the Government of Cameroon on managing the environmental and social impacts of
energy sector projects. The capacity of all governmental agencies responsible for
implementing the Cameroonian environmental legislation and supervising the
enforcement of environmental management plans is being strengthened by the US$20
million World Bank financed Environmental and Social Capacity Building Project in the
Energy Sector (PRECESSE). The Bank is also engaged in a dialogue with the GOC on
including the Douala-Edea nature reserve in the list of protected areas which benefit from
World Bank support through its lending. The GOC has initiated the process to classify
the reserve, including its marine part, as a National Park.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations: All the actions included in the management program (ESMP, SMP, RAP
and CIPP) are disclosed to the affected communities. The status of RAP will go through
an independent and post implementation audit to ensure that residual concerns /
grievances are appropriately handled. Consultations were carried out through a series of
focus groups. A summary of the RAP in French and English is available to local
communities, and the Company will carry out further consultations on the contents of the
RAP and CIPP.

 All the actions included in the management program (EIAs/ESMPs, RAPs, and CIPP)
have been disclosed to the affected communities. Consultations were carried out through
a series of focus groups.

 A summary of the RAPs in French and English has been made available to local
communities, and KPDC has been carrying out further consultations on the contents of
the RAP and CIPP to clarify impacts, the project implementation process, entitlements,
and community benefits. The RAPs will go through an independent and post
implementation audit to ensure that residual concerns/grievances are appropriately
handled.
 Consultation for the EIAs has also been undertaken in accordance with the requirements
of the Decree of Cameroon 2005/0577, which requires:

 . The determination of the acceptability of the EIA, which involves consultation and
public hearings and which will also include meetings undertaken during the studies.
 . The proponent to provide thirty days notification prior to the first consultation meeting.
 . Minutes of meetings to be included in the EIA report.
 . After confirmation of acceptability of the EIA report, public consultation to be
undertaken. Following thirty days, a report of the findings is presented to the Minister.

  The preparation of the EIAs has involved identification of stakeholders through formal
and informal public meetings, document review, household surveys and unscheduled
informal discussions. Public consultation meetings were conducted with the twenty-five
affected villages. Subsequent formal public meetings have been held to update
stakeholders on the Project plans. These have been conducted primarily in French with
translation into other local languages where necessary. The following parties were
consulted:

 . Government Agencies, including the Kribi and Edéa Divisional Officers, ARSEL and
the Ministry of Environment and Protection of Nature; and
 . The affected villages in the Project area, namely Bebambwe 1 and 2, Londji, Bipaga,
Ebea, Pama, Bivouba, Mbebe, Elogbatindi, Bonguen, Dehane, Appouh Koukoue,
Malimba Farm, Ekite Pilote, Malimba Urbain, Ekite 1 village, Ekite 3 village, Londji
Health Centre staff, and Mpolongwe 1.

 Key issues raised during village consultations included:
 . requests for electricity and potable water supply;
 . assurance that consultation would be carried properly, with written explanation about
the Project;
 . clarification on resettlement and compensation;
 . land and security of tenure cultural protections for indigenous peoples;
 . requests to receive relevant training opportunities to enable PAPs to compete for
Project jobs; and,
 . lack of access to health care and, in particular, concern about the effects of possible
radiation from the transmission lines on human health.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                       02/25/2008
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                   02/25/2008
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                    02/25/2008
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                   11/02/2011
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02/25/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             02/25/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              02/25/2008
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02/25/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             02/25/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              02/25/2008
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                   Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   Yes
  and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Astrid Manroth                            11/02/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Robert A. Robelus                         11/02/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor                      11/02/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                     11/02/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Lucio Monari                              11/02/2011
  Comments:
