                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 10/04/2011                                      Report No.: AC6510
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Cameroon                            Project ID: P122153
Project Name: Cameroon Mining Sector Technical Assistance Project
Task Team Leader: Gotthard Walser
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 30, 2011 Estimated Board Date: January 26, 2012
Managing Unit: SEGOM                         Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance
                                             Loan
Sector: Other Mining and Extractive Industries (100%)
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (55%);Other public sector
governance (25%);Other social development (10%);Gender (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             30.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                           0.00
         Financing Gap                                                0.00
                                                                      0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
In line with the Government's vision, the Project Development Objective (PDO) is to
improve (i) the efficiency and transparency of mining sector management and (ii) the
frameworks for sustainable mining development. To achieve this objective, the project
will focus on institutional strengthening and on the local/regional integration of mining
activities. It will contribute to the strategic objective, which stretches beyond the scope
and timeline of this project, of increasing the contribution of mining to sustainable
growth and development.

3. Project Description
Component A. Access to Mineral Resources and Governance of Mining Operations
(Indicative Cost USD 21.5 millions). The main objective of this component is to address
fundamental impediments to properly manage the up-stream functions of the EI value-
chain, focusing particularly on access to resources (link 1), monitoring of mining
operations (link 2) and transparency and accountability mechanisms (mainly referring to
link 3). To achieve this, the project will support the following:
 - A.1 Program of Geo-data acquisition, organization and promotion. This sub-
component will assist the Government to acquire, interpret, store, and disseminate
information about the country's subsoil to better assess, manage and promote its mineral
potential. Activities will include: i) regional airborne geophysical surveys; ii) programs of
regional geological and geochemical data acquisition; iii) data interpretation studies and
mineral potential products; iv) design and installation of a geological information internet
portail ; v) supply of equipment and office renovations for Direction of Mines and
Geology as well as IRGM; vi) training and other capacity building efforts in geo-
sciences; vii) promotion of the geological data and knowledge through suitable printing
of maps and reports, media documentation, and participation at international conferences
and industry meetings.
 - A.2 Management of Mineral Rights and Operations. Key activities under this sub-
component are designed to strengthen government oversight capabilities through: i) a
more complete legal and regulatory framework; ii) a modern computer-based mining
cadastre; iii) capacity building in mining convention negotiations; iv) capacity building in
monitoring of mining operations; and v) a Strategic Environment and Social Assessment
(SESA) leading to better tools and more capacities to manage mining environmental and
social impacts.
 - A.3 Transparency and Accountability in the Mining Sector. To improve governance
and minimize potential negative effects of resource exploitation, in addition to public
improving transparency processes, it is critical to set up stronger accountability
mechanisms. The project will support the adoption of transparency standards like EITI
and Kimberley Process, and set up an accountability platform mechanism at national and
local levels as a vehicle for a more inclusive management of mining.

 Component B. Integration of Mining into Local and Regional Development (USD 5
millions). The main objective of this component is to improve the integration of current
exploration and future exploitation activities into local and regional development (in
reference mainly to the link 5 in the EI value chain). To achieve this, the project will
support the following:
 - B.1 Mineral Resources Dynamic Management System. Under this sub-component, a
GIS regrouping geological data with other natural resources and socio-economic
information will be designed in two regions where the Government is willing to better
understand the potential role of mining in regional development.
 - B.2 Coordination between Mines, Forests, and Environment Stakeholders. To better
address existing or perceived conflicts between mining and other land-uses, the project
will support Coordination bodies like the Technical Committee for Forum Monitoring
(CTSF) on the integrated management of forest and mining resources and a potential
decision-making inter ministerial committee comprising relevant ministries.
 - B.3 Local and Regional Linkages. The project will contribute to mitigating some of the
social risks induced by operations by empowering local communities and municipalities,
promoting local linkages and benefit sharing mechanisms in mining areas.
 - B.4 Framework for Mining Infrastructure Development. This sub-component will
support activities to facilitate the development of adequate PPPs for mining ancillary
infrastructure (transport, power, and/or port) and increase the chances of national mineral
resources to be sustainably exploited.
  Component C. Management and M&E of the project (USD 3.5 million).
  This component will support (a) Project coordination and management of procurement,
financial management, and disbursement ; and (b) monitoring and evaluation of project
implementation, including reporting, audits and assessment of safeguards policies. A
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) has already been established under the PPF, and is
managed by staff contracted by the Ministry of Mines. All the details pertaining to PIU
activities and other institutional arrangements are comprised in the Project
Implementation Manual.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Cameroon

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Paula F. Lytle (AFTCS)
   Mr Maman-Sani Issa (AFTEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Project is expected to have significant positive environmental impacts through
improving environmental management of the mining sector, promoting modern mining
methods and enhancing environmental management capacity.

 As a technical assistance (TA) operation, activities will have no significant physical
impact on the natural or social environment. Aerial surveys and modest office
refurbishment will take place, however, there will be no new construction or change in
physical footprint. These small civil works will be undertaken according to national and
local laws and regulations. Furthermore, the project will only provide support for
establishment and improvement of general sector management systems, and will not
engage in zoning, planning or preparatory activities for specific investments linked to
identifiable impacts.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
It is widely understood that mining activities often involve risk of significant adverse
impact on social and environment aspects if inadequate arrangements are in place to
manage them.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
To help the Government address such safeguards concerns for future mining investments
(which are not part of this project), a key project activity will be the preparation of a
comprehensive Strategic Environment and Social Assessment (SESA). The SESA will
involve a consultative process to help the Government to: (a) diagnose the key
environmental and social problems and opportunities associated with the anticipated
growth of Cameroon#s mining sector; (b) identify the policy, legal, regulatory, and
institutional adjustments and capacity-building actions needed to minimize the adverse
environmental and social impacts of mining operations and associated infrastructure
development, while enhancing the positive impacts; and (c) propose specific measures
that Government can implement in the near future to improve the environmental and
social sustainability of mining in the country, particularly through the Project. In
addition, to account for the specificity of Component B which will fund technical
assistance to prepare the Government for the integration of industrial mining into local
and regional development, the SESA will provide critical input to the preparation, as
necessary, of the following safeguards frameworks for the sector: i) an Environment and
Social Management Framework (ESMF); ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF);
and iii) an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF). Those 3 products will not be
implemented by the Bank, but would be meant to be helpful tools for the Government
when it needs to be involved in preparing/implementing the sector policy, specific plans
or programs in the future regardless the source of financing.

 In line with the approach taken for similar mining TAs in the Region (e.g. DRC,
Malawi, Burkina Faso.), the Government will produce ToRs for the SESA, to the
satisfaction of IDA, organize consultations, and disclose them in country and via the
Bank#s InfoShop before appraisal. The SESA itself will be carried out at the early stages
of project implementation.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The principal measure taken by the borrower is to conduct the SESA which will lead to a
series of recommendations. The Borrower will subsequently adopt a follow up action
plan to address the priorities. Part of them will be financed under the project.

 In terms of capacitites, the proposed operation will be implemented by a stand-alone
Project Implementation Unit (PIU), which will be set up during project preparation, with
the support from Project Preparation Facility (PPF) funds. Until now the MINIMIDT has
not yet implemented a World Bank operation with environmental and social safeguards.
Its capacity to implement such policies remains weak.It is expected that the MINIMIDT
capacity will be reinforced at the time of PIU establishment and that the PIU will be
fully-functional prior to project effectiveness. In addition to a project coordinator,
procurement and FM staff, the PIU will recruit (on a part time basis if sufficient) an
Environmental and Social Specialist with a sufficient experience on WB safeguards
policies and knowledge on Cameroon environmental and social regulations. In addition
the PIU will work closely with the Ministry of Environment and other relevant ministries.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include (i) communities living close to active or planned mining
activities, including indigenous communities; (ii) environmental and social development
non governmental organizations involved in extractive industry issues; (iii) government
institutions and their staff, responsible for the management of the mining sector, as well
as those involved in related issues (land-use planning, infrastructure, environment, social,
decentralisation, protected areas etc.); (iv)private sector and mining companies and their
staff; and (v) the Cameroon civil society at large.

 Discussions and consultations related to the project and sector development have been
carried out through a number of workshops on themes linked to governance or sector
studies during preparation. On safeguards policies, consultations are being organized in
Yaounde, Bertoua and Ngaoudere to discuss the draft terms of reference of the Strategic
Environmental and Social Assessment, prepared by the government and to be
implemented at project inception. Further consultations and disclosure of safeguard
policies will be an integral part of the SESA implementation.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 09/06/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             09/07/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              09/07/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
n/a


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              N/A
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          N/A
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Gotthard Walser         08/19/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Maman-Sani Issa         09/22/2011
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   07/05/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Paulo De Sa             07/05/2011
  Comments:
