                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 02/21/2012                                   Report No.: AC6358
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Cameroon                             Project ID: P114077
Project Name: CM - Lom Pangar Hydropower Proj. (FY12)
Task Team Leader: Meike van Ginneken
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 26,         Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: AFTEG                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Large Hydropower (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (67%);Rural services and
infrastructure (33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            132
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                          199.00
         African Development Bank                                     29.00
         Development Bank of the Central African States               15.00
         EC: European Investment Bank                                 40.00
         FRANCE: French Agency for Development                        79.00
                                                                     362.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective of the proposed Lom Pangar Hydropower Project is to
increase hydropower generation capacity, reduce seasonal variability of water flow in the
Sanaga River, and increase access to electricity.

3. Project Description
The LPHP will finance four components:
 •      Component 1: Lom Pangar regulating dam (total cost US$216 million): This
component will co-finance the construction of the Lom Pangar regulating dam on the
Lom River. Based on the engineering design, the dam will be 46 m high and 7 m wide at
the crest and be composed of a central overflow section with embankment wings and a
saddle dam. The dam will create a reservoir with a useful capacity of about 6 billion m3.
The contractor and also the owner’s engineer for the dam construction have been selected
accordin to World Bank procurement rules and the contracts signed. A 25 km access road
has been constructed from the village of Deng Deng to the site of the dam. This road will
be extended by 57 km from Deng Deng to Belabo. Price contingencies for construction
contracts have been included in the total cost of this component.
  •      Component 2: Lom Pangar power plant and transmission line (total cost US$62
million): A 30 MW hydro power plant consisting of four Francis turbines will be
constructed at the foot of the dam. The power plant will be connected through a 105 km
90 kV transmission line to the existing Eastern Network at Bertoua. An HV/MV
substation will be constructed in Bertoua. This component will include electrification of
13 localities in the Eastern Region including the construction of 108 km of MV line and
21 km of LV line and the electrification of approximately 2,400 households. This
component will also include environmental and social mitigation measures. The
hydropower will substitute some of the power currently generated by expensive thermal
generation units in the eastern electricity network currently being provided from AES
Sonel’s existing diesel power plant in Bertoua.
  •      Component 3: Environmental and Social Measures (total cost US$73 million):
This component is composed of six subcomponents related to the Environmental and
Social Management Plan, one subcomponent on the Resettlement Action Plans and one
subcomponent on local development. The subcomponents include i) Environmental and
social management of construction sites, including preventive archeological inventories
and digs; ii) management of reservoir and cumulative downstream mitigation measures,
including monitoring of water quality, monitoring of greenhouse gases, and the
monitoring of induced impacts downstream; iii) social mitigation, including public health
activities, livelihood restoration, rural electrification and the construction of Touraké
bridge; iv) management of the Deng Deng forest, including salvage logging for the
reservoir area, the adaptation of forest zoning of the Deng Deng forest, management of
the Deng Deng National Park, game management and control of illegal activities; v)
audits of Environmental and Social Safeguards, including independent quarterly audits;
vi) Implementation of the ESMP, including financing for the Senior Environmental
Advisor, a senior environmental specialist and financing of the environmental and social
panel and the dam safety panel. This subcomponent will also include training, capacity
building, and monitoring and evaluation; vii) Resettlement Action Plans, including the
resettlement and compensation for the persons affected by the dam and associated
reservoir and viii) Local development including management of a local development plan
and local investments.
  •      Component 4: Technical assistance and project management (total cost US$42
million): This component is composed of three sub-components i) Technical assistance,
ii) Strategic Communications and Consultation, and iii) project management. The
technical assistance sub-component will finance studies on reservoir filling and the
operation of the dam. Studies will also be undertaken on integrated water management in
the Sanaga River basin. The communications subcomponent will include a
communications campaign and outreach activities for the project. It will include also
include all communications related to the Environmental and Social Management Plan
such as the grievance mechanisms and conflict resolution. The project management sub-
component will finance certain positions to support the EDC PIU including an
international technical advisor, a senior engineer, a procurement specialist, financial
management staff, an accountant, a monitoring and evaluation specialist, a
communications specialist and other technical staff. . This sub-component will also
finance equipment, trainings and monitoring and evaluation activities of the project.

 3.     The adaptation of the Chad-Cameroon pipeline is an associated infrastructure of
the project. The reservoir created by the LPHP will require adaptation of two 12.5 km
stretches of the Chad-Cameroon pipeline (CCP) at two crossings of the Pangar River that
will be submerged once the reservoir is filled. The chosen adaptation method is a double
connection: new stretches will by-pass existing stretches to minimize supply
interruptions. Once the adaptation works are finalized the old stretches of pipeline will
no longer be used to avoid the risk that they would collapse under the column of water.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Lom Pangar Hydropower Project is located in Cameroon’s Eastern Province on the
River Lom about 4 km before its confluence with the Pangar River and 13 km before its
confluence with the Sanaga River. Its reservoir will flood an area of 537 km2, and the
project will have an influence over a large part of the Eastern Province. A hydroelectric
power plant will be constructed at the foot of the dam for the electrification of
neighboring towns and villages and a transmission line will link the power plant and the
Eastern Interconnected Network at Bertoua.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Yves Andre Prevost (PA9SS)
   Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTEG)
   Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
   Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                          X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                   X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
EDC has prepared an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) that
describes project impacts according to two complementary analytical frameworks, first
according to project phases (construction and operation) and then according to
environmental and social components.

  Construction phase impacts. Impacts during the construction phase are caused directly
or indirectly by activities at the nine main work sites, including: the dam site (as defined
in the bidding documents, including camps and quarries); the power plant; the
transmission line; access roads; the relocation of Lom Pangar Village; the recovery of
wood from the reservoir; the Touraké bridge, including its access roads; and the pipeline
modification.

 Construction activities will have indirect impacts on neighboring settlements and on
regional urban centers where workers will seek services. These impacts are both direct
and cumulative and are focused on specific areas the Deng Deng to Ouami corridor,
corridors along the access roads from Bertoua and Belabo, and the cities of Bertoua,
Belabo, and, to a lesser extent, Bétaré Oya. The impact arise either from these areas
hosting workers, creating additional stress on already insufficient services, e.g. health,
education and public security, which can in turn cause a population influx into the
project’s area of influence, increasing pressure on land resources and leading to an
expansion of areas under agriculture.

 While the scope of the impacts at each of the construction sites will vary, the impacts of
construction activities on the physical environment are concentrated at these sites, and
depend on contractor practices. The indirect impacts of construction at the different sites
are cumulative since they all affect either the Deng Deng forest or the populations living
in or next to the forest. Accordingly, the impacts of construction activities have been
regrouped into five categories: (i) general environmental, social and safety impacts of
construction activities, (ii) direct impacts on populations, (iii) indirect and induced
impacts on populations, (iv) direct impacts on natural habitats, and (v) indirect and
induced impacts on natural habitats.

 Mitigation measures with regard to the construction ESMP, as described in the ESMP
and RAPs, are similar for the same type of impacts at all sites (including the social
impacts). These measures have been integrated into bidding documents and contracts by
specifying environmental and social clauses.

 Impacts on natural habitats. The project will have significant impacts on natural
habitats, both during construction and operation of the dam. The reservoir will flood
approximately 537 km2 of natural habitats, including approximately 300 km2 of natural
forest. The cumulative footprint of the construction sites (apart from the reservoir) cover
approximately 4,000 hectares that will be converted from forest to other uses. Indirect
impacts on natural habitats could in the long term be more significant than the direct
impacts. They include loss of biodiversity because of poaching or habitat fragmentation
by the road network, including any roads built for the salvage of wood from the reservoir
before it is filled, and the expansion of agriculture into forest areas. The construction
phase might trigger a process of agricultural penetration into the Deng Deng forest that
could perpetuate itself long after commissioning of the dam and could significantly
reduce the integrity and ecological functions of the forest. The reservoir will transform a
terrestrial ecosystem of forest and savannas along a river into a lake ecosystem subjected
to strong seasonal variations in water levels. While the ESA indicates that none of the
flooded terrestrial habitat is critical, the dam site is located next to portions of the Deng
Deng forest that include critical habitats, particularly because of the presence of a viable
population of gorillas and a significant population of chimpanzees. The environmental
significance of the Deng Deng forest was identified in the context of the Chad-Cameroon
Pipeline Project and led to the pipeline’s realignment to avoid critical habitats. gradual
degradation of the Deng Deng forest could lead to the extinction of its gorilla population.

  Impacts on aquatic fauna: More than 130 fresh water fish species have been identified in
the Sanaga River, of which 26 contribute in a significant manner to the present catches in
the river. The Lom River is poor in aquatic species. Measures to ensure sustainable
fishery management are addressed as part of the ESA.

 Deforestation and release of greenhouse gases. Forestry issues include recovery of the
wood from the future reservoir, as well as control of induced impacts at the periphery of
the reservoir. Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from hydroelectric facilities occur
primarily during construction, from exhaust gas emissions, from construction machinery,
and during early operation as a result of decomposition of organic material inundated in a
reservoir. EDC estimates that GHG emissions from Lom Pangar reservoir would be about
21 million tons-equivalent of CO2 over 100 years. Over the same timeline, the LPHP will
avoid emissions of about 140 million ton-equivalent of CO2. The LPHP will also avoid
the potential local health risks of particulate matter, nitrous oxides and sulfur dioxide
emissions from thermal plants. Most of the biomass will be removed from the reservoir to
reduce greenhouse gases, particularly methane emissions after flooding. A supplemental
forestry study was commissioned to ensure that recovery of the wood follows Bank
guidelines, including benefit-sharing with local population, and to limit induced impacts.

 Oil spill risk in the reservoir. The project reservoir will flood about 5 kilometers of the
Chad-Cameroon pipeline. This creates the risk of an oil-spill in the reservoir and
requiring pipeline adaptation and changes to the existing ESMP of the CCP. The
reservoir created by the LPHP will require rebuilding two 12 kilometer stretches of the
CCP where they cross the enlarged Pangar River. Technical and environmental studies on
alternative pipeline routings have been completed and a technical option for the
adaptation has been adopted. The GOC has agreed to pre-finance the adaptation works
which will be carried out by COTCO. An Environmental and Social Management Plan
(ESMP) has been prepared by COTCO for the pipeline adaptation according to Bank
standards and the existing ESMP of the pipeline will be amended to ensure that its
implementation remains compliant. To manage the risk of an oil spill into the reservoir,
COTCO has updated the Area Specific Oil Spill Response Plan and the National
Hydrocarbons Society (SNH) has finalized the National Oil Spill Response Plan. COTCO
lenders have provided their consent to the signing of the agreement between COTCO and
the Ministry of Forests and Fauna (MINFOF) regarding Right of Way (ROW) for
maintenance activities in the vicinity of the Deng Deng National Park which will be
signed shortly.

  Social impacts. The populations in the area of influence of the project have been studied
using a combination of surveys and direct analyses (in particular in the field of health), as
well as a review of existing literature. The region has few inhabitants; the most densely
populated areas still have less than 10 inhabitants/km². The total population living in the
area of influence is estimated at about 30,000 people. Critical economic activities in the
area are agriculture (practiced by practically all households), sedentary and itinerant
livestock, hunting (essentially for domestic consumption), artisanal gold digging, fishing,
and the illegal timber trade using the railroad towards northern Cameroon.

 Expected social impacts are analyzed in detail in the project’s ESA and classified into
major, moderate, minor, and negligible impacts for the different phases of construction
and operation. The reservoir will displace economic activities currently, including limited
to agriculture, pastoralism, and gold extraction. In addition, the reservoir could increase
the prevalence of waterborne diseases along its periphery. Finally, the reservoir may
induce the development of some commercial fisheries, although the seasonal and inter-
annual variations in the reservoir’s level limit the fishery’s reliability.

 The involuntary resettlement of the populations directly affected by the dam, the plant,
the line, the creation of the DDNP and the access roads is described in the respective
RAPs along with their mitigating measures. Some additional mitigation measures are
included in the ESMP.

  The dam construction contractor has the contractual obligation for traffic, waste, labor
force, environmental monitoring, health and safety, and hazardous materials
management. This includes mitigation and management measures to deal with social and
health consequences of migrant workers coming into the communities, e.g. risks of
development of STI (Sexually Transmissible Infections) and of AIDS, and safety issues
from construction traffic.

  The EPC contractor hired by EDC will have responsibility for traffic, waste, labor force,
environmental monitoring, health and safety, and hazardous materials management.
Environmental and social clauses satisfactory to IDA are included in the bidding
documents and contracts for infrastructure investments as legal obligations for
contractors. This includes mitigation and management measures to deal with social and
health consequences of migrant workers coming into the communities, e.g. risks of
development of STI (Sexually Transmissible Infections) and of AIDS, and safety issues
from construction traffic.
 Expected positive impacts include job creation through the hiring of local labor for
construction works, improved living conditions through the benefits of rural
electrification, the creation of fishing opportunities in the reservoir, and the potential for
increased trade and tourism in an enclave area. EDC is committed to undertake ongoing
consultation activities with the local communities to help prioritize community
development needs aside from the required livelihood restoration measures.

 Throughout the consultations, local communities have requested additional social
support from the project beyond the social mitigation measures in the RAP and ESMP.
To this end, the project will finance the design and management of a Local Development
Program that will include: (i) a series of outreach and training activities to build local
capacity, and (ii) the implementation of micro-projects. Such micro-projects proposed by
local communities may include: i) provision of basic social infrastructure such as wells,
latrines, and class rooms; ii) basic maintenance and rehabilitation of critical sectors of
access roads; and, iii) support to the establishment of community groups that aim to
undertake sustainable community management of natural resources. The ESA notes the
possibility of additional social measures that would be managed by the project, and the
ESA and ESMP provide guidance on mitigating environmental and social impacts for
some of the types of works that would be undertaken by the Local Development Program
(e.g. rehabilitation of access roads, natural resources management). Once the Program is
established, and types and sites of civil works are finalized, Environmental and Social
Management Plans for the micro-projects will be prepared, consulted upon, and
disclosed.

 Land acquisition and resettlement. The proposed project will require about 4,000 ha of
direct and permanent land take, including 2,500 ha for the dam construction and reservoir
site; 530 ha for the construction of the transmission line; 400 ha for the construction of
access roads; 500 ha for the resettlement of the Lom Pangar village; and 70 ha for
pipeline adaptation works. Several RAPs have been prepared to mitigate, offset, and
reduce negative social impacts and to strengthen positive impacts on the communities in
the project area. The RAPs for the dam found that 756 households (3,267 people) and
855 households for the RAP of the transmission line from Deng Deng to Ouami and
powerhouse, respectively, were affected. Two villages and twenty eight encampments are
located in the proximity of the dam site. The Decree 2012/0034 regarding compensation
of project affected people was signed by the Prime Minister on January 24th, 2012. The
implementation of the RAPs will start with the compensation of PAPs and then some of
the PAPs will be relocated to the new Lom Pangar village. Seven households have been
affected by the creation of the Deng Deng National Park. All of them opted for cash
compensation and will be assisted by the project to receive comparable agricultural land
elsewhere. The abbreviated RAP for the Deng-Deng National Park was implemented
before it was cleared by the Bank. A Bank team audited the resettlement process in
February, 2011 and submitted recommendations to the GOC to ensure compliance. The
compensation was recalculated and the difference was paid to the project-affected people.

 The GOC has committed itself through the RAPs to the requirements of OP 4.12 for
resettlement and compensation. These requirements are considerably more stringent than
the applicable domestic legal framework and the Government of Cameroon, through the
signature of Decree 2012/0034, has agreed to compensate PAPs according to Bank
standards in all IDA-financed projects.

 Impacts on vulnerable people. According to a social assessment prepared at the project
site in February 2010, no Pygmies or other Indigenous Peoples, as defined in OP 4.10,
have been found in the project area. However, the social assessment noted the presence of
members of the Peulh/MBororo tribe in the project area, who mostly engage in herding
activities. A supplement to the study assessed the project’s impact on vulnerable people
of the Peulh/MBororo groups and proposes adequate compensation measures in the
project’s RAPs, such as support, technical monitoring, and medicine for cattle.
Furthermore, women, elderly, children, and sick an disabled people can be considered as
particularly vulnerable on account of their limited adaptation capacities, their mutual
need for dependency, and/or their fragility or specific needs. The needs of vulnerable
groups are given specific attention and support as part of the RAPs and in the ESMP.

 Dam safety concerns. Dam safety concerns, in particular, potential dam break flooding,
are an integral part of the World Bank Group’s review of any hydropower development.
The safety issues posed by the Lom Pangar dam and its impact on the proposed project as
well as an extensive review of all technical matters, has been undertaken by a dam safety
panel. This panel will continue to provide advice through the construction, initial filling,
and start-up of the dam, including any design or operational precautions to ensure that the
project is consistent with Bank safeguard policies. An Emergency Preparedness Plan
(EPP) has been drafted and includes a discussion of procedures for timely and reliable
identification, evaluation, and classification of existing or potential emergency
conditions. EDC has appointed an independent dam safety panel with terms of reference
and staffing acceptable to the World Bank Group. The dam design, including the
selection of the project site, seismic design requirements, the general arrangement of the
site, the location of the main structures, and the scheme for diversion of the river during
construction, has been reviewed by the dam safety panel and is considered appropriate for
the site and its construction feasible without undue difficulties. This review has also
included the evaluation of flood risks and their incorporation in the design of the Lom
Pangar dam and is considered to be consistent with industry design practice. Dam safety
plans (instrumentation plan, operation and maintenance plan and emergency preparedness
plan) and a construction supervision and quality assurance plan have been elaborated as
part of the revised engineering design and have been reviewed by the Bank and the dam
safety panel.

  Impacts on physical-cultural resources. Physical Cultural Resources were addressed in
the draft EA from 2005. Further work was conducted to meet Bank requirements, and
agreement was reached with the Ministry of Culture regarding the management of chance
finds. According to the supplementary mission in 2010, in the northern sector (between
Deng Deng and Bétaré Oya), a total of 72 sites has been surveyed, identified and
described over a distance of about 140 kilometer. The ESMP includes measures to
manage the cultural resources.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The project's immediate area of influence includes (i) the area inside which project’s
direct, indirect and induced impacts are felt, an area that can be represented as the area
around the main infrastructure elements required by the LPHP, as well as (ii) a much
larger area inside which the cumulative are felt. Beyond LPHP, major projects likely to
generate cumulative impacts in the coming decades are the hydroelectric projects at
Nachtigal, Song Mbongue and Kikot, sand extraction in the Sanaga, the Alucam
aluminum factory extension project at Edea, and the Pont-Rail dam project on the
Djerem, upstream of Mbakaou reservoir. Those projects have been subject to a census
and of a description of their potential impacts. Identified cumulative impacts include:
 •       The ESA estimated the forest disruption and destruction area to 32000 ha and
26000 ha of savannah.
 •       Direct and permanent loss of about 3000 ha of natural habitats;
 •       Creation of a 540 km² reservoir. The reservoir will trigger major impacts: (i)
stratification into water layers, with the deepe being anoxic; (ii) release of greenhouse
gases from the decomposition of vegetation, particularly methane, (iii) degradation of
water quality immediately downstream from the reservoir; and (iv) changes in seasonal
water flows that modify the ecology of the Sanaga River downstream to the estuary;
 •       Increased risk of oil spills in the reservoir because of the inundation of part of the
Chad-Cameroon pipeline;
 •       Increase in logging, poaching, and agricultural activities, resulting from
population influx and increased accessibility of the forest area on the north side of the
Lom river through the new Touraké bridge;
 •       Increase in social conflicts and increased STD/AIDS transmission risks;
 •       Fragmentation and degradation of the Deng Deng forest area and significant loss
of biodiversity; and
 •       Improved livelihood of local populations, opening of new markets, industrial
development.

  Mitigating measures have been included in the ESMP to mitigate these cumulative
impacts. Most particularly, the ESMP includes a detailed plan to monitor environmental
impacts in the estuary and middle valley following commissioning, as well as a provision
to fund measures if mitigation is required. The LPHP technical assistance component
will support the establishment of a Sanaga River basin commission, which will manage
tradeoffs, and take into account environmental issues in the management of the basin.
The ESMP also includes measures for the management of the Deng Deng forest
landscape that will mitigate induced and cumulative impacts upstream from the reservoir.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Lom Pangar has been subject to a series of analyses of alternatives in line with OP/BP
4.01. The studies conducted in the context of the analysis of alternatives for Lom Pangar
support the choice of the hydropower option to increase power supply on the
interconnected South network vis-a-vis the considered alternatives of thermal power from
natural gas for economic and environmental reasons. Two hydropower options were
considered: storage enhancement and new dams.

  A detailed analysis of alternatives is included in the project’s ESA. The main
advantages of constructing a dam at Lom Pangar include: (i) lower cost per stored m3
cost and it large storage capacity (ii) increased guaranteed generation capacity of existing
Song Loulou and Edea hydropower plants by at least 120 MW; (iii) unlocking
downstream hydropower projects on the Sanaga River, the basin where the main demand
is located, including both economic and political capital cities.; (iii) allowing for the
replacement of expensive thermal generation units in the Eastern Grid; and (iv)
possibility for electrification of neighboring towns and villages to the South of the dam
site. The project site and design was selected based on several studies of alternative
locations for reservoirs, considering costs and benefits as well as several options for
technical suitability. The environmental and social impacts of the project, including its
ancillary infrastructure were assessed to be manageable.

 The reservoir capacity optimization have been analyzed on the basis of the three
reference scenarios for power use from the ESDP 2030. Two hydropower options were
considered: storage enhancement and new dams. As far as storage enhancement, Lom
Pangar was considered superior compared to alternatives sites at Bankim, Mbakaou and
Litala because of its lower cost per stored m3 cost and it large storage capacity.

 The reservoir capacity optimization have been analyzed on the basis of the three
reference scenarios for power use from the ESDP 2030 (“low? 1,430 MW, “median?
1,680 MW, and “large ambitions? 3,839 MW demand forecast at horizon 2020). Two
hydropow were considered: storage enhancement and new dams. As far as storage
enhancement, Lom Pangar was considered superior compared to alternatives sites at
Bankim, Mbakaou and Litala because of its lower cost per stored m3 cost and it large
storage capacity. The analysis of alternatives also reviewed alternative technical options
for the LPHP, such as dam design (spillway design and optimization of reservoir’s
capacity); comparative analysis of various site access possibilities (railway and roads);
analysis of alternatives for construction camp area, quarries and material extraction sites;
alternative solutions for reservoir’s partial clearing before flooding; and, alternative
routing options for the transmission line.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) is made up of mitigation
measures that are proportional and sufficient to mitigate the impacts indentified in the
ESA.
 Management of the construction sites
 32. Management of the construction sites seeks to minimize impacts on the
environment, the workers, and on neighboring populations. Management rules for the
construction activities are spelled out in the Construction ESMP that was disclosed in
July 2010, more particularly in Chapter 9 which describes the environmental and social
clauses that EDC has incorporated into the main contract for the construction of the dam
and intends to incorporate into all works contracts. These clauses legally require that
contractors to prepare a Contractor ESMP. The contractor ESMPs are subjected to:
 •      Permanent control by EDC with the help in the field of the owner’s engineer, with
a system of warnings and penalties.
 •      Control by concerned government departments, as part of their inspection and
monitoring mandates.
 •      Control and policing missions on the construction sites and access roads by
MinFOF for forestry issues, and by MinDEF/Gendarmeri for public security.

 The following measures will be taken to limit the influx of populations in the area: (a)
Recruitment will be either in Bertoua or Bélabo, contractors are expected to buy their
supplies from Bertoua or Bélabo, and workers will be transported from the dam’s
construction site to Bertoua or Bélabo, to avoid the development of services targeting
them in villages close to the construction site.

  Management of the Reservoir and Downstream Area
  Management of the reservoir and of its downstream impacts will be the main
environmental challenge of the project during the dam’s operation phase. Management
of the dam and reservoir by EDC will seek to avoid or mitigate its direct, indirect,
induced and cumulative impacts. It will take into account the strong seasonal variation of
the water level, given that drawdown during the dry season will create opportunities for
recession agriculture, seasonal pastures, and other land uses. The ESMP also requires that
EDC give particular attention be given during the operation phase to the risks that water
releases or a dam breach would pose to persons and their assets downstream. Four
measures in the ESMP are directly related to the management of the reservoir:
  •      Monitoring of water quality: The ESMP proposes management rules for potential
stratification of the water layers and requires that EDC monitor water quality in the
reservoir as well as the quality of water released by the dam.
  •      Monitoring of greenhouse gases: EDC will implement a program to monitor
greenhouse gas releases after impoundment.
  •      Fisheries management: The current artisanal fishery along the Lom and Pangar
might develop into a commercial fishery after impoundment of the reservoirs. However,
annual variation of water levels will reduce fish stocks if the water level reaches the
anoxic layer. The ESMP proposes initially that two fisheries docks be built in Bétaré Oya
and the new village of Lom Pangar. In addition, the project includes measures to monitor
fish stocks and manage the fisheries through access rights and controls, including
measures to address the influx of foreign fishers and a registration system for of boats.
EDC will also undertake a study to assess the long-term viability and growth of the
fisheries. EDC will define the best way of working with the relevant administrations (
MINEPIA) to ensure the implementation of the fisheries issues. Management of potential
oil spills: COTCO intends to get a modification of its management plan approved for the
modified portion, once the issue of funding has been resolved with the GOC. An interface
legal agreement was signed between EDC and COTCO. As a complement to COTCO’s
measures, EDC is responsible, i cooperation with SNH, for the coordination of
Government agencies in the case of an oil spill.
 Regulation of the Lom River by the dam will have impacts downstream that are
cumulative to the modification of the hydrological regime of the Sanaga River by the
existing regulating dams at Mbakaou, Mapé and Bamenjing. Further developments along
the Sanaga River over the coming decades will be cumulative to the LPHP. The ESMP
includes measures that are based on the recommendations in the Cumulative Impact
Assessment. The program includes monitoring of downstream ecosystems to determine
the magnitude of changes (e.g. mangroves, marine biodiversity, natural habitats). Water
releases from the anoxic water layer in the reservoir will have a negative impact on
aquatic biodiversity immediately downstream from the reservoir, but probably no further
than the confluence with the Djerem. The water releases could also have an impact on
geomorphology and downstream salinity. The ESMP includes a program to monitor this
situation during construction and after impoundment. The ESMP also includes a
commitment that if significant changes are detected that require environmental
mitigation, the mitigation measures will be funded by LPHP.

 Social Mitigation
 Given its size, the Lom Pangar Hydropower Project will have a significant impact on
neighboring populations. The management of physically or economically displaced
persons is addressed through various Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) and is not
covered in the ESMP. However, local populations expressed expectations during the
consultations held between 2000 and 2010, which go beyond the RAPs. Accordingly, the
ESMP includes measures to mitigate additional negative impacts on living conditions,
most particularly health services resulting by the influx of population into the project
area. In addition, the eventual construction of a bridge at Touraké, which is key to
restoring the livelihoods of local herders, will open up new development perspectives
north of the reservoir.

 LPHP will have multiple impacts on human health. The health coverage in the area of
influence of the project is already insufficient for the existing inhabitants, and thus must
be improved to cover population influxes. Thus, the ESMP includes measures to prevent
any increase in waterborne diseases after impoundment. In addition, medical facilities
must be significantly improved by adding infrastructure, equipment, medication and
personnel.

 The ESMP also provides other measures to restore livelihoods, including agricultural
extension services (training on agricultural techniques, seeds, facilitation of market
access, animal husbandry and nutrition), support to fishermen (see paragraph 34 above),
and assistance to artisanal gold miners (e.g. techniques mine in an environmentally
sustainable manner; training miners in new professions). At Touraké Bridge, health risks
to cattle and other herd animals will be mitigated through the establishment of a cattle
park and veterinary services near the bridge.

 Management of the wood salvage in the reservoir
 The project is expected to undertake some wood salvage in the areas that would be
inundated by the dam. This would be a major part of the project, given the high
commercial value of the timber that will be submerged. The wood salvage could also
help reduce adverse effects on water quality and facilitate navigation and fishing in the
reservoir.

  The total volume of organic material from the area to be flooded by the reservoir
(including wood of lesser quality that can be used for firewood) is approximately 8
million m³. Of this, about 1 million m3, representing approximately 40 percent of
Cameroon’ annual timber production. However, due to technical, economic,
environmental, social constraints, a maximum amount of about 475,000 m³ is expected to
be salvaged from eight zones. The salvage logging is within the Deng Deng forest as
defined in the concept note for the UTO prepared by MINFOF in 2006.

 Salvage logging in the reservoir before impoundment will involve considerable
environmental and governance risks. A specific study on the wood salvage identified the
following risks: (i) degradation of the Deng Deng forest at the periphery of the future
reservoir through illegal logging; (ii) interference with the national process of
certification of origin and traceability of wood; and (iii) conflicts on revenue sharing.
Another risk is facilitation of poaching in the reservoir area, especially in Bertoua and
Bétaré Oya. These risks are accentuated by the weak governance and technical capacity
of MINFoF, which has both a technical and a regulatory role in forest management.

 While the Government undertakes longer-term measures to manage the Deng Deng
forest through the UTO, it will be critical during project implementation to ensure there
are adequate controls in place to ensure the wood salvage is focused only on the zones
being inundated by the dam, protect the forest from illegal logging and hunting, and
ensure the environmental protection and sustainability of the forest area. Such efforts
would need to include the following: i) effective monitoring of the wood salvage to limit
the creation of new access roads in the area, and ensure a continuous level of monitoring
stations located around the control Deng Deng National Park as well as those specifically
established for the wood salvage; ii) a requirement that any logging must be done in such
a way as to ensure the traceability of wood. This obliges contractors to have an FSC
(Forest Stewardship Council) or OLB (Origine Légale Bois – Legal Wood Origin)
certificate; iii) respecting national laws concerning the distribution of revenues from
recovery to local communities; and iv) taking strong measures to monitor and control
poaching, with checkpoints and guards (ecoguards and community guards). Year-round
24-hour checkpoints, staffed with qualified agents, will be installed at Deng-Deng,
Mararaba, Bétaré Oya, Bertoua and Bélabo.

 This system of control and monitoring will (i) establish firm controls over the areas of
the wood salvage, origin of wood, and the access roads, thus preventing illegal logging
during and after the wood salvage; (ii) include an independent audit function, per the
requirements of FSC and OLB; (iii) avoid wherever possible pathways for the wood
salvage that pass through wooded areas outside of the salvage zones; (iv) respect the
requirements of the ESMP for the Chad-Cameroon pipeline by avoiding the development
of access roads that pass through the pipeline to join the railway Mbitom or Tête
d’Elephant; (v) prevent access to the reservoir through the Deng Deng National Park,
except via the dam construction site, (vi) limit the removal of wood by the village of
Deng Deng to wood from left bank of the Lom between the dam site and the existing
boundary of the FMU 10065 forest concession; (vii) establish a single discharge point
through Mararaba and towards an improved transfer point at Touraké; (viii) help put in
place a mechanism for equitable sharing of revenue along local populations; and, (ix)
ensure that an area near Mbitom does not become a transhipment route for illegal timber
from Deng Deng National Park and Mbam Djerem.

 There is a possibility that bids for the wood salvage may be unsuccessful because it is
simply too costly and risky to remove the wood. For this reason, it is important to note
that one outcome may that all the wood remains in the reservoir. There will be no
significant negative environmental impact (the emission of gases has the greenhouse
effect is estimated to increase by 2-3% if the biomass is not removed, and the risks of
induced impacts in the area are reduced). If the wood remains in the reservoir, it will not
have an impact on the implementation of the dam. Finally, it is possible that the cost to
the government to manage the process will be much more expensive than the fees paid by
operators, and thus the decision to not cut the wood may have a net positive financial
outcome.

 Management of the Deng Deng Forest
 Adaptation of the UTO - Effective structuring of the Deng Deng forest area will
contribute to its sustainable management. Prior efforts to establish an Operational
Technical Unit (Unité Technique Opérationnelle, UTO) in 2006 were never completely
implemented (except for Forest Management Units (FMU) and more recently the
DDNP). In addition, the 2006 design for the UTO does not allow the satisfactory
management of LPHP’s induced impacts on the Deng Deng forest. The ESMP notes that
the Government of Cameroon is working towards the long-term management of the forest
by eventually structuring it into three zones: (i) areas that will remain permanent forest
land; (ii) areas that are managed by communities; and (iii) areas that are open to
settlement or agriculture.

 Game management - The reservoir is likely to create a growth pole, which might result
in increased commercial poaching if unchecked. While “poaching? by local people for
subsistence has only a limited impact, commercial poaching inevitably leads to a
significant loss of biodiversity, even to the disappearance of some species. Commercial
poaching has already grown following the improvement of the road from Bertoua to Lom
Pangar, which facilitates the evacuation of bushmeat to urban markets, and the use of
bushmeat for feeding construction workers on the preparatory sites (access roads,
owner’s camp, and the resettled Lom Pangar Village). The ESMP includes measures to
control commercial poaching, including a complete ban on hunting in the DDNP, the
effective deployment of ecoguards in the forest and a ban on the commercialization of
uncertified bushmeat in Bertoua and Bélabo. The ESMP also includes sustainable
management measures for legal bushmeat channels (species that are not on the list of
species controlled by MINFOF) and local awareness campaigns, in order to allow local
consumption by communities within the UTO.

 Management of the Deng Deng National Park
 The Deng Deng National Park (DDNP) serves a dual purpose: (i) it offsets the direct
environmental impacts of the project, as well as the loss of natural habitats because of the
reservoir; and (ii) it contributes to the viability of the Deng Deng gorilla population (as
well as chimpanzees), although the gorilla population are not confined to the DDNP.

  Modifications of the boundaries of DDNP - The ESMP proposes changes in the
boundaries of DDNP to mitigate impacts on the gorilla population, including: (i) an
extension of its southern boundary to the road from Satando to Carrefour Mansa, and of
its western boundary to the road from Santado to Goyoum (excluding plots already being
cultivated), with in counterpart the establishment of the Belabo Communal Forest south
of the road; (ii) the inclusion of an ecological corridor in the south of Hona'a towards
FMU 10065 north of River Sesse, and (iii) approximately 10,000 hectares between the
current boundary of DDNP and the future reservoirs, but neither settlements nor
agricultural activities are currently prohibited, whereas access to the area will be greatly
facilitated by the reservoir after impoundment and a network of roads that is required for
the safe management of the CCP.

 Management and Sustainable Financing of the Deng Deng National Park - MinFOF will
put in place a park management team, based in the Deng Deng village. As an initial and
critical first step, MinFOF will prepare a management plan for the DDNP, with the
support of its technical partners. Three committees (advisory, management and
scientific) will be established for the national park. Technical assistance will be provided
by a NGO or consultancy firm which will be co-located with the MinFOF team at the
Park’s Headquarters in Deng Deng village.

 Surveillance and enforcement activities in and around the DDNP will be carried out by
70 “rangers? vested with police powers so that they may make arrests and seizures as
needed and “community wardens? to monitor wildlife, reporting, and community relation
The dam construction phase presents the highest risks to conserving populations of large
primates. The National Park team will need to be organized quickly and establish itself
with local communities and other stakeholders. The filling of the reservoir will take 18
months to allow animals still present after the logging phase to migrate outside the area
of the dam. During this phase monitoring activities will be maintained with the same
intensity as during the construction phase. Once impoundment is completed, park
management and monitoring will revert to the base case scenario, with MinFOF and
technical partners ensuring the day-to-day functioning of the park and outreach to
stakeholders.

  The technical partner will support MinFOF to develop the detailed protocol for
monitoring, including the parameters to be measured, the methods, sampling sites,
frequency of measurements, detection limits, and definition of thresholds that signal the
need corrective actions. The protocol will also identify the scope of independent third
party evaluations and approaches for communicating results to stakeholders. The Park
management team, with assistance from the technical partner, will be required to provide
written reports to the Park Management Committee twice per year. A Management
Effectiveness Tracking Tool will be used by the National Park as one measure of its
performance. Annual Technical audits will be conducted by a third party to certify the
functioning of the DDNP and identify recommendations and corrective actions to
improve overall park functioning.

 The recurrent costs for DDNP will be paid from a designated account managed by EDC,
which will have fiduciary oversight and responsibility for the use of the funds on behalf
of the Government of Cameroon. EDC will contract the technical partner as well as the
technical auditor. The designated account will also pay for MinFOF salaries (to be
agreed). EDC, MinFOF, and MINFI will stipulate these financial arrangements in a
[Memorandum of Understanding ].
 ESMP management and capacity building

 The implementation arrangements for the ESMP are fully integrated with the overall
implementation arrangements of the project. EDC is the ultimate responsibility for the
project’s compliance with Cameroonian legislation and World Bank safeguards
guidelines. EDC coordinates closely with these Ministries involved in the project, notably
MINEP, MinFOF, the Ministry of Social Affairs, the Ministry of Economy and Regional
Planning (MINEPAT), and the Public Works Ministry for the construction of the access
roads. COTCO: COTCO has a specific role to play in constructing the pipeline adaptation
ahead of the reservoir flooding. In doing so, COTCO complies with its own IFC/World
Bank requirements and cooperates with EDC under the conditions of an Interface
Agreement (IA) being finalized as of February 2011. NGOs will be involved in the
monitoring and evaluation of the ESMP and RAP implementation.

 The independent expert panel is an independent entity set up by EDC in agreement with
GOC and donors to provide advice and recommendations on all environmental, social,
and dam safety aspects of the project. EDC will extend the mandate of the Environmental
and Social Panel of experts throughout the duration of the ESMP.

 EDC will implement a monitoring and evaluation program, including monitoring of
ESMP indicators, monitoring of impacts and their mitigation, as part of the regular donor
reporting. These reports will be available in EDC's local office in Bertoua. The ESMP
also includes as a program to provide standardized cartographic information to support
ESMP implementation. The ESMP includes a periodic technical audit which will enable
the project team to identify any adverse impacts and, if any mitigation measure is not
being effective, will enable EDC to effect corrective action.

 Given the very rapid social changes that the PHLP is likely to trigger in its area of
influence, the ESMP includes conflict an overall grievance mechanism, a communication
program, as well as conflict prevention measures, including the mediation and resolution
of conflicts. The grievance mechanism provides affordable and accessible procedures for
third-party settlement of disputes arising from resettlement. There are grievance
mechanisms at the village level and at the EDC communication Centers. At the village
level, there will a mediation committee and a "Cellule de base". Their roles will be to
register complaints coming from populations and ensure that cases are resolved.
  The ESMP includes continued capacity building measures to strengthen the EDC’s
capacity to handle safeguards issues according to international standards, particularly in
the context of large energy infrastructure projects such as LPHP, including technical
assistance. The capacity building measures in the ESMP build on the technical assistance
to environmental and social studies; AFD financing the Wildlife Conservation Society
(WCS) to assist the GOC with the establishment of the Deng Deng National Park. The
GOC’s and EDC’s team will also continue to receive guidance and support as needed
from the Bank’s safeguards specialists. Complementing this ongoing support, the
proposed project will include further measures to ensure satisfactory handling of
safeguards during the construction and operation of LPHP. In particular, the project will
include a suitable training program, supported by a technical assistance package as
needed.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders identified are the State, industry, local NGOs, farmers, hunters,
local fishermen, herders, gold diggers, and vulnerable groups.

 Extensive public consultations on the ESIA started in 2004 and have continued
throughout project preparation. Most of the key stakeholders were consulted on all
safeguards documents, including the ESMP and the various RAPs. Safeguards documents
have been disclosed locally in the Public Centers, at the EDC web site and through the
World Bank’s Infoshop. EDC has recruited an independent panel of environmental and
social experts to provide advice during the preparation of the safeguards documents and
the public consultation process. During the preparation of the LPHP, the following
selected means were used for targeted communication:
 •      Information was disseminated through an IUCN website until 2009, and through
EDC’s after 2009. Other dissemination channels included the World Bank website as
well as national and international media;
 •      At the national level, information is disseminated via the press organizations and
during information meetings with national and international journalists;
 •      At the regional level, information is disseminated through the local press and
through meetings targeted local authorities, « chefs de canton » and « chefs de village »,
opinion leaders, elites, NGO, the public centers and other interested parties;
 •      At the local level, meetings in all villages were set up during preparation of the
ESIA and during public hearings organized either by EDC, MINEP and MINFOF.

 The following is a summary of the main consultation activities to date:
 •      January 2004 through 2005 : Launching workshops, followed by collaborative
and information meetings in some 60+ sites in total, targeting the whole of the local
populations, as well as smaller groups, like women or agriculturists living close to the
future reservoir (Northern Betare Oya sector);
 •      Starting in April 2005, the outcomes of the ESIA were presented to the local
populations, NGOs and regional/national administrative authorities;
 •       In 2009, faced with evolutions in the design of the project’s, ESIA and ESMP, a
new cycle of information and local population consultation was organized;
 •       On February 3, 2010, an interactive workshop in Yaoundé was attended by
approximately 100 representatives from representations from civil society, the private
sector, and national, regional and local governments.
 •      In 2010, the drafts for the dam and transmission line RAP were shared with civil
society organizations and their comments were integrated in the final documents.
 •      In January/February 2011, MINEP, with EDC support, organized a second round
of public consultations in Yaounde, Bertoua, Belabo, Betare-Oya, Garga Sarali and Deng
Deng. In January/February 2011, MINEP, with EDC support, organized a second round
of public consultations in Yaounde, Bertoua, Belabo, Betare-Oya, Garga Sarali and Deng
Deng, as well as consultations with EDC in Yaoundé. In April 2011, the Bank held
consultations with civil society organizations.
 •      In February 2012, EDC held consultations with civil society organizations. The
Bank, AFD, and EIB attended the meeting.

 EDC has reinforced its Communication Unit with the aim to strengthen its broad
communication capacity and has opened a local office in Bertoua, close to the project
site. Consultations with the population South of the dam site (village of Deng Deng and
surrounding villages) and North of the dam site (village of Betare Oya and surrounding
villages) are ongoing as part of the RAP and the implementation of the Deng Deng
national park. EDC is updating its communication strategy and will continue to plan
upcoming information and coordination meetings to be held in the framework of the ESA
process.

 The World Bank has developed a comprehensive communication strategy to explain its
approach to energy sector interventions and its support to preparatory activities for the
LPHP to civil society, NGOs and other stakeholders. The communications to date has
focused mainly on in-country stakeholders and to some extent on international NGOs
who have followed the proposed project in Cameroon. The following communication
actions have already been undertaken:
 •       Support for the preparation and dissemination of analytical work on political
economy issues around the project; for example, sustainable management of the Deng
Deng forest and the pricing of power for the aluminum industry;
 •       Promotion of proactive, open consultation with stakeholders including CSOs and
NGOs, including regular meetings at the Bank office in Yaoundé with CSOs to discuss
the Bank’s energy work in Cameroon in 2007, 2008, 2010 and 2011 and a consultation
among donors, Government and CSOs was organized to review options for expanding
electrification in Cameroon in early April 2008.
 •       Communications on World Bank safeguard policies, including environmental and
social standards as well as procedures for public consultation and disclosure of
information.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02/16/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             03/21/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              03/21/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                              02/24/2012
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02/16/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             03/21/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              03/21/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02/15/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             02/07/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              02/07/2012
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        Yes
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                      Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                     Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or      Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?               Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential             Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   Yes
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           Yes
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        Yes
provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                              Yes
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts         Yes
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements           Yes
been made for public awareness and training?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's          Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project      Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the              Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name               Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Meike van Ginneken              02/17/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Yves Andre Prevost              02/17/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor            02/17/2012
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna   02/17/2012
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi           02/17/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Lucio Monari                    02/17/2012
  Comments:
