                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/16/2011                                    Report No.: AC5321
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Cape Verde                           Project ID: P115464
Project Name: CAPE VERDE - Recovery and Reform of the Electricity Sector Project
Task Team Leader: Stephan Claude Frederic Garnier
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 3, 2011 Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTEG                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: General energy sector (80%);General water, sanitation and flood protection
sector (20%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            53.50
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                       5.00
                                                                        5.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed main development objectives of the Recovery and Reform of the
Electricity Sector Project (RRESP) are to increase electricity generation in the Islands of
Sao Vicente and Santiago and to assist ELECTRA to reduce electricity losses in Santiago
Island.

3. Project Description
The proposed project, whose cost is estimated at US$58.5 million (of which US$53.5
million IBRD), comprises the following four components:
 Component 1: Priority Investments in Electricity and Water (IBRD US$ 42.5 million)
 a)     Extension of Palmarejo Power Plant in Praia (Island of Santiago) including
through the installation of two 10MW heavy fuel oil (HFO) fired generating unit(s) of
electricity generation. (US$30,000,000)
 b)     Extension of Lazareto Power Plant in Mindelo (Island of Sao Vicente) including
through the installation of one 5.5MW HFO fired generating unit(s) of electricity
generation, (with common facilities for another 5.5MW unit to be installed in the future).
(US$11,000,000)
 c)     Additional water storage capacity in Palmarejo including through the construction
and installation of two water storage tanks and related interconnecting pipes at Palmarejo
Power Plant. (US$1,500,000)
 Component 2: Support ELECTRA#s Loss Reduction Plan (IBRD US$ 5.5 million and
GoCV US$ 0.5 million)
 a)     Improve ELECTRA#s ability to measure energy balances at different levels of
electricity transmission and distribution chain including through the provision of
metering equipment. (US$2,300,000)
 b)     Support for reducing electricity distribution losses by preventing meter and
metering installation tampering including through the provision and installation of
metering technology. (US$3,200,000)
 c)     Support to ensure proper management and optimization of the remote metering
capabilities installed in the existing system through the design and implementation of an
automatic metering management system. (US$500,000)
 Component 3: Support ELECTRA#s Reform and Sector Governance (IBRD US$ 1.5
million)
 a)     Support activities related to electricity and water sectors# reform and
reorganization of ELECTRA, including through the provision of technical assistance to
complete the design and implement key reform steps in the electricity and water sectors.
 b)     Support for monitoring the Performance Management Contract including through
the provision of technical assistance.
 Component 4: Project implementation, communication and monitoring and evaluation
(IBRD US$ 1.5 million and GoCV US$ 1.5 million)
 a)     Support the PIU for effective implementation and supervision of the Project
including through the provision of technical assistance, training, audits and design and
carrying out of a communication campaign to disseminate ELECTRA#s reform.
 b)     Support ELECTRA for effective supervision of the Part A and B of the Project
including through the provision of technical assistance

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The sites were the three main investments will be commissioned belong administratively
to ELECTRA and will be housed in its facilities.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Amadou Konare (AFTFW)
   Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project initially prepared an RPF and disclosed it in-country and at the InfoShop in
December 2010. However, the technical missions have subsequently confirmed that OP
4.12 is not triggered for this project and that no Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) is
necessary as no land acquisition or resettlement is foreseen.
  Although the potential environmental and social impacts of the three main investments
under the proposed project are expected to be generally minimal, potentially localized
impacts may occur, thus requiring appropriate mitigation. Therefore the GoCV has
prepared three standalone ESIAs each including an ESMP for the proposed investments,
namely the Extension of the Palmarejo Power Plant (Praia), Extension of Mindelo Power
Plant on Sao Vicente Island, and Construction of two additional water storage tanks
(capacity:2x1,500m3) in Palmarejo (Praia). The foreseen impacts of the project are
expected to be minimal and site specific (activities will take place in existing power and
water stations; human settlements are within boundaries relatively distant from the
existing stations). The ESIAs/ESMP for the three main investments of the project have
also been prepared and cleared and disclosed in-country on October 31, 2011 and at the
Bank#s InfoShop on November 3, 2011 at the Infoshop.
  Potential negative environmental impacts, as described in the sub-projects specific
ESIAs/EMSPs, mainly result from construction, operation and maintenance of power
plants or the construction of the water tanks. In general, clearing of vegetation from sites
and right of ways and construction of access roads are the main sources of construction-
related impacts. These include, but not limited to: soil erosion due to land clearing and
degradation; habitats degradation; air and noise pollution; land acquisition, loss of
livelihood and economic activities on the part of project affected people; impacts on
cultural and historical physical resources.
  In addition there is the risk of Atmospheric emissions, liquid effluents from the main
power plants and water reservoir during operation, beyond accepted levels, if proper
monitoring and maintenance of equipment, machinery and various emissions is not in
place. These risks are varied, to include: contamination of air by nitrogen oxides (Nox);
contamination by carbon monoxide, fine particles, sulfur oxides, volatile organic
compounds (VOCs) and total organic compounds (TOC). Other effluents that may be
generated during exploitation include: oil sludge, oil waste from machinery/engines, and
other types of residue, such as: the cooling water system of from HV and LV motors,
recovery of wash water from boilers, water blow down boilers, cleaning water of the
main transformers, domestic wastewater, heavy fuel oil centrifugation cleaning area. All
which will also require proper management, treatment and/or disposal, as detailed in the
three ESIAs/EMSPs.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No potential indirect and/or long term impacts have been identified during project
preparation.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The "without project" scenario would result in the continuation of the current situation,
which would imply negative externalities in terms of saturation of the grid, load shedding
and especially degradation in the level of comfort and security of beneficiaries across the
country at large. This will eventually lead to reduced yields and the efficiency power and
water production and distribution, as well as sector performance.
 The Energy sector and by implication Electra, is viewed as growth engine for the
country#s industrial, economic and social development. The current situation will be an
obstacle to Cape Verde#s social and economic goals. "The do nothing" alternative would
curb the desire and policy initiatives to improve the energy sector, and consequently
further erode industrial, socioeconomic development and the welfare of its growing
population, not only at the project intervention zones, but across the country at large.
 The ESIAs/ESMF provide for a systematic screening process for the investment
components, namely: (i) power generation in Praia and Mindelo; and (ii) a water storage
capacity in Praia. They define procedures and institutional responsibilities and set out
basic guidelines and principles to be used for subproject level environment and social
assessments, evaluation of potential impacts and preparation of appropriate mitigation
measures through (ESIES, ESMPs) during project implementation, if deemed necessary.
The project conforms with the Bank#s Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The ESIAs/ESMPs conducted subsequently using guidelines of the ESMF, provide an in-
depth and comprehensive analysis of the environmental and social impacts/risks during
construction, exploitation and maintenance phases (biophysical and socioeconomic
environments) associated with these investments, as well as devise mitigation measures
commensurate with those impacts. These mitigation measures are detailed in the
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), and in the Environmental and
Social Impacts Assessment (ESIA), which have been prepared and disclosed in-country
and at the Bank#s InfoShop prior to appraisal.
 In addition, together the safeguard instruments provide sound institutional arrangements
for implementing and monitoring project activities, outlining the roles and
responsibilities of the various technical agencies and stakeholder groups involved with
the implementation and monitoring of identified measures. The ESIAs/ESMPs also make
provisions for capacity strengthening measures and awareness raising campaigns
targeting relevant actors closely involved with implementation and monitoring of project
environmental and social management.
  Overall coordination of the project environmental and social safeguards function will be
carried out by ELECTRA, who will appoint a seasoned environmental and social
specialist to that effect, no later than 30 days after project effectiveness. He/she will be
responsible for overseeing project compliance with environmental and social guidelines
and proposed mitigation plans in implementing Component 1 and 2 of the project, in
accordance with national and Bank policies and procedures.
  For security purpose and to avoid any potential risk to the project, adequate financial
provision to face any potential resettlement claims arising out of involuntary resettlement
has also been made in the Project financing. All contractor bidding documents will
include specific environmental and social clauses to be strictly implemented during
implementation phase. Resident Engineers will be appointed at each of the construction
sites to closely monitor contractors# work. The resident engineer#s team shall include an
environmental and social specialist, who will attend to the effective mitigation measures
incumbent to the contractor.
  Responsibility and oversight of project#s overall compliance with national and Bank
environmental and social safeguards policies will be devolved to the Project
Implementation Unit (PIU), who will be working with the Environmental and Social Unit
of ELECTRA, and in close collaboration with the Ministry of Environment (a Social and
Environmental Focal Point has been identified), and other technical agencies involved, or
able to play a vital role water supply and sanitation facilities. These include, but not
limited, to the National Environmental Agency (NEA), the Directorate of Public Health,
the Directorate of Cultural Heritage, the Directorate of Civil Protection, the
Municipalities of Praia and Mindelo etc. A #protocole d#accord# sanctioning this close
partnership between ELECTRA, Ministry of Environment, as well as clear Terms of
Reference, outlining the mode of intervention of the national environmental agency, will
be issued and ratified by the various parties, prior to project commencement. Details on
how other relevant actors will intervene will be worked out prior to project#s
commencement. Further, all civil works, will be contingent on broad-based and sustained
consultation with local communities.
  A second dimension of the monitoring program would focus on sound operations of
energy and potable water production and supply water systems. This calls for regular
review, as described in the reports, of the system performance standards, observance of
EHS standards, as it applies to the biophysical environment, company#s employees and
local community health, safety and well being. Required information will be collected to
monitor attainment of those standards in an efficient and timely fashion.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The preparation of the various safeguard instruments, including the ESMF, RPF and sub-
project-specific ESIAs and ESMPs, which were subsequently prepared for investment
purposes, followed a broad based consultation approach involving relevant stakeholder
groups in the public and private sector and civil society, consistent the approach adopted
at the onset of project preparation. This approach will be carried on throughout project
implementation and supervision phases. The ESMF and RPF have been already disclosed
in-country and at Bank InfoShop, upon clearance by ASPEN. Similarly the sub-project-
specific ESIAs/ESMPs, as they relate to extension of the Mindelo and Praia power plants,
and the Palmarejo water storage facilities, which are now available, have also be
disclosed in-country and at Bank InfoShop, following review and clearance by ASPEN.
 Key stakeholder groups include, but not limited, to the National Environmental Agency
(NEA), the Directorate of Public Health, the Directorate of Cultural Heritage, the
Directorate of Civil Protection, the Municipalities of Praia and Mindelo and local
communities. The main objective is to devise an appropriate mitigation plan that is
commensurate to the identified impacts, as defined by the promoter, the beneficiaries.
Chief among the concerns raised by the stakeholder groups is the lack proper treatment
and disposal of waste water generated by the power plants. They recommend the
procurement and establishment of wastewater treatment at the power plants. This will
allow the management of the plants to treat and dispose of wastewater in a more effective
manner, with less public health issues.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 06/30/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/31/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              11/02/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
  If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
  explain why:



  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
  ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

  OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
  review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
  credit/loan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Stephan Claude Frederic Garnier           11/15/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Amadou Konare                             11/15/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna                        11/15/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                     11/15/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Lucio Monari                              11/15/2011
  Comments:
