                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/05/2012                                     Report No.: AC6679
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Caribbean                            Project ID: P114963
Project Name: Caribbean Regional Communications Infrastructure Program
Task Team Leader: Mavis A. Ampah
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 5, 2012       Estimated Board Date: May 1, 2012
Managing Unit: TWICT                          Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                              Loan
Sector: General information and communications sector (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (29%);Regional
integration (29%);Regulation and competition policy (14%);Other public sector
governance (14%);Education for the knowledge economy (14%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            30
IDA Amount (US$m.):             25
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The primary development objective of the proposed program is to increase access to
regional broadband networks and advance the development of an ICT-enabled services
industry in the Caribbean Region.

 This would be achieved through a targeted set of strategic interventions harmonized at
the regional level but tailored to the needs of the individual countries, including support
for the development of regional ICT infrastructure and promotion of ICT-led innovation.

 As a result of the program, it is expected that the whole Caribbean population would
benefit by having access to new communications services, sources of information and
knowledge, enhanced and diversified employment opportunities, improved delivery of
public and private sector services, increased productivity and transparency of
government, and more rapid and coordinated response to emergencies. Overall, the
region would see a boost to its competitiveness, social inclusion, economic
diversification and regional integration efforts.
3. Project Description
Lending Instrument

 The proposed lending instrument is a Regional horizontal Adaptable Program Loan
(APL). The proposed APL structure will allow countries substantial flexibility to join the
program on a need and readiness basis, and to select the elements of the program that fit
their immediate needs within an overall harmonized regional framework, while allowing
for incremental incorporation of additional elements in the future. Triggers for countries
joining the program include sector liberalization, country commitment, the explicit
request from countries to participate in CARCIP, as well as confirmation from
participants to ensure an open and non-discriminatory access to communications
infrastructure, and further commitment to pursue Public Private Partnerships for projects
funded under CARCIP.

 Program components

 The program will have different elements depending on the priority areas for each of the
participating countries, and will be tailored to each country’s needs. However, the
interventions for each of the participating countries will be structured along the same set
of strategic priorities and will be closely coordinated and jointly implemented to the
extent possible to ensure regional spillover effects are maximized.

 It is expected that the first phase of the program will focus substantially on the
connectivity component while allowing for selective inclusion of enabling environment
to foster growth of a robust regional IT and ITES industry. A third cross-cutting
institutional development and capacity building component will lend support to the
national and regional institutional frameworks to implement and monitor the program.
Details of the key components as follows:

 Component 1: This component addresses the: (i) physical connectivity infrastructure,
and (ii) enabling environment that would ensure Public Private Partnership in the
ownership, management and competitive access to the infrastructure. Physical
connectivity infrastructure activities will include support to develop missing
infrastructure links such as submarine cable infrastructure, terrestrial broadband
backbone fiber networks and cross-border links leveraging government networks as
needed, and national and regional Internet Exchange Points (IXPs). Enabling
environment activities will include (a) support to structure/promote public-private
partnerships in the deployment of submarine cable infrastructure, including landing
stations, (b) telecoms regulatory support to ensure appropriate governance structures and
competitive access to connectivity infrastructure, (c) harmonization of policies, shared
services and institutional capacity building, and (d) strategies and frameworks to promote
effective use of ICT for productive activities.

 Component 2: ICT-led innovation. This component will support activities that will
leverage the regional broadband infrastructure to foster growth of regional IT and IT
Enabled Services (ITES) industry. Activities will include: (i) development of regional
network of IT and technology incubators, IT parks and technology centers, and
investment promotion centers; (ii) targeted skills development and certification programs;
(iii) creation of special financing vehicles, such as regional or national Venture Capital
Funds for regional IT/ITES industry, as well as (iv) strategies, policies, regulatory and
incentive structures to support a multi-lingual regional IT and ITES industry.

 Component 3: Implementation Support. This component will support implementation,
institutional and capacity building, knowledge-sharing activities, as well as monitoring
and evaluation of the program to ensure that the program delivers results, both at the
national and regional level.

 A fourth component is included in the overall program design, but will not be triggered
under Phase 1. This component will be aimed at improving government and private
sector efficiency and transparency by leveraging the regional broadband infrastructure
towards the delivery of a wide variety of e-services.

 Implementation arrangements

  The implementation arrangements will need to be fully worked out as project
preparation progresses. It is proposed to link the program at the
CARICOM/CARIFORUM level within an existing regional specialized agency. It is
likely that the Caribbean Telecommunications Union (CTU) will play the role of overall
program coordinator, as well as project implementation entity for selected aspects of the
project, such as where implementation capacity at the national level is weak, or where
splitting among national level implementation agencies may prove impractical. The CTU
will be supported by other specialized regional agencies and national implementing
agencies as required.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Caribbean wide

 The implementing entities at both the national and regional levels are expected to
include the addition of an environmental specialist/officer to implement and monitor
compliance with safeguards policies.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Anjali Acharya (LCSEN)
   Mr Peter F. B. A. Lafere (LCSSO)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Under this project, the following safeguard policies are triggered:

  Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01). The laying of submarine cables envisaged under
the project could potentially have adverse impacts, though manageable and reversible, on
coral reefs that are found along the coastlines of most of the potential participating
countries and on other sensitive coastal ecosystems. The project also envisages the
deployment of terrestrial broadband telecommunications infrastructure, which will have
minimal environmental impact, due to the small footprint of the cable and the fact that it
is expected to be laid alongside existing infrastructure (notably roads). Hence, the project
is assigned to environmental category B under OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. Since
sites will not be identified during project preparation, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) has been developed in which potential environmental
impacts were identified, and mitigation measures put in place.

 Natural Habitats (OP 4.04). In light of the fragile marine habitats through which some
submarine cables may be laid, the Natural Habitats Policy (OP 4.04) is triggered.
Activities to identify, minimize, mitigate, manage and offset the impacts of these works
will be included in the ESMF. The project will also avoid any impacts on critical natural
habitats, in particular, marine protected areas.

 Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11). The project will not finance works in any
culturally important areas of the participating countries. However, the ESMF will include
"chance find" procedures that are translated into the bidding documents for contractors
implementing works.

 Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12). Land acquisition for terrestrial facilities, if
required, would be done in accordance with OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement and
according to the guidelines set out by the Involuntary Resettlement Framework.
However, impacts are not anticipated given that facilities are expected to follow existing
rights of way, especially roads.

 OP 7.50 International Waterways is not triggered since the possible submarine cables to
be financed under the project will not affect the territorial of third countries that are not
beneficiaries of the project.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
None foreseen.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
None available.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared to
identify, minimize, mitigate, manage and offset potential environmental impacts from
expected activities. This ESMF covers all four countries participating in this Project, and
will be used for the environmental and social screening and assessment of activities
relating to cable laying and construction of landing stations, as well as backbone and
transmission telecommunications infrastructure development within the area.

  A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared to guide the preparation of
Resettlement Action Plans, if during project implementation it is determined that
involuntary taking of land may be required and whether this would result in relocation or
loss of shelter, loss of assets or access to assets, loss of income sources or means of
livelihood, whether or not the affected persons must move to another location, or whether
the involuntary restriction of access to legally designated parks and protected areas
resulting in adverse impacts on the livelihoods of the displaced persons. While unlikely,
given that project activities will follow existing rights of way, the RPF describes the
necessary contents and processes for the development, disclosure, consultation and
monitoring of RAPs.

  In each of the participating countries, borrower capacity to address safeguard policy
issues on the basis of the ESMF and RPF is deemed adequate.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations on the ESMF and RPF for the three OECS countries (Grenada, Saint Lucia
and St. Vincent and the Grenadines) have taken place following the initial World Bank
review. The expanded versions of the ESMF and RPF which includes issues relating to
the Dominican Republic are pending translation into Spanish, and will be disclosed and
consulted on shortly. Additional consultations are expected to be completed prior to
Board. Below are the links where the documents were disclosed in country:
 Grenada:
 http://www.gov.gd/ministries/opm.html#carcip

 St. Lucia:
 http://finance.gov.lc/

 St. Vincent and the Grenadines:

http://www.gov.vc/images/stories/pdf_documents/environmentalandsocialmanagementfra
mework.pdf

http://www.gov.vc/images/stories/pdf_documents/resettlementplanningframeworkdraft1.
pdf



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02/28/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             02/29/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              03/02/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02/29/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             03/01/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              03/02/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           No
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name      Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Mavis A. Ampah          03/01/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Anjali Acharya          03/01/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr Peter F. B. A. Lafere   03/05/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Randeep Sudan           03/05/2012
  Comments:
