                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                              Report No.: AC6463


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/21/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Central African Republic           Project ID: P119815
Project Name: Health System Support Project
Task Team Leader: Gaston Sorgho
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 15, 2012 Estimated Board Date: April 30, 2012
Managing Unit: AFTHE                        Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                            Loan
Sector: Health (100%)
Theme: Health system performance (50%);Population and reproductive health
(20%);Child health (20%);Other communicable diseases (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):          15.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
                                                                      0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The project objective is to increase utilization and improve the quality of health services in rural
areas with a particular focus on maternal and child health.
 Since the most important bottlenecks are on the supply-side, the main strategy for achieving the
PDO will be Results Based Financing through performance-based contracting of public, FBO
and NGO facilities. Considering IDA-16 funding, the aim is to cover at least 2.5 million people #
half the total population of CAR # in four years. Payments to health facilities will be linked to
the volume and quality of services delivered. The payments scheme will improve capacity to
deliver health services in under-served rural areas with performance-linked bonuses to health
workers in such areas. A second key component of the proposed project is building operational
capacity to strengthen the monitoring and evaluation function of the MoH. This is expected to
strengthen the implementation of the performance based contracting in addition to strengthening

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project has two main components: results-based financing (component 1) and
strengthening M&E capacity (component 2). The CAR team proposes to apply for funding from
the Health Results Innovations Trust Fund (HRITF) to further develop the intervention. HRITF
funding could be up to US $10 million, in addition to the 15 million from IDA-16.

  Component 1: Improving use and quality of maternal and child services through results based
financing at different levels. (US$13 million). This component finances the purchasing of key
MCH and RH services from rural public, FBO and NGO facilities by a Performance Purchasing
Agency (PPA). The PPA will contract with health posts, health centers and district and regional
level hospitals to deliver an agreed package of MCH, RH and curative services. Facility
payments will be based on: (i) volume of pre-defined MCH and RH services delivered and (ii)
technical quality of these services. Payment rates will also be adjusted for factors such as
remoteness of the health facility. Facility payments will be made quarterly after service volumes
have been verified and quality of care has been assessed independently of facility personnel.
Project funds to make payments to health facilities will be held by an independent fund holder
called the Performance Purchasing Agency (PPA) and released to contracted health facilities
after the quantity and quality of services provided are certified. An External Evaluation Agency
(EEA) will perform ex post-facto verification of the quantity and quality of these services. Given
the shortage of technical capacity and human resources within the MoH the project proposes to
identify international NGOs with demonstrated experience with RBF to act as the PPAs. Given
the low management capacity within the public sector, a second important aspect of the PPA#s
role will be to build the management capacity for RBF at both the central level and in the
periphery by working with the central-level steering committee, regional health directorates and
district health teams.

 Component 2. Strengthen monitoring and evaluation capacity to enable the health information
system to generate up to date, reliable data to measure performance for RBF (US 2.0 million). At
present, the health sector routine reporting system is very fragmented and the data generated are
too unreliable and inaccurate to use as a basis for measuring health facility performance. Since
RBF payments are to be made based on service volumes and quality, having accurate data on
these parameters is critical to effective implementation. The component will therefore support
health facility and population-based household surveys to be conducted by an independent third
party, i.e., the External Evaluation Agency (EEA). The EEA will be contracted by the MoH. The
EEA#s role will include: (i) Ex post-fact verification of service volumes and quality delivered by
contracted health facilities through a combination of facility record checks, technical quality
assessments using a checklist, home visits to a sub-sample of facility clients and community or
focus groups to assess perceived quality, (ii) annual household and health facility surveys to
measure service coverage and quality and evaluate the performance of the project, and (iii)
building in-country M&E capacity. The project will initiate advance procurement of an EEA
with demonstrated and relevant M&E capacity to ensure that timely baseline data are available.

D. Project location (if known)
The program will be implemented in all regions of CAR, provided that the team succeeds in
securing the additional US $10 million from Health Results Innovations Trust Fund (HRITF). It
is not anticipated that project activities aiming at paying for performance will have significant
negative environmental impacts, besides the increase level of use of medical products by the
physicians. The Indigenous Peoples located in Region 1 (Lobaye and Ombella-Mpoko
prefectures) and Region 2 (Nana-Mambéré, Mambéré # Kadéî, and Sangha # Mbaéré
prefectures) are at risk of not benefiting equitably from the project given that traditionally they
barely utilize modern medical services.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Government of CAR has extensive experience with World Bank safeguard policies, notably,
under the ongoing Multisectoral HIV/AIDS project which closing date was extended for eighteen
months to March 2012. The extension of the closing date was conditioned to the updating and
implementation of revised strategy of medical waste management. The Medical Waste
Management Plan prepared for the xxxx [proper name] project and updated in 2010 will be re-
disclosed prior to appraisal. An Indigenous Peoples Plan will be prepared prior to appraisal to
ensure that Indigenous Peoples who are generally marginalized will also benefit from this
project.
  The World Bank safeguards team will also provide training session on WB s safeguards
policies and the PIU staff will benefit from specific training on medical waste management
techniques.
  Moreover, the quantity and quantified quality checklist used by RBF, to pay for performance,
will precisely measure both the proportion of indigenous people served by health facilities and
the management of medical waste. The weighting for those two indicators will be increased, and
the adherence to the Indigenous Peoples Plan and guidelines for waste management will be
checked, and paid for, quarterly. This is the comparative advantage of RBF in solving such
traditionally intangible problems.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
   Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes         No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
    Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01).
     The project will not support civil works. Nevertheless, the project will result in an increase
in the use of medical material which will accordingly increase medical wastes. The main
safeguard instrument under this policy will be the Medical Waste Management Plan that was
prepared for xxx project and updated in 2010.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                      X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                               X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                          X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                           X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                        X
    The project will be implemented in the area where Indigenous Peoples (IPs) are located.
While the project will not negatively affect IPs, this policy is triggered to ensure that IPs will
benefit from the project. An Indigenous Peoples Plan will be prepared and disclosed prior
appraisal with the objective to define clearly how IPs will be taken into consideration in the
project and what will be the indicators.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                              Yes              No             TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                    X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   12/20/2011

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   --

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Gaston Sorgho                                               06/24/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                                       06/24/2011
      Comments: --
    Sector Manager:                                Ms Eva Jarawan                                                 05/25/2011
      Comments: --




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
