                       INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                    APPRAISAL 'STAGE




                                                                                  81088
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:       07-Aug-2013


I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                    Central     African Project ID:              Pl31127
                             Republic
 Project Name:               OBA for Sanitation and Water Supply for Flood Prone Areas in Bangui
                             CAR
 Task Team Leader:           Patrice Joachim Nirina Rakotoniaina
 Estimated Appraisal Date: 08/20/2013           · Estimated Board Date: N/A
 Managing Unit:              AFTU2               Lending Instrument:      Grant
 Sector:                     Sanitation (80%); Water Supply (20%)
 Theme:                      Urban Services and Housing for the poor (100%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00 No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
 Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:      4.924                   Total Bank Financing:    0.00
 Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:           0.00
    Financing Source                                                      Amount
    Borrower                                                              o.oo
    Global Partnership on Output-based Aid                                4.924
    Total                                                                 4.924
 Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
  Is this    a   Transferred No
  project?

  2. Current Project Development Objectives
  The project development objective is to support access to on-site sanitation facilities,
  associated hygiene education, and water supply through social connections in Bangui, Central
African Republic (CAR). This scheme will complement the IDA-financed Emergency Urban
Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Maintenance Additional Financing (Projet d'Urgence de
Rehabilitation d'Infrastructure et de Services Urbains Financement Additionnel, PURISU,
Pll7616).

3. Project Description
The project will contribute to addressing critical public health issues in Bangui, especially the
high level of diarrheal diseases and water borne diseases affecting vulnerable households due
to limited access to sanitation services, frequent flooding, and lack of hygienic practices.

The activity proposes an Output-Based Aid (OBA) subsidy scheme to: (i) support access to
on-site sanitation facilities, including training masons to carry out construction works; (ii)
provide associated sanitation and hygiene education; and (iii) support access to water supply
services via social connections. This scheme will complement the IDA-financed PURlSU.
The rationale for using GPOBA financing is to (i) test whether an output-based approach is a
viable and efficient alternative to traditional input-based project financing; (ii) include
sanitation among the range of services supported by the ongoing PURISU; and (iii) extend the
geographical range to include the 7th arrondissement of Bangui, which is one of the poorest
areas in the city.

The scheme will (i) support the construction of approximately 32,000 improved latrines with
hand washing points and the adoption of hygienic practices that are expected to benefit to
about 250,000 beneficiaries; (ii) improve access to sustainable water services for about 35,000
beneficiaries. The project will be implemented in three arrondissements of Bangui via two
main components:
   • Component 1: OBA subsidies for improved sanitation and adoption of hygienic
       practices at household level;
   • Component 2: OBA subsidies for extending access to water services via the
       construction of 50 water kiosks and 1,000 social water connections.


4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The GPOBA project will target three arrondissements of Bangui: the 2••, 6"', and the 7"'
arrondissements

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
Mr Maman-Sani Issa (AF1N2)

6. Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01     Yes            The Environmental Assessment will be
                                                       triggered since the proposed operation will
                                                       support the rehabilitation and construction
                                            of community-based infrastructure through
                                            a participatory process, with the potential of
                                            localized environmental and social impacts,
                                            albeit minor. Likely adverse impacts include
                                            water pollution, soil erosion and potential
                                            expropriation of land required for future
                                            water infrastructure investments. Similar
                                            activities have been imple!llented under a
                                            Bank funded project (PURJSU), for which
                                            safeguard instruments - Environmental and
                                            Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                                            and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                            - have been approved by the Bank and
                                            disclosed in the country on February 4,
                                            2008 and at the Bank's Info Shop on
                                            February 8, 2008. They have been re-
                                            disclosed at the Bank's InfoShop on June
                                            15, 2010 and in-country on June 21, 2010.
                                            These two documents have been updated for
                                            this new operation and re-disclosed in the
                                            country and through InfoShop on August 6,
                                            2013.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No    The project is located in an urban area with
                                            no such ecosystem.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No    The project is located in an urban area with
                                            no such ecosystem.
Pest Management OP 4.09               No    This policy is not triggered. No acquisition
                                            or use of pesticides will be supported under
                                            this project.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No   There is no excavation or exploitation of
                                            quarries/borrow pits, and the project
                                            intervention area is not known as a site of
                                            ancient civilization. No sacred area or
                                            resource is located there. In the case of
                                            chance finds, procedures are adequately
                                            addressed in the ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No    This policy is not triggered. There are no
                                            Indigenous Peoples in the project area
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.17   Yes   The proposed interventions under the
                                            project are not likely to result in taking of
                                            land or restriction of access to assets or
                                            sources of livelihoods. However, for due
                                            diligence and to address the potential risk of
                                            the OP/BP 4.12, the project will adopt the
                                            RPF that is operational under the Bank's
                                            activities in the sector under PURISU. This
                                            safeguard instrument has been approved by
                                            the Bank and was <;lisclosed in the country
                                                          on February 4, 2008 and at the Bank's
                                                          InfoShop on February 8, 2008 and re-
                                                          disclosed at the Bank's Info Shop on June
                                                          15, 2010 and in-country on June 21, 2010.
                                                          The RPF of the existing PURISU was
                                                          updated and revised for this purpose and
                                                          disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop. If
                                                          later on there is a need for land, then the
                                                          project will prepare a Resettlement Action
                                                          Plan(RAP).
Safety of Dams OPIBP 4.37                  No              The project will not finance any activities
                                                           related or connected to dams.
Projects on International Waterways No                     The project will not draw water from
OP/BP 7.50                                                 international waterways. The social water
                                                           connections will be supplied from the
                                                           existing network.
Projects in Disputed Areas OPIBP 7.60      No              The city of Bangui is not under dispute
                                                           between countries.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The two environmental safeguards instruments used by the original project are the Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The original
PURISU project is rated satisfactory and social safeguards (Involuntary Resettlement) are rated
satisfactory. The ESMF and RPF were prepared and disclosed in the country and at the Bank's
InfoShop on 11/13/2007 under the parent project (P104595) and were satisfactorily implemented and
monitored. An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment has been prepared, adopted by the
Ministry of Environment, and disclosed at the Bank's InfoShop on June 22, 2010. The proposed
activities are similar in type and scope to the original investment program. None of the additional civil
works activities included in this Project affect the environmental category of the Project, which
remains at Category B. No new safeguard policies are triggered. The ESMF and RPF have been re-
disclosed at the Bank's InfoShop on June 15, 2010 and in-country on June 21, 2010. These two
documents have been updated for this new operation and re-disclosed in the country and through
Infoshop on August 6, 2013.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The project's indirect and long-term impacts are anticipated to be positive and include a possible
increase in the social economic status of the people living within the selected project areas, arising
from increased access to safe water and better hygiene and sanitation.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered io help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project's implementing agency will be AGETIP-CAF, under a delegated management
arrangement with the Ministry of Water and Energy (sanitation) and the public national utility
SODECA (water supply). The GPOBA project will be implemented using the same institutional,
procurement, and disbursement arrangements as for the PURISU project, as they have been assessed
to be strong by the Bank's fiduciary teams. AGETIP-CAF has also traditionally been strong on the
technical side in a country with very weak institutional capacity. This will ensure that project design
and supervision are executed in a satisfactory manner.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The primary project beneficiaries are residents of low income areas. The project will support the
construction of about 32,000 improved latrines with hand washing points that are expected to benefit
about 250,000 beneficiaries. It will also provide. access to sustainable water services for about 35,000
inhabitants via the construction of 50 water kiosks and 1,000 social water connections. Lastly, the
project will provide hygiene education to 250,000 people. The sanitation facilities, hygiene education,
and water supply connections will all help address critical public health issues in Bangui.

The other key stakeholders for the. project will be the project's implementing agency AGETIP-CAF,
under a delegated management arrangement with the Ministry of Water and Energy (sanitation) and
the public national utility SODECA (water supply).

International NGOs will be selected competitively to build on-site sanitation and water supply
facilities and to provide hygiene education to beneficiaries (Service provider).

A Fiduciary or Safeguard Appraisal will be conducted by the Bank for the OBA Subsidy Funding. For
Safeguards, the types of activities are covered by the Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that were prepared for the
PURISU. These reports were disclosed in CAR on February 4, 2008 and at the Bank's InfoShop on
February 8, 2008 andre-disclosed at the Bank's InfoShop on June 15, 2010 and in-country on June 21,
2010. These two documents were updated for this new operation and disclosed in the country and at
the Bank's Infoshop.

B. Di$closure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   02/28/2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                08/06/2013
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure: 08/05/2013
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   02/28/2013
Date of submission to Info Shop                                               08/06/2013
''In country" Disclosure: 08/05/2013
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cnltnnl Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at tile Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01- Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [X l No [ l                NA [ 1
OP/BP 4.12- Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plaolabbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [ X] No [ l                NA [ 1
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X ] No [ l                 NA [ l
Sector Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure oflnformation
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [X ] No [ J                NA [ J
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X ] No [ l                    NA [ J
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional Yes [ X] No [ J                       NA [ l
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in Yes [X ] No [ l                 NA [ l
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include Yes [X ] No [ J                 NA [ l
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with Yes [X 1 No [ J                   NA [ l
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:        . .+-I Patrice Joachim Nirina Ralwtoniaina    ctt-7            p;Jfl/3
Approved By:
Regional Environmental and
Safeguards Advisor:
                              Alexandra jGf~zt
                                                         ..,,--
                                                                  I
                                                                      Date:<O   I'till )
                                                                                    t       1/
Acting Sector Manager:        Ventura B~ng~echea      . f.el
                                                        " ~ul/\.._    Date:     'l/7/ (J
                                                                                I       I
