INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: AC6965
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: June 11, 2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country: Central African Republic      Project ID: P131127
Additional Project ID (fany)
Project Name; OBA for Sanitation and Water Supply for Flood Prone Areas in Bangui
CAR
Task Team Leader: Patrice Joachim Nirina Rakotoniaina
Estimated Appraisal Date: 05/31/2013   Estimated Board Date: 06/28/2013
Managing Unit: AFTU2                   Lending Instrument: Grant
Sector: Sanitation (80%); Water Supply (20%)
Theme: Urban Services and Housing for the poor (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source:
GPOBA (USSm): 4.924
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing          Simple [X I            Repeater [
Is this a transferred project   Yes []               No [X]
B. Project Objectives [from section 1 of GPOBA CNJ:
The project objective is to support access to on-site sanitation facilities and hygiene education in
Bangui - CAR through an output-based aid (OBA) subsidy scheme, complementing the IDA
financed Emergency Urban Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Maintenance Project (PURISU).
C. Project Description [from section 3 of GPOBA CNI:
The project will contribute to address critical public health issues in Bangui, Central African
Republic (CAR), especially the high level of diarrheal diseases and water borne diseases
affecting vulnerable households due to limited access to sanitation services, frequent flooding,
compounded with lack of hygienic practices.


﻿The activity proposes an OBA subsidy scheme to: (i) support access to on-site sanitation
facilities including masons training for construction works, (ii) provide associated sanitation and
hygiene education, and (iii) support access to water supply services via social connections. This
scheme will complement the IDA-financed PURISU. The rationale for using GPOBA financing
is to (i) test whether an output-based approach is a viable and efficient alternative to traditional
input-based project management; (ii) include sanitation among the range of services supported
by the ongoing PURISU; and (iii) extend the geographical range to include the 7t
arrondissement, one of the poorest in Bangui.
The scheme will (i) support the construction of 8,000 on-site facilities that are expected to
benefit about 64,000 inhabitants; (ii) provide 2,000 households with a social water connection;
and (iii) provide hygiene education to 100,000 people.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):
The GPOBA project will target three arrondissements of Bangui: the 2nd, 6, and the 7'
arrondissernentst.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:
The Recipient is familiar with World Bank safeguards policies through the implementation of
other World Bank-funded projects and in particular the ongoing PURISU, The Project will thus
be able to draw upon successful previous experiences from ongoing Bank's operations in
addition to the available teams of the current PURISU which are fully operational. During and
throughout the project supervision, the World Bank task team will assess the appropriate
implementation of the environmental and social mitigation measures and subsequently
recommend additioial strengthening measures as needed.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
Mr Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please axplain why)          Yes        No        TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01                        X
The Environmental Assessment will be triggered since the proposed operation will support the
rehabilitation and construction of community-based infrastructure through a participatory
process, with the potential of localized environmental and social impacts, albeit minor. Likely
adverse impacts include water pollution, soil erosion and potential expropriation of land required
for future water infrastructure investments. Similar activities have been implemented under a
Bank funded project (PURISU), which safeguard instruments - Environmental and Social
Management Framework -ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP) - have been
approved by the Bank and disclosed in the country on February 4, 2008 and at the Bank's
1 The technical feasibility of VIP latrines in this zone and the need for lining and/or sealing will be further explored
during project preparation.


﻿Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)        Yes         No       TBD
InfoShop on February 8, 2008, They have been re-disclosed at the Bank's InfoShop on June 15,
2010 and in-country on June 21, 2010. These two documents will be updated for this new
operation and will be disclosed in the country and InfoShop prior to appraisal.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                        X
The project location is an urban area with no such ecos stem.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                 X
The proiect location is an urban area with no such ecosystem.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                            X
This policy is not triggered. No acquisition or use of pesticides will be supported under this
project.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                             X
Not only there is no excavation or exploitation of quarries/borrow pits, but the project
intervention area is not known as a site of ancient civilization. No sacred area or resource is
located there.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                      X
This policy is not triggered. There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12                       X
The proposed interventions in the project are not likely to result to land-take or restriction of
access to assets or sources of livelihood. However, for due diligence and to address the potential
risk of the OP/BP 4.12, an RPF has to be prepared. The project currently has the safeguard
instrument, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) operational within the Bank's previous
activities under PURISU in the sector. This safeguard instrument has been approved by the Bank
and was disclosed in the country on February 4, 2008 and at the Bank's InfoShop on February 8,
2008 and re-disclosed at the Bank's InfoShop on June 15, 2010 and in-country on June 21, 2010.
The RPF of the existing PURISU will be updated and revised for this purpose and disclosed in-
country and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal. If later on there is a need for land, then the project
will prepare a RAP.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                          X
The project will not finance activity related to dam or connected to dam,
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                     X
The project will not draw water from international water. The social connections will uptake
water from the existing network.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)                              X
The Bangui city is not under dispute between countries,
Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address                       X
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)
Not applicable
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
would be prepared: N/A


﻿B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
ISDS: June 4, 2013
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing2 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The EMSF and RPF prepared for the PURISU project (P104595) have been updated to this
new operation and will be disclosed in-country and at the Bank's InfoShop prior to appraisal.
IV. APPROVALS
Signed andsubmitted by.
Task Team Leader;                   Mr. Patrice Joachim Nirina RakotoniainaM Cr     06/11/13
Approved by:
Regional Environmental and          Ms. Alexandra  . Mzerdi                         06/12/13
Safeguards Advisor:                                      '.      -
Comments:
Acting Sector Manager:              Ms. R. Mukami Kariuki                           06/11/13
Comments:
2 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.


