                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                              Report No.: AC6307


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/13/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Chad                              Project ID: P126576
Project Name: Agricultural Growth and Food Security Project
Task Team Leader: Manievel Sene
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 1,      Estimated Board Date: May 18, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: AFTAR                       Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                           Loan
Sector: Crops (30%);Animal production (20%);Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and
Highways (20%);Irrigation and drainage (20%);Agro-industry, marketing, and trade
(10%)
Theme: Global food crisis response (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):           25.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                           8.33
                                                                     8.33


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support rural communities and producer
organizations in increasing production of selected food crops and livestock in targeted zones.
The PDO indicators for the proposed Project include: (i) supported communities and producer
organizations satisfied with the project support (percentage); (ii) increased production of targeted
food crops by direct beneficiaries (tons); (iii) increased production of targeted animal species by
direct beneficiaries (number); and (iv) direct project beneficiaries (number), of which female
(percentage).

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The Project will be structured as a Specific Investment Loan (SIL), funded by an IDA credit in
the amount of US$25 million. It will be implemented over four years. Project activities will be
organized under three components.
 Component 1. Support to food production (US$21.5 million IDA). The Chad Agriculture Sector
Strategy Support Technical Assistance (P124801) and other background work suggest that the
Government's agricultural productivity / food security goals can best be pursued through
interventions concentrated in four focal areas: (i) Improving management of land and water
resources (micro-projects eligible for support include: irrigation / water control, terraces, water
harvesting structures, planting of cover crops, etc.); (ii) Increasing crop and livestock
productivity (micro-projects eligible for support include: machinery, tools, seeds and fertilizer,
improved animal breeds, veterinary services, etc.); (iii) adding value post-harvest (micro-projects
eligible for support include: drying facilities, storage facilities, processing equipment, business
skills training); and (iv) Improving performance of agricultural markets (micro-projects eligible
for support include: rural roads, information and communication technology infrastructure,
market information systems).

 Component 1 will finance activities in the four focal areas listed above (improving land and
water resources, increasing crop and livestock productivity, adding post-harvest value,
improving performance of agricultural markets). Component 1 will have two disbursement
windows, focusing respectively on community investments and producer organizations
investments. One set of micro-projects to be supported under Component 1 will be designed to
produce public goods, mainly infrastructure; these micro-projects will be implemented by local
government bodies for the benefit of the entire community. A second set of micro-projects to be
funded under Component 1 will be designed to finance semi-public goods, mainly productive
assets; these micro-projects will be implemented by producer organizations and other local
groups for the benefit of the members. Given the high vulnerability of the country to natural
disasters and climate change, the component will also support mitigation measures to be
identified and assessed during project preparation. During pre-appraisal and appraisal, lists will
be prepared describing allowable investments in each of the two categories, and model
investment plans will be prepared detailing technical specifications and unit costs.
Implementation arrangements for the matching grant mechanism will be decided during project
preparation and described in detail in the Project Implementation Manual.

 Component 1 will be designed to finance semi-public goods, mainly productive assets; these
micro-projects will be implemented by producer organizations and other local groups for the
benefit of the members. Given the high vulnerability of the country to natural disasters and
climate change, the component will also support mitigation measures to be identified and
assessed during project preparation. During pre-appraisal and appraisal, lists will be prepared
describing allowable investments in each of the two categories, and model investment plans will
be prepared detailing technical specifications and unit costs. Implementation arrangements for
the matching grant mechanism will be decided during project preparation and described in detail
in the Project Implementation Manual.

 Sub-component 1.1: Basic infrastructure to benefit rural communities (US$15 million IDA).
This sub-component will finance community micro-projects designed to create basic agricultural
infrastructure for improving land and water management, storage facilities, and performance of
agricultural markets (a positive list will be established). These micro-projects will be selected by
rural councils and approved by the Project steering committee. Funds will be channeled to local
government bodies (Rural Councils) to finance micro-projects. Rural roads will be rehabilitated
or constructed to connect production basins to food markets, while storage facilities will limit
post harvest losses and food insecurity. To the extent possible, water management infrastructure
will be designed to enhance agricultural production eco-systems, minimize conflict with herders
around water points or pasture borders, and mitigate impact of natural disasters (drought, flood)
and climate change. The sub-component will finance studies related to the infrastructure that will
be identified and implemented during the project cycle. It will support goods and equipment,
works, consulting services, environmental and social studies, capacity building for Rural
Councils and Local Action Committees on preparation of micro-projects, management and
maintenance of infrastructure for sustainability.

  Sub-component 1.2: Productive assets for producer organizations (US$6.5 million IDA) will
finance micro-projects to benefit producer organizations. These micro-projects will be selected
by rural councils and approved by the Project steering committee. The investments will target a
sub-set of the value chains targeted by the NFSP-II, including: (i) cereal value chains
(sorghum/millet, maize, and rice); and (ii) animal value chains (cattle, sheep, goat, poultry, and
pigs). They will also support other cross-cutting economic activities (e.g., provision of
agricultural extension services, business skills training). Support will be provided to enable the
members of producer organizations to: (i) master cultural calendars and management of herds,
and (ii) have a better technical command of technical itineraries. Sub-component 1.2 will also
finance: (i) institutional diagnosis of producer organizations aimed at identifying their capacity
gaps and needs (capacity building plans will be established by category of eligible producer
organizations); (ii) training producer organizations in preparing, implementing their service
providers and managing investments to be delivered by relevant public services, or Non-
Governmental Organizations. Funds will be channeled to producer organizations through an
investment fund operating under the oversight of local government bodies (Rural Councils).
Procedures for accessing funds and eligibility criteria for micro-projects will be specified during
project preparation.

 Component 2. Capacity building and institutional support to public services (US$1.5 million
IDA) will support implementation of Component 1. Component 2 will enable participating
ministries (Agriculture, Livestock, Water, and Environment) and their related decentralized
services involved in the Project at all levels (regional, district and local) to: (i) accompany
communities and producer organizations in preparing and implementing their investments, (ii)
provide services to Rural Councils in the monitoring, management and maintenance of
infrastructure; (iii) provide services to producer organizations in the areas of animal health
services supply, advisory services supply, and necessary trainings; and (iv) contribute to the
monitoring of project activities. The priority needs of the public services with regard to
institutional support will be specified during Project preparation and appraisal. Component 2 will
also support non-governmental organizations (NGOs) specialized in providing agricultural
advisory services and facilitating participatory local conflict resolution, especially with regard to
resolving conflicts between agriculturalists and pastoralists. This sub-component will finance
workshops, trainings and seminars for public service providers necessary for the project. The
budget will cover goods and equipment, consulting services, training and study tours, and
operating costs.
 Component 3. Project Coordination and Management (US$2.0 million IDA) will support
project implementation activities, including the start-up and operating costs of a lean Project
Coordination Unit (PCU) with offices at national, regional, local levels. Three alternative options
have been identified for the configuration of the PCU: (i) Establish the PCU under one of the line
ministries; (ii) Establish the PCU under the Prime Minister#s office or under the Ministry of
Economy and Planning; or (iii) Establish a common PCU to be shared by AGFSP and LDPSP-II.
The PCU will be responsible for day-to-day management, implementation, fiduciary
management, and overall monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The operational costs of the Project
Steering Committee will be supported by the Project. The Project will finance the establishment
and operations of an M&E unit. The M&E unit will carry out baseline and impact studies, and it
will communicate information on agricultural technology, financial services and markets. In
addition, the M&E unit will carry out targeted studies or surveys that may be needed to ensure
effective implementation of Project. Given the risks related to governance, fraud and corruption,
Component 3 will support the implementation of a Governance and Anti-Corruption Plan.
Supported costs will include goods and equipment, consulting services, training and study tours,
and operating costs.

D. Project location (if known)
The project will focus on the following areas: Moyen Chari, Mandoul, Sila, Salamat and Guera.
However, the specific location of the investments will be identified during project preparation.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The country has progressively built its capacity on safeguards management during the
implementation of previous CDD projects. While several existing project implementation units
in Chad are by now quite skilled in safeguards management, capacity remains weak in the
Ministry of Environment, in civil society organizations, and among local government bodies.
The Project will adopt and adapt the safeguards instruments being used for the newly approved
Chad LDPSP-II (P113030). A thorough capacity assessment exercise will be carried out during
the project preparation.

 Prior to appraisal, the Government will update three safeguards instruments, namely, the
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), the Resettlement Plan Framework
(RPF), and the Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) prepared for use under LPPSP I and II.
Riparian countries will be notified in compliance with the requirements of OP/BP 7.50.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
   Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
    Environmental Assessment is triggered. The exact nature and location of activities could not
be identified before appraisal. Therefore, OP4.01 is triggered to ensure that potential negative
environmental and social impacts of future micro-projects are identified and mitigated
adequately. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No         TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                  X
    Natural Habitats is not triggered. Micro-projects able to impact a natural habitat will not be
eligible to the project resource and this will be reflected in the ESMF. However, final decision
concerning the eventual triggering of OP/BP 4.04 is deferred until the time of the preparation
mission.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                           X
    Forests is not triggered. With regard of the Chadian context, this policy does not need to be
triggered as there is more a dry Savannah area than forest in Chad. Micro-projects that have
potential impact on natural forests will not be eligible. However, final decision concerning the
eventual triggering of OP/BP 4.36 is deferred until the time of the preparation mission.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                             X
    Pest Management is triggered to ensure safe pest management under future micro-projects.
Future community micro-projects and productive assets for Producer organizations (POs)
involve increase in agricultural production that may imply use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                          X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                   X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
    Involuntary Resettlement is triggered in the vent that a micro-project should involve
resettlement as the Project will finance hard investments that may imply land acquisition in the
covered areas.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                    X
    Final decision concerning the eventual triggering of OP/BP 4.36 is deferred until the time of
the preparation mission.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                      X
    Projects on International Waters is triggered as the project will support micro-projects
including water harvesting structures, water control, irrigation with potential interface with Lake
Chad, Logone, Chari.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 10/25/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Integrated Pest Management
   Plan (IPMP), and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be disclosed in-country and at
   the Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Manievel Sene                                               09/13/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                                       09/13/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Iain G. Shuker                                              09/13/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
