                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/28/2011                                   Report No.: AC6494
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Chile                               Project ID: P111661
Project Name: Tertiary Education Finance for Results 3
Task Team Leader: Michael F. Crawford
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 29,       Estimated Board Date: February 23, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: LCSHE                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Tertiary education (100%)
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            40
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                    60.00
                                                                     60.00
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
To improve quality and relevance for students in tertiary education by strengthening the
link between funding of tertiary education institutions and accountability for
performance.

3. Project Description
The Project would achieve its development objective through the implementation of the
following two components:
 Component 1. Performance Agreements (Total: US$155 million, Bank: US$38
million).This component will help strengthen the link between funding and accountability
for performance. It will scale up the use of innovative performance-based funding
agreements with TEIs, piloted under the MECESUP2 project. These will help create: (i)
stronger visions of each TEI’s educational mission; (ii clear paths with specific time-
bound goals to measure progress towards these; and (iii) funding incentives for achieving
goals and targets. The scaled-up regime of performance agreements (CDs, Convenios de
Desempeño) in MECESUP3—to be made directly between the Ministry of Education and
competitively-selected TEIs—will prioritize changes that directly impact both quality and
relevance. These include:
 a)     Improving the quality and relevance of learning by (i) sharpening student learning
goals for courses and degree programs; (ii) aligning curricula with international best
practice; (iii) increasing the amount, quality, and capacity of human capital for tertiary
teaching and research by increasing faculty qualifications; (iv) raising labor market
relevance of programs; (v) developing new programs in strategic areas; (vi) promoting
innovative educational models that improve student learning; (vii) providing remedial
education to students who require it; (viii) integrating technology into the learning
experience; and (ix) facilitating credit transfer and pathways between technical tertiary
and university education. This will ultimately raise faculty qualifications, reduce time to
graduation, increase first-year retention, and improve graduate employability and wage
premiums.

 b)      Strengthening managerial capacity within TEIs by: (i) strengthening institutional
analysis, self-evaluation, and the articulation of institutional improvement strategies; (ii)
sharpening institutional priorities and goals; (iii) increasing capacity for institutional
management and the alignment of resources and activities with institutional goals and
priorities; (iv) facilitating measurement of efficiency and effectiveness; and (v) enhancing
internal and external accountability. The resulting changes in managerial capacity will
underpin and facilitate improvements in quality and relevance.

 Most tertiary institutions, especially those publicly-financed, lack sufficient
discretionary resources to fund initiatives to improve quality. MECESUP provides this
funding through Performance Agreements (CDs). Through MECESUP funding, an
institution could implement a plan for upgrading of faculty qualifications by providing
promising staff with scholarships for graduate education. Or the institution could create
an office of institutional analysis to focus on better measuring the impact of on-going
activities and implementing recommendations from the accreditation process. To change
practices in the classroom, CDs could fund the staff time required to redesign degree
programs and curricula and/or to introduce new teaching methods and technologies.

 The degree of complexity of each performance agreement will determine its length and
amount of resources. There will be two types of performance agreements: Institutional
CDs, which will be comprehensive nature, and focused CDs, which will be more
targeted.

 a)     Institutional CDs (CDIs, Convenios de Desempeño Institucionales), aim at
supporting institutional or corporate change, thus impacting the whole tertiary education
system. CDIs will largely improve the quality of teaching and learning, boost managerial
capacity, and help TEIs pursue major and comprehensive institutional change. CDIs will
have two parts to help maximize their leverage: a core and a varying number of
complements (from zero to three). A CDI’s core will focus on institution-wide issues,
namely (i) the remediation of basic skills among students from disadvantaged
backgrounds; (ii) curriculum development and reform, in line with local needs and
international best practices; (iii) the improvement of institutional analysis; and (iv) the
improvement of institutional management. These four elements will be developed to a
varying degree in each case. Additionally, the core of each CDI may include other actions
specific to the TEI’s PMI. Furthermore, a CDI’s core may be accompanied with up to th
complements that address the public policy priorities established by the Ministry of
Education. These include: (i) training of (new) teachers for basic education; (ii) training
of (new) engineers for the development of production and innovation; (iii)
internationalizing domestic doctoral programs to make them world-class; and (iv)
improving technical and professional education. CDIs would therefore have a core in
every case, to which a number of complements will be added in some cases, following
the institution’s priorities and capacities for change.

  b)     Focused CDs (CDFs, Convenios de Desempeño Focalizados), aim at supporting
(i) early development of capacities for institutional change (in cases of institutions with
insufficient capacities), and (ii) discrete activities for improvement and innovation in the
quality of teaching, learning and management that stem from progress in knowledge and
technology or are devised as pilot projects before including them in the institution’s PMI.
CDFs will thus be generally aligned with their institution’s PMI, but will not necessarily
be linked closely to it. CDFs would have smaller fund allocations and would be
implemented in shorter periods of time than CDIs. CDFs would not be eligible for
additional complements.

 It is foreseen that Performance Agreement call for proposals are held in 2012-1 (first
semester), 2012-2 (second semester), and 2013. At each call, there would be about 6 core
CDIs with a total of 14-15 complements (2-6 per area of public policy priority) and
approximately 18 CDFs. The foreseen budget for each type of CD is as follows: US$3
million for core CDIs, US$0.5 million for CDFs, and a variable amount ranging between
US$1 and $2.5 million for each type of CDI complement. At each call for proposal about
24 CDs will be signed, with a cost slightly above US$52 million. (See table in Annex 2
for additional information.)

 Component 2. Policy Support and Project Management (Total estimated cost: US$5
million; Bank: US$2 million). This component has two subcomponents: 2.1 Policy
support, and 2.2 Project management. The first of these will provide the policy support
needed for the implementation of the tertiary education reforms underway. These may
include the transition to a new Under-Secretariat of Tertiary Education, aspects of the
new Superintendence, efforts to strengthen accreditation, and the design of a Student
Financial Aid Agency. As pending legislation becomes law, the new Under-Secretariat
will face significant implementation challenges and require technical assistance. This
subcomponent will provide for these needs. The second subcomponent will support the
operation of the project implementation team, which will be within the Division of
Higher Education (DIVESUP) in the Ministry of Education. In DIVESUP, this
subcomponent would finance equipment and software required for high-level
performance (i.e. computers, computer systems, and information system software, among
others), personnel training, and professionals to help carry out Component 1 activities.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project's overall approach to strengthening quality and relevance in tertiary education
in Chile involves action at all levels and types of tertiary education institutions across the
country. OP 4.10 is triggered, given that indigenous peoples are present in the project
area (since the coverage of the project is nationwide) and can potentially benefit from the
Project’s activities.

 Environmental safeguards are not triggered by this project. Civil works for MECESUP3
will be limited to minor refurbishments in existing buildings (cosmetic changes and/or
minor internal renovations) to facilitate new equipment or proper ventilation for scientific
equipment, as appropriate. No new structures will be built in MECESUP3.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   ()

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                      X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                 X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Project's overall approach to strengthening quality and relevance in tertiary education
in Chile involves action at all levels and types of tertiary education institutions across the
country. OP 4.10 is triggered, given that indigenous peoples are present in the project
area (since the coverage of the project is nationwide) and can potentially benefit from the
Project’s activities.

 The Project will have no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The Project is expected to increase quality and relevance at participating TEIs. This will
enable Chile to continue developing its human capital and through it to augment
productivity and growth and thereby achieve high-income developed status by 2018.
Indigenous students stand to benefit from these activities.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Indigenous students stand to benefit from Project activities. Not doing so—missing out
on the opportunity—would constitute a possible adverse impact on indigenous students.
To minimize this possibility, the project will:
 (a) Promote the quality and relevance of tertiary education in TEIs determined to
have significant populations of current and potential future indigenous students.
 (b) Closely monitor the participation of indigenous students in Project activities.
 (c) Build on the efforts of the previous Mecesup2 project, particularly in remediation
initiatives. Remediation is key because it focuses on strengthening basic core
competencies—math, science, reading comprehension, and study skills, among others—
to increas student success in tertiary education. Remediation caters to students with weak
secondary education, most of which are from lower socioeconomic backgrounds,
municipal schools and rural areas. Given that indigenous Chileans are, lamentably, over
represented in this target category, remediation activities benefit them directly.
 (d) Seek to align select Project activities with the applicable GoC initiatives where
relevant (the initiatives are described below).

 The goal is that these actions ultimately lead to increases in the academic success of
indigenous students in tertiary education.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower’s action plan for its indigenous population has three parts: (i) scholarship
for indigenous students (called Beca Indígena); (ii) the recently announced initiatives for
indigenous students in tertiary education; and (ii) the Araucanía Plan.

 The Indigenous Scholarship Program provides maintenance support to students
belonging to ethnic groups in basic and higher education. In 2011, almost 60,000
scholarships were given (23% for tertiary education). This support is additional to the
tuition scholarships typically awarded to students in lower income quintiles.

 The Government has reiterated its commitment to Chile’s indigenous populations and to
the importance of multiculturalism in tertiary education by announcing a series of
important initiatives. The Mecesup3 project will seek to align select project activities
with these where relevant. The GoC initiatives include:

 (a) Promotion of access and timely graduation of indigenous students.
 (b) Encouragement of more courses and programs that address cultural issues.
 (c) Promotion of the creation and/or strengthening of specialized centers of research
and teaching programs associated with the identity of indigenous peoples and the
production of specific educational content.
 (d) Continuity of the additional benefits associated with indigenous scholarships.
 (e)   Improvement of infrastructure for indigenous dormitories.

 The Government’s Araucanía Plan, a strategy for the region where most of Chile’s
indigenous population is concentrated, is mean provide public investment with a vision of
the future, a systemic and sustainable approach for the use of natural systems, and a focus
on investing in people and opportunities. The Plan is holistic in that it deals with
education, health, private sector development, infrastructure, connectivity and issues
specific to the indigenous community. In the area of education the Plan has a three-
pronged strategy, and two of the prongs tangentially overlap with the Mecesup3 Project:

 (a) Increase in the quality of the secondary education vocational track schools by:
 (i)     articulating them better with CFTs;
 (ii) increasing the relevance of the degree concentrations offered and strengthening
their link to the private sector; and
 (iii) incorporating innovation and entrepreneurship in the curriculum to better develop
student competencies, particularly in the areas of English language and ICT use.
 (b) Incorporation into teaching of part of the Mapuche culture and language

 The Borrower has thoroughly consulted its own Government plan and has the capacity
to fully implement it.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations regarding the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) for the
Mecesup3 Project were coordinated with the Government’s Indigenous Affairs
Coordination Unit. Discussions drew on the consultations held in 2010 and 2011as part
of the development of the Government plan for indigenous peoples. Issues covered
included the overall design of the Mecesup3 Project, the results of the social assessments
conducted to date, and the proposed plan to include indigenous students in Project
activities.

 It was established that the IPPF proposed was consistent with the Government’s policies
to improve the conditions of indigenous people in Chile and that it would complement
positively the activities currently under implementation by the Government. The IPPF
reflects the agreements that emerged from the aforementioned consultations.

 The current political environment of protests by tertiary and secondary school student
organizations limited the amount of direct consultations undertaken during Project
preparation. The availability of detailed findings from other direct consultations held
earlier in the year provide a partial substitute, as does the requirement for TEIs to hold
individual consultations locally in conjunction with the construction of their proposed
plans in the Mecesup3 Project.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    11/14/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                12/08/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 11/17/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
Document is being translated into Spanish to disclose "in-country"


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Michael F. Crawford                       11/23/2011
Environmental Specialist:
Social Development Specialist       Ms Maria Paulina Mogollon                    11/23/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Chingboon Lee                             11/28/2011
  Comments:
