                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                              Report No.: AC6414


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/05/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Chile                              Project ID: P111661
Project Name: Tertiary Education Finance for Results 2
Task Team Leader: Michael F. Crawford
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 17,       Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: LCSHE                        Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                            Loan
Sector: Tertiary education (100%)
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):          100.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                    60.00
                                                                    60.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
1.      To improve quality, efficiency, and relevance of Chilean tertiary education by
strengthening the link between funding and accountability for performance.

 KEY RESULTS

 2.     The proposed MECESUP 3 project will seek to: (i) improve faculty qualifications,
particularly in pedagogy programs; (ii) shorten expected and actual time to graduation; (iii)
increase retention of first-year students; (iv) raise employer perception of quality and relevance
of graduates of Mecesup3-supported TEIs, as a proxy for increased employability and wage
premiums. This will be done by increasing the amount of public funding executed under
performance-based agreements. The table below shows specific linkages between the PDO and
the key indicators.

 PDO:Quality-Key Results:Faculty qualifications
 PDO:Efficiency-Key Results:Time to graduation and First-year retention
 PDO:Relevance-Key Results:Employer perception of graduate & relevance
C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
3.      In order to improve quality, efficiency, and relevance, the Project will scale up the use of
innovative performance-based funding agreements piloted under Mecesup2. The Mecesup2 pilot
agreements helped create: (i) stronger visions of each TEIs educational mission; (ii) clear paths
with specific time-bound goals to measure progress towards these; and (iii) funding incentives
for achieving goals and targets. The scaled-up regime of performance agreements to be made
directly between the Ministry of Education and competitively-selected TEIs will prioritize
changes in three main areas:

  #      Improve quality and relevance in the classroom: to (i) sharpen student learning goals for
courses and degree programs; (ii) align curricula with international best practice; (iii) increase
amount, quality, and capacity of human capital for tertiary teaching and research; (iv) increase
labor market relevance of programs; and (v) develop new programs in strategic areas.
  #      Rationalize tertiary education: to (i) promote innovative educational models that improve
student learning; (ii) provide remedial education to students who require it; (iii) integrate
technology into the learning experience; and (iv) facilitate credit transfer and pathways between
technical tertiary and university education.
  #      Managerial capacity: will seek to pursue capacity-building initiatives that (i) strengthen
institutional analysis and planning; (ii) sharpen institutional priorities and goals; and (iii)
facilitate measurement of efficiency and effectiveness; and (iv) enhance internal and external
accountability.

 4.     By linking disbursement directly to predefined targets in each of these areas, the Ministry
of Education will be able to simultaneously improve quality and relevance in tertiary education
while increasing accountability for performance. Institutional missions will converge with
national and regional priorities. TEIs will have increased autonomy to define what they want to
achieve and how they wish to achieve it, but also greater accountability for showing results.
Generalized use of performance-based funding is expected to make public funding more
effective.

 5.     Annual competitive rounds will be held to select those TEIs with which the Ministry of
Education signs performance agreements. All accredited TEIs may compete for funds by
submitting project proposals with clearly defined and measurable objectives, strategies, action
plans, milestones, goals, and performance indicators. Selected TEIs are invited to fully develop
their proposals, negotiating directly with the Ministry of Education to establish the contractual,
budgetary and technical terms of their agreements.

  6.    The degree of complexity and institutional readiness of each agreement will determine its
length (between two and four years) and amount of resources (between USD $350,000 and
$3,500,000). There will be three categories of performance agreements: simple, complex and
targeted. The primary difference between institutions that compete for the simple versus the
complex agreements is whether or not they have a full-fledged "Institutional Improvement Plan"
(PMI in its Spanish-language acronym). The targeted agreements will address specific issues or
programs within institutions, such as pedagogy, engineering and social science programs, a given
campus in a larger institution, or others. The pedagogy-specific agreements will be the most
important among these, and only schools or faculties of education will be eligible. Since
graduates of the latter typically join the ranks of primary and secondary school teachers, the
pedagogy performance agreements will seek to underpin and sustain the GoC reforms in basic
education and particularly the push to improve teacher training and teacher quality.

 Category       : Simple
 TEI Types       : For those that are just embarking on institutional change.
 Resources (approx.): $350,000 - $750,000
 Length (approx.) : 1-2 yrs

 Category       : Complex
 TEI Types       : For those pursuing major and widespread institutional change.
 Resources (approx.): $2,000,000 - $3,500,000
 Length (approx.) : 3-4 yrs

 Category       : Targeted
 TEI Types       : For specific issues or programs within institutions.
 Resources (approx.): $1,000,000 - $3,000,000
 Length (approx.) : 2-4 yrs

 7.     The total cost of the Project is estimated at $160 million, $60 million of which constitutes
the GoC contribution. The instrument used will be a Specific Investment Loan (SIL). The team
will encourage adequate distribution of resources among TEI groups. The percentage of total
resources received by any one institution will be capped in order to ensure fair distribution of
Project benefits.

D. Project location (if known)
The implementing agency, the Division of Higher Education in the Ministry of Education, is
located in Santiago. Project activities would be implemented throughout Chile, as tertiary
education institutions are spread across urban areas all around the country.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The implementing agency, the Division of Higher Education, has extensive experience on
safeguards issues as a group within them was the implementing agency for the previous
Mecesup1 and Mecesup2 projects.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Maria Paulina Mogollon (LCSHE)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes           No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                            X
    Civil works for the Project will be limited to minor refurbishments in existing buildings
(cosmetic changes and/or minor internal renovations) to facilitate new equipment or proper
ventilation for scientific equipment, as appropriate. No new structures will be built.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No         TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                      X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                               X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                          X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                           X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                       X
     8. Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10): The Project overall approach to strengthening the quality,
efficiency and relevance in tertiary education in Chile involves action at all levels and types of
tertiary education institutions across the country. OP 4.10 will be triggered, given that indigenous
peoples are present in the project area (since the coverage of the project is nationwide) and can
potentially benefit from the Project activities.

     9. The Project will seek to design an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) in
which main areas of focus will be alignment of select project activities with the relevant areas of
the GoC upcoming national Araucanía Plan for indigenous people, continuity with the efforts of
the previous Mecesup2 project, particularly in remediation initiatives, close monitoring of the
participation of indigenous students in Project activities, and subsequent promotion of learning
quality, efficiency, and relevance at participating TEIs with indigenous students. The Project will
also consider encouraging investments in improvements of tertiary education that to varying
degrees focus on issues relevant to the racial and ethnic diversity of Chile and consistent with
Project development objectives. Remediation initiatives are important because they focus on
strengthening basic core competencies math, science, reading comprehension, and study skills,
among others to increase student success in tertiary education. Remediation caters to students
with weak secondary education, most of which are from lower socioeconomic backgrounds,
municipal schools and rural areas. Given that students from indigenous backgrounds fit into this
category, remediation benefits them directly. Next steps will include: (i) identifying areas where
the Project potential activities overlap with the Government Araucanía Plan; (ii) designing
systems to monitor the participation of indigenous students in Project activities; and (iii)
providing concrete recommendations regarding how the Project can operationally integrate and
encourage the access of indigenous students in activities to promote learning quality, efficiency,
and relevance at participating TEIs.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                             X
    Subprojects involving minor civil works will not require land acquisition leading to
involuntary resettlement impacts.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                  X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X


Environmental Category: C - Not Required

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 09/15/2011
B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   No additional studies are expected during preparation.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Michael F. Crawford                                         06/30/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Glenn S. Morgan                                             06/29/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Ms Chingboon Lee                                               06/29/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
