INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 12/09/2011           Report No.: 69297
1. Basic Project Data
Country: China                               Project ID: P115561
Project Name: CN - HCFC Phase-out Project Stage I
Task Team Leader: Viraj Vithoontien
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 6, Estimated Board Date: April 10, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: EASCS                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Other Industry (90%); Central Government Administration (10%)
Theme: Pollution Management and Environmental Health (50%); Environment Policies
and Institutions (50%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             0.00
MP Amount (US$m.):            225 .00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              .00
        Montreal Protocol Investment Fund                           225. 00
                                                                    225.00
Environmental Category: B – Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple [ ]         Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to reduce HCFC consumption and production in
order to contribute to the Government of China’s endeavor to comply with its Montreal
Protocol phase-out obligations for HCFCs including: (i) reduction of HCFC consumption
and production to meet its freeze level (the average of 2009 and 2010 levels) by 1
January 2013; and (ii) reduction of 10% from the freeze level by 1 January 2015. After
completion, the project will have contributed to annual climate benefits of 11 MtCO2
equivalent a year eliminated from the PU foam sector and at least 59 MtCO2 equivalent a
year eliminated from the production sector.

3. Project Description

The project includes the following components:
Component 1: Investment in HCFC Consumption reductions. (US$ 65.70 million)

The project aims to introduce low GWP alternative technologies to HCFC-141b, i.e.
hydrocarbon and water-blown foam technologies, to support complete phase-out of
HCFC-141b at all enterprises in three sub-sectors where these technologies are well
proven (reefers and containers, refrigeration and freezers, and small household
appliances) as complete phase-out of HCFC-141b is required by 2015. Complete phase-
out in these three sub-sectors which will be required by the Chinese Government will
contribute to a permanent and sustainable phase-out of 12,000 MT of HCFC-141b.

In addition, the project will provide similar support to enterprises in other sub-sectors
(e.g., insulation pipes and panels, solar water heaters, block foam, and etc.) to cover at
least another 2,000 MT of HCFC-141b consumption in order to meet the overall
reduction target of more than 14,000 MT by 2015. Enterprises in these sub-sectors are not
obliged to phase out their HCFC-141b consumption by 2015. Therefore, it is expected
that only larger enterprises in these sub-sectors which find conversions to low GWP
alternatives more cost effective, will participate under this project.

As hydrocarbon is a flammable gas, this technology may not be appropriate for certain
(small) PU foam manufacturers and applications at this point in time given higher
conversion costs, safety constraints, and lack of technical capacity. The project will
provide financial assistance for foam system houses to modifiy their production process
in order to provide hydrocarbon pre-blended polyol to enterprises that cannot alone adopt
full-scale hydrocarbon technology.

Component 2: Investment in HCFC Production Reductions. (US$ 132.40 million)

An overall reduction of HCFC consumption in a verifiable and sustainable manner can
only be achieved through simultaneous control and reduction of the supply of HCFCs.
Hence, the project will include an HCFC production reduction component where the 29
HCFC producers presently operating in China will as a whole contribute to the reductions
through direct reductions and tradeable quotas. This component aims to reduce the
production of 8,976 ODP tons of HCFC-22, HCFC-141b and HCFC-41b from the 2012
level1.

As it cannot be determined prior to the introduction of the production quota in 2013
which producers will reduce production to meet overall targets and require funding,
production reduction contracts will be signed with a currently unknown number of HCFC
producers. Compensation will be made on the basis of lost profits resulting from reduced
production levels imposed by the MP phase-out schedule. To ensure full compliance with
the production reduction contracts with HCFC producers, FECO will issue a production
quota for the domestic and export markets on an annual basis.



1
 The production level in 2012 is estimated to be about 35,037 ODP tons against the estimated production baseline of
28,956 ODP tons.
Depending on evolving MLF policies on eligible incremental costs of HCFC phase-out,
some funding might be used to support the establishment of production capacity for new
low-carbon alternatives. Currently, costs of establishing production capacity of
alternatives are considered on a case-by-case basis by the MLF Executive Committee
(ExCom). In case project funding is used to support establishment of substitute
production capacity, the Bank environmental safeguard policies will be applied.

Component 3: Technical Assistance and Policy Support. (US$13.65 million)

The project will finance technical assistance (TA) activities supporting HCFC phase-out.
For the foam sector, the activities will include, among others, training activities on the
sub-project cycle, identification and testing of low carbon blowing agents, technical
workshops on low GWP alternatives, development of guidelines for use of hydrocarbons
in different foam applications, and revision of existing foam standards to remove any
barriers for HCFC-141b phase-out.

For the production sector, TA will comprise primarily studies and knowledge sharing on
possible substitute substances that could be produced in lieu of HCFCs, i.e. refrigerants
and/or foam blowing agents. A list of TA activities with objectives, scope of work, and
costs for the first eighteen months of the project (2012 – mid 2013) will be identified at
the appraisal stage. Additional TA activities beyond mid 2013 will be identified during
project implementation. This flexibility will allow the project to adapt to evolving
technological needs and circumstances and take advantage of the experience gained from
the early phase of project implementation.

Both the phase-out of HCFC production and HCFC-141b consumption will be supported
by policies and regulations at the national, provincial and sector levels. Local EPBs will
be responsible for enforcement of these policies at the provincial level. The project will
strengthen capacity of local EPBs to effectively assist FECO to carry out the following
activities: (i) workshops on technologies and new CFC phase-out policies of the
Government; (ii) enforcement of HCFC phase-out regulations; and (iii) delivery of
financial assistance to small foam enterprises.

A tradable HCFC production quota system will be introduced in 2012 to ensure that
reduction targets will be achieved and that both production and consumption levels stay
below the agreed limits. The proposed tradable production quotas will ensure
economically efficient allocation of the quotas among producers.

To facilitate implementation of Components 1, 2 and 3, the project will finance
engagement of a Domestic Implementing Agency (DIA). DIA assists FECO to carry out
day-to-day operation aspect of the project. These include: (i) review of technical
proposals of all eligible enterprises; (ii) review of technical specifications of all
equipment required by the sub-projects; (iii) development of terms of reference for
technical assistance activities; (iv) supervision of sub-project implementation; and, (v)
preparation of technical reports as required by FECO.
Component 4: Project Management Fee. (US$ 11.25 million)

FECO will maintain, throughout the implementation of the Project, a PMO staffed by
competent staff in adequate numbers to be responsible for overall management and
monitoring of Project execution, review and formulation of new policies and regulations
as well as the overall assessment of the quality and impact of the Project and the
preparation and furnishing to the Bank of reports, consumption verification, and other
information thereon. A fee of five percent (5%) of each Annual Program Amount (as
part of each Annual Program Amount) will be payable for carrying out project
management activities.

Component 5: Preparation of HCFC Phase-out Activities Post 2015 (US$2 million)

This component will include scoping, preparation activities and relevant studies as
needed on HCFC phase-out beyond 2015.


4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis

Nationwide. The project will include a number of HCFC producers and PU foam
enterprises scattered in the country.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Mr. Feng Ji, Environmental Specialist (EASCS)
Mr. Meixaing Zhou, Social Development Specialist (EASCS)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                          Yes        No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                    X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                       X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                           X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                            X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                     X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                         X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                    X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                             X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
OP 4.01. Environmental Assessment. The project aims to assist China in meeting its
HCFC consumption and production phase-out obligations (i.e. 10% reduction from the
baseline level by 2015 as per the Montreal Protocol) by adopting low carbon
technologies, where possible, as replacement of HCFCs. Generally speaking the project
activities have site specific, minor or moderate adverse environmental impacts. The
environmental benefits of the project greatly outweigh the negative impacts, because the
project will phase out HCFCs, a group of chemicals which have both Ozone Depleting
Potential (ODP) and Globe Warming Potential (GWP).

OP4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. To implement the project and meet its objectives, there
may be up to 140 HCFCs enterprises to be supported by the project, but no specific
individual enterprise has been selected at the appraisal stage. It is likely to include a few
enterprises which probably need relocation in line with the local urban plan programs.
There may be involuntary resettlement associated with possible relocation of a few
project enterprises. In that case, land will be usually provided for the affected enterprise
by Chinese government according to local development plan.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

As mentioned above, the project contributes very positively to mitigating the climate
change effects by phasing out HCFCs. Given the project nature and overall HCFC phase-
out plan, it will have very limited adverse social impacts in terms of both land acquisition
and involuntary resettlement and job changes or losses.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.

Alternatives for HCFCs have been widely studied in China and in other courtiers.
Beneficiary enterprises will be selected with suitable and well-proven technology based
on the alternatives studies and the relevant guidelines from the Executive Committee of
the Montreal Protocol’s Multilateral Fund.

Since some of the HCFCs enterprises would have to stop the production of HCFCs by
2015 according to government regulation and obligation of HCFC phase out, the project
will facilitate such kind of enterprises to shift to other non-HCFC products by avoiding
closure of the enterprises or job losses as much as possible.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

The project is by and large an extension of China ODS Program, which has been
implemented satisfactorily. The same Project Management Office-Foreign Economic
Cooperation Office (FECO) under the Ministry of Environmental Protection (MEP) will
be managing this project. FECO/MEP has been working with the Bank team on ODS
phase-out projects since early 1990s and has sufficient staff who are familiar with the
Bank’s safeguards policies and have received trainings on the Bank project management.
Therefore, the institutional capacity is deemed sufficient for the Bank’s project.

Environmental Safeguard. As the project has multiple subprojects and their locations of
subprojects are not known at the time of the appraisal, an Environmental Management
Framework (EMF) has been prepared by the PMO with support from the Bank. The
EMF will be used to provide guidance to both beneficiary enterprises and the Foreign
Economic Cooperation Office (FECO) under the Ministry of Environmental Protection
for the environmental management process to be followed in evaluating individual sub-
projects to be considered for financial support under the Project. This EMF defines the
contents, procedures and institutional responsibilities for environmental management of
the sub-projects whose purpose is to ensure the environmental management is in
compliance with both Chinese environmental assessment (EA) laws and regulations and
in accordance with World Bank EA policies and procedures as specified in OP/ BP 4.01
(Environmental Assessment).

Social Safeguard. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is prepared by the borrower
to address possible relocation of project enterprises with possible involuntary
resettlement during the project implementation. The RPF also covers the issue of possible
small number of job changes or job losses in project enterprises due to the phase-out
obligation target of HCFCs reduction by 2015. It highlights that local Chinese labour
laws and regulations should be followed meanwhile it ought to be in compliance with the
Bank policy OP4.12 to ensure appropriate compensation and livelihood restoration for
affected employees.

Given possible closure of a few project enterprises owing to their compliance with local
government overall development plans, it is agreed with the project PMO-FECO that the
project will fund and give close technical support to the first case of company relocation
for the project. The Bank team will work closely with FECO and local PMO and
consultants to go through the whole process of the preparation of safeguards instruments.
The central PMO is required to inform every and each of the project company of the
basic requirements of the Bank safeguards policies as early as possible.

Furthermore, implementation of the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
supervised and periodically monitored by FECO and the local project owners and
external monitoring consultants during project implementation. This work will be funded
through counterpart funds. Further, the Bank Team will periodically carry out field
supervision and provide safeguard training and guidance to the PMO. Such supervision
and safeguards training will be funded through the Bank’s supervision budget.

The PMO is very familiar with the Bank safeguard policies and has sufficient
institutional capacity for implementation of the safeguard measures.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Environmental and Social. Public consultations will be conducted in accordance with the
EMF and RPF after enterprises and their specific activities are identified during project
implementation. The EMF and RPF is locally disclosed on 7 December 2011 through
announcements published in the local newspaper and on the internet websites of FECO.
The safeguard documents were sent to the Bank InfoShop for disclosure on 3 January
2012.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?              Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank             11 Nov. 2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure         7 Dec. 2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop          30 Dec. 2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank                   18 Nov. 2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure              7 Dec. 2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop               30 Dec. 2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?              N.A.
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?              N.A.
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?     N/A
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) N/A
review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           N/A
  credit/loan?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        YES
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        YES
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     YES
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    YES
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            YES
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              YES
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:            Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Viraj Vithoontien
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Feng Ji
Social Development Specialist       Ms Meixiang Zhou
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr L. Panneer Selvam
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Paul Kriss
  Comments:
