                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC6268


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/28/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: China                            Project ID: P122008
Project Name: Yunnan Technical and Vocational Education and Training Project
Task Team Leader: Xiaoyan Liang
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 12,   Estimated Board Date: July 6, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: EASHE                      Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                          Loan
Sector: Vocational training (100%)
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (50%);Education for all (50%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           50.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                    50.00
                                                                    50.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The Project’s Development Objective is to improve the quality and relevance of technical and
vocational education and training in nine project schools and to produce lessons to guide future
school reforms and policy development.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The project will have two main components: (i) school-based reform; and (ii) provincial level
coordination, policy development, and monitoring and evaluation activities.

 Component One: School-Based Reforms and Innovations This component will: (i) strengthen
and institutionalize the linkage between schools and industry; (ii) introduce an updated modular
and Competency-Based Training (CBT) curriculum; (iii) train instructors and managers to use
the new curriculum; (iv) improve student assessment; (v) expand and upgrade facilities and
equipment; and (vi) support non-project school reforms (DALI only). CBT specialties will be
developed for the four curriculum clusters corresponding to bio-industry, geology and minerals,
tourism, and automobile. One school will be selected to lead the standards and curriculum
development for each cluster. The Provincial Project Management Offices will play an
important role in coordinating activities such as capacity building for management and
instructors, developing guidelines for school-industry committees, and preparing templates for
monitoring project performance in order to achieve uniformity where this is important and
realize cost savings. However, each project school will develop and implement its own school-
based curriculum materials.

 Component Two: Provincial Coordination, Policy Development, and Project Management.
This component will support: (i) support provincial activities related to the development of
curriculum cluster; (ii) evidence-based policy research and knowledge sharing; and (iii) project
management and coordination including monitoring and evaluation.

D. Project location (if known)
The Project will take place in nine secondary and tertiary TVET institutions. Seven schools are
located in the Kunming City. The Tengchong No. 1 Vocational School is located in the
Tengchong County of Baoshan City, and the Dali Secondary Vocational School is located in the
Dali City.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Project will be managed by the Provincial Project Management Office (PPMO) established
under Yunnan Provincial Education. The PPMO is staffed with 6 fulltime staff including a
Director, Deputy Director, 4 project management officials and education specialists. The PPMO
has successfully implemented Basic Education projects financed by the Bank within 2000-2009
and possess sufficient capacity in implementing World Bank projects with knowledge and
experience in ensuring the development and implementation of environmental management
guidelines. Training related to the Bank’s safeguards policy was provided at the project
identification mission in March 2011. Additional training will be organized as necessary.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Chaogang Wang (SDV)
   Mr Yiren Feng (EASCS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes           No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
    The proposed project will finance the rehabilitation of building, construction of new school
buildings, workshops, and laboratories for additional training space and skills training. All
planned civil works will be built on the existing land within the campus of 9 schools. No
relocation of people is anticipated. By considering the type, location, sensitivity, and scale of the
proposed project, the project will have very limited adverse impacts during the construction and
operation phase. Therefore, the project is classified as Category C for its minimal adverse
environmental impacts per the Bank OP 4.01. However, in order to avoid and minimize any
potential impacts and risks, the team decided to take a prudent approach in planning for an
Environmental Management Guideline (EMG). The team’s environmental specialist discussed
the structure, the key elements of such EA instrument and a detailed timetable to complete the
EMG and subsequent public disclosure. The environmental specialist also reviewed and
discussed the status of environmental assessment as per the domestic government approval
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes          No         TBD
process by each project school.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                    X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                             X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                        X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                         X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                  X
    Task Team has carried out initial social screening. Yunnan is one of the largest ethnic-
inhabited provinces in China. There are 51 officially recognized ethnic groups. Population
census in 2000 indicated that total population of these ethnic minority groups was about 14
million, about one third of total population in the province. On average, about 30% of students in
the 9 schools supported by the proposed project are ethnic minorities. This is consistent with the
average proportion of ethnic minority population to the total population in the province.

      However, the Task Team concluded that the policy will not be triggered considering the
purpose, design, and beneficiaries of the proposed project. The proposed project is mainly
focused on curriculum cluster development and improvement of the quality of technical and
vocational education and training. The project does not have targeted intervention. The students
enrolled are graduates of middle or high schools and have received mandarin education. Hence,
they do not have any language issue in receiving vocational education. They enter into
vocational training and education schools completely on voluntary basis. Hence, there is no
access issue for students from ethnic minority groups either. All students that have enrolled in
the 9 schools will equally benefit from the proposed project. Further, no ethnic minority
communities will be affected by the proposed the project.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                             X
    It is anticipated that the proposed project will finance some new construction of school
buildings, workshops, and laboratories. Based on the information provided by clients that all
civil works will be within the existing campus and no any involuntary land taking will be
involved. It is also confirmed that no people will be adversely affected by the civil works
supported by the project. Based on the information above, the Task Team concluded that the
proposed project will not trigger the Bank Policy on Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                  X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X


Environmental Category: C - Not Required

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   07/15/2011
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Based on recommendation from Bank’s Environmental Specialist during the project
   identification mission in March 2011, the project counterparts will develop a draft
   Environmental Management Guidelines for Bank review by June 30, 2011.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                  Ms Xiaoyan Liang                                                           04/19/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr John R. Butler                                                          07/21/2011
      Comments: Acting Regional Safeguards Advisor
    Sector Manager:                    Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo                                                  05/03/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
