                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                           Report No.: AC6626


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/17/2012

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: China                           Project ID: P123225
Project Name: Shandong Renewable Energy Project
Task Team Leader: Ximing Peng
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 13,  Estimated Board Date: January 11, 2013
2012
Managing Unit: EASCS                     Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                         Loan
Sector: Other Renewable Energy (100%)
Theme: Climate change (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):        100
IDA Amount (US$m.):            0
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                 100.00
        Financing Gap                                              0.00
                                                                 100.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed project would contribute to achieving Shandong Province’s Renewable Energy
(RE) targets and demonstrate potential contribution of the private sector in RE development.

 Achievement of the development objective will be assessed through the successful installation
of the RE capacity (MW) and sales of electricity to the power grid (GWh) by the private
companies. The project is expected to contribute certain percent towards the achievement of the
12th FYP target in Shandong Province. The project indicators will be quantified during the
project preparation stage.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project would comprise of the following three components:

 a.   Contribution to the financing of a privately owned 150 MW wind farm. The proposed
component will support the design and construction of a wind farm of approximately 150 MW in
Binzhou City, developed by the Shandong Chengkou Salt Chemical Company Ltd. The wind
turbines will be installed along the existing cofferdams or access roads in an existing brine pan.
The electricity will be delivered to the grid through an about 15 km 220 kV line to substation,
which will be commissioned by the end of 2012 to reinforce the provincial grid. The
transmission line is part of the project to be financed by counterpart fund.
  b.    Contribution to the financing of a privately owned 12 MW biomass power plant. This
proposed subcomponent will support the design and construction of a 12 MW biomass power
plant in Jiaxiang County of Jining City, developed by Jiaxiang County Jiaxing Thermal Power
Cogeneration Company (also called, “Jiaxing Company?). The envisaged main biomass fuels
will be cotton straw to be collec in a 30-50 km radius around the plant site. The electricity will be
delivered to the grid through an existing transmission line to an existing substation located about
2 km from the plant.
  c.    Technical assistance (TA) component. During project preparation, the need for training
and capacity building of the sponsors, especially the wind developer, will be assessed. The
program will most likely be linked to optimum use of resources, preparation of the feasibility
study, environmental and social programs, and preparation and negotiation of legal agreements
that meet good industry practices, as well as the sustainable operation and maintenance of the
plant(s) during the project implementation period.

D. Project location (if known)
The Project consists of two investment components: one is an about 150 MW wind farm located
in Mashanzi Town, Wudi County, Binzhou City; and the other is a 12 MW biomass power plant
located in Jiaxiang Town, Jiaxiang County, Jining City.

 Wudi County is located in the north of Shandong province towards the Bohai Sea. Its area
covers north latitude 37º41’~38º16’ a east longitude 117º31’~118º4’, with a total area of 1,998
square kilometers and population of 440,000. The proposed wind farm be built within the
existing brine pan of Shandong Chengkou Salt Chemical Company, located in Beihai
Development Zone of Wudi County.

 Jiaxiang County is located in southwest of Shandong Province with an area of 973 square
kilometers. It is a large agricultural county including 8 towns and 7 townships with a total
population of 870,000. The proposed biomass power plant will be built at a reserved site adjacent
to the existing Jiaxing Thermal Power Plant.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Both companies have basic capacity to implement the safeguard policies, as they have
experience in conducting EA and land acquisition procedures for other investment projects. The
companies have been certified with the ISO Environmental Management System. However,
both companies are new to the Bank safeguard requirements, with limited knowledge of Bank’s
safeguard policies, although Shandong Provincial Government have more experience in
processing Bank funded projects. Each company will have a Project Management Office with
designated staff to oversee and coordinate the preparation and implementation of its subproject.
Their staff will receive necessary trainings to be provided by the Bank team on the Bank’s
safeguard policies in the early stage of preparation; and experienced consulting agencies will be
selected to assist the borrowers to prepare required safeguard documents. Terms of Reference for
hiring these consulting agencies will be reviewed by the Bank team. Additional TA will be
discussed with the companies to ensure their capacity for safeguards management will be in
place.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Youxuan Zhu (EASCS)
   Mr Feng Ji (EASCS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes        No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                               X
    Chengkou Wind Farm:
     The physical components of the subproject include the installation of about 150 MW wind
turbines, associated civil and electrical works, and about 15 km 220 kV transmission line to
connect the wind farm to power grid. Apart from the 15 km transmission line, the physical
investments will be located within the boundary of the Shandong Chengkou Salt Chemical
Company. The project area features fish ponds and shallow artificial brines ponds with which to
produce salts from sea water. The ponds are separated by cofferdams (2-4 meter wide) and
access roads which have space for wind farm development.

     The establishment of the wind farm may cause negative impacts, mainly dust, noise and
vibration during the construction period, and noise and visual impacts during operation period. .

     Jiaxiang Biomass Power Plant:
     The physical components of the subproject consist of a 12 MW biomass-fired power plant,
straw collection and storage facilities, and associated electrical works. The electricity will be
delivered to the grid through an existing transmission line to an existing substation (about 2 km
from the plant). Four straw collection stations may be set up in the vicinity of the project site
according to the preliminary fuel supply plan. No plantation of energy crops will be involved for
the operation of the biomass power plant. The generation of the heat from boilers of the biomass
power plant will depend solely on biomass residues; no heat from external sources or use of
fossil fuels is required;

     Based on the environmental screening, the biomass subproject is not located in any
environmental sensitive area. The potential negative impacts include dust, noise and vibration
during the constructurion period, and noise, atmospheric emissions(e.g particulates, NOx),
waster water discharge and transport of biomass fuel into the plant during the operation period.
None of the impacts are likely sensitive,diverse, or unprecedented.

     One major positive environmental impact of the Project is the avoided air pollutants from
coal-fired thermal power, which will be partially replaced by the RE generation from this
Project. Estimate of the amount of avoided air pollutants and associated environmental benefits
will be conducted in both the feasiblitatiy study report and EA report.

     This EA policy is triggered. Considering the type, location, sensitivity, and scale of the
project and the nature and magnitude of its potential environmental impacts, the EA Category is
proposed as “B?. An EA and EMP will be preared for the proposed wind fa and biomass plant
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                           Yes        No           TBD
subprojects respectively based on applicable Chinese EA regulations, industrial regulations and
standards, World Bank Safeguards Policies, and IFC EHS Guidelines.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                    X
    Based on the information provided in the preliminary feasibility study, the wind farm project
will be in the premise of Chengkou Salt Chemical Company, and the project site is neither on
birds’ migratory flyways, nor within birds’ habitats areas. Though one natural reserve-Binzhou
Shell-Dyke Island and Wetland National Nature Reserve is located in the vicinity of the project
area, Chengkou Company confirmed that its wind farm project is outside of the protected area of
the Nature Reserve. Whether the OP4.04 is triggered will be assessed after the finding of the EA
is available.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                               X
    The project will not (i) have impacts on the health and quality of forests; (ii) affect the rights
and welfare of people and their level of dependence upon or interaction with forests; (iii) aim to
bring about changes in the management, protection, or utilization of natural forests or
plantations, whether they are publicly, privately, or communally owned.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                          X
    The project will not procure any pesticides nor will any use of pesticides result from the
project.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                           X
    It is not expected that project activities will adversely affect any above-ground artifacts with
archeological, historical, religious or unique natural values as defined under OP.4.11. Chance
finds during construction might occur and relevant clauses will be included in all construction
contracts.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                    X
    In Shandong Province, the ethnic minority population accounts for only 0.6 percent and 80%
of them are Hui nationalities. In the project areas, no ethnic minority communities have been
identified. Therefore, the policy is not triggered.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                   X
    Chengkou Wind Farm:
      The land where the wind turbines will be erected is located within the boundary of the brine
pan operated by Chengkou Salt Chemical Company, no new land acquisition and resettlement is
expected. The brine pan covers an area of about 150 km2, of which the Company has obtained
the land use certificates for about 60% of the whole area. The remaining 40% of land areas,
where most of 150 MW of wind farm will be located, are reclaimed sea areas, and are currently
used by the company for salt production under temporary lease agreement with local
governments. For this part, the Involuntary Resettlement Policy is not triggered since all the
land is government land. Nevertheless, proper acquisition procedures still need to be followed
for the affected temporarily leased land areas, which include getting land pre-examination
approval from Shandong Provincial Land Resources Department, and paying relevant fees for
obtaining the land use rights for the affected land areas.

      The construction of the associated 15 km 220kV transmission line might involve limited
land acquisition and resettlement. The scope of impacts for the transmission component has not
yet been identified due to unavailability of a grid connection scheme. Based on completion of the
final grid connection scheme for the subproject, an abbreviated resettlement plan will be
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                     Yes          No         TBD
prepared for the construction of 220kV transmission line, which will be funded by the project
sponsor and built by the local power grid company.

     Jiaxiang Biomass Power Plant:
     The proposed biomass power plant will involve permanent acquisition of about 130 mu or
8.7 ha of farmland. All these land areas belong to Jiaxiang Village. According to local county
officials, these land areas are located in the recently zoned industrial areas, and the pre-
examination of land use has been conducted by the Shandong Provincial Land Resources
Department for the Project. Following the most recent national laws and provincial regulations,
adequate compensation and rehabilitation measures will be provided to the affected households,
which will be handled by Jiaxiang County Land Resources Bureau.

      In addition to the power plant, four straw fuel collection stations would be built in a 30-50
km radius around the plant site based on the preliminary fuel supply plan. The area of each
station is about 40 mu, and about 160 mu in total. Most of them will use existing warehouse or
closed factories with no new land acquisition required.

     According to the Bank policies on involuntary resettlement, a resettlement action plan
(RAP) needs to be prepared based on detailed impact survey and extensive consultation with
affected people. The RAP should also cover other potential impacts caused by related facilities,
such as transmission line connection, fuel straw collection facilities and water supply pipelines.

      The proposed biomass power plant will bring considerable social, economic and
environment benefits to local areas and communities, which include (i) increasing income for
local farmers from selling the agricultural wastes to the power company, and participating in the
process of straw fuel collection, transportation and processing, (ii) facilitating local
government’s efforts in reducing burning of agricultural wastes and improving environment, and
(iii) promoting local economy growth by creating employment. These potential social benefits
need to be identified through a social assessment. Following the social assessment, proper
actions and measures will be identified to ensure that concerned communities will benefit as
much as possible from the proposed project.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                         X
     The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
policy.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                    X
     Not applicable.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                             X
     Not applicable.


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   09/17/2012

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Environmental Safeguards: EA and EMP will be undertaken by experienced EA consulting
   firms for each subproject, with first draft available before the next preparation mission
   (February 2012), draft final report to be completed by pre-appraisal (June 2012), and final
   report at appraisal (September 2012).

        Social Safeguards: Social Assessment for Jiaxiang Biomass Power Plant and RAPs for both
       Jiaxiang Biomass and Chengkou Wind Farm will be carried out by experienced consulting
       team from Shandong University. The first draft reports of relevant documents will be
       completed and submitted to the Bank for review by the end of February 2012, draft final
       reports to be completed by pre-appraisal (June 2012), and final reports at appraisal
       (September 2012).

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                  Mr Ximing Peng                                                             01/10/2012
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr John R. Butler                                                          02/17/2012
      Comments: Acting Regional Safeguards Advisor
    Sector Manager:                    Mr Paul Kriss                                                              02/10/2012
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
