                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                           Report No.: AC6615


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/15/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: China                                  Project ID: P125496
Project Name: Integrated Modern Agriculture Development Project
Task Team Leader: Rabih H. Karaky
Estimated Appraisal Date:                       Estimated Board Date: April 16, 2013
Managing Unit: EASCS                            Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                Loan
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (60%);Crops (25%);Forestry (5%);Agricultural extension
and research (5%);Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (5%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (30%);Climate change (20%);Water resource
management (20%);Other rural development (20%);Rural policies and institutions (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):          200
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                          0.00
        Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country        90.50
        Sub-borrower(s)                                                  23.50
                                                                       114.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed Project Development Objective is to support sustainable and climate resilient
agriculture production systems in selected areas of Gansu, Hunan, Jiangxi, and Liaoning
provinces; Xinjiang Autonomous region; and Chonqging municipality. This will be achieved by
investing in (i) water conservation infrastructure improvement, (ii) enhanced climate-smart
agricultural practices, and (iii) institutional strengthening and capacity building.

 Key Performance Indicators may include: (a) area of farm land benefiting from climate resilient
agricultural systems established; (b) increased irrigation water use efficiency; (c) improved
agricultural productivity from adoption of climate smart agricultural practices; (d) increased
numbers of improved water user associations and active cooperatives.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The Integrated Modern Agricultural Development Project (IMAD) would finance investments in
34 counties/prefectures/cities in the six participating provinces/regions/municipalities. An
approach that balances infrastructure improvement with the promotion of climate smart
agriculture practices and the strengthening of the involved institutions and their sustainability is
contemplated. Interventions would be tailored to the local conditions and will be determined in
consultation with line bureau staff, technical institutions, farmer groups, local private sector
representatives and local government. Project areas are selected based on specified criteria such
as clustered arable land with adequate water resources but with infrastructure and technology
gaps, vulnerability to climate shocks, potential for agricultural modernization with demonstrative
impacts, access to markets, etc. The total cost is estimated at about $314 million, comprising an
IBRD loan of US$200 million and counterpart funding of $114 million. Counterpart funds
comprise allocations from the six provinces/regions/municipalities and farmers contribution. The
GOC will pass on the Bank loan, as grants, to the provinces. The project would have four
components.

 1. Description
 Component 1 – Water Conservation Infrastructure Improvement (Indicative 60%-65% of total
cost)

  This component seeks to improve farmland infrastructure and the reliability and efficiency of
irrigation and drainage systems. It aims at stimulating irrigated agriculture output by increasing
water productivity and improving water use efficiency in the targeted areas. Activities will be
customized for each target area based on the analysis and the stakeholders input related to
constraints and opportunities. Activities financed under this component may include civil works
and equipment associated with: (a) systems design and rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage
infrastructure (canal lining, dredging, cleaning of earth canals and drain channels, small weirs,
bridges, culverts, gates, etc..); (b) water-saving irrigation (drip, sprinklers, furrow, and low
pressure pipelines); (c) local water resources storage systems and farm ponds ; (d) rehabilitation
and electrification of pumping stations and existing tube wells; (e) water monitoring and
measurement structures and equipment (flow measurement devices, ground water monitoring);
and (f) farm and field access roads.

 Component 2 - Enhanced Climate–Smart Agricultural Practices (Indicative 20%-25% of total
cost).

 This component seeks to build on the improved irrigation infrastructure and water delivery
activities in component 1 to improve the productivity of agriculture, increase farmer incomes,
and reduce their vulnerability to adverse climatic events.

  Activities financed under this component may include: (a) on-farm water saving technologies,
such as land leveling, need-based irrigation, use of crop residues for mulch, wet-dry methods for
rice cultivation, and green houses; (b) adaptation-oriented agronomic practices such as improved
seeding technologies, demonstration of low carbon and conservation agriculture measures, crop
rotations, diversification to drought/heat/frost/pest resistant varieties, and soil fertility
management (e.g. soil testing, precise/formula fertilizer application, green manure, and organic
mulching); (c) promotion of integrated pest management, integrated nutrient management, and
green, organic, and non-polluting production techniques; (e) improved access to machinery, farm
equipment, technology, and extension services; (f) enhanced post-harvest measures to add value
to agricultural products and mitigate against climate and market risks; (g) agro ecological
activities to improve the resilience of the farm landscape and increase carbon sequestration (e.g.
forest shelterbelts, greenbelts, and soil conservation measures); and (h) adaptive research on
technical and policy issues related to climate change adaptation and mitigation (e.g. index- based
risk transfer and insurance mechanisms, water pricing, low carbon agriculture, incentives for
adoption of new technologies/policies, etc.).

 Component 3 - Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (Indicative 10% of total cost)

  This component seeks to improve farmer and institutional capacity at various levels for
sustainable and climate resilient irrigated agriculture. The component would be designed to fully
integrate with and add value to the irrigation infrastructure and agriculture investments. Possible
activities would include: (a) development and transfer of technical knowledge through training,
study tours, and demonstration of innovative technologies that will contribute to information
transfer to farmers and help them respond or cope with climate risks (e.g. early warning systems,
real-time weather information and responses to farmers through Information and Communication
Technology- ICT); (b) establishing and strengthening water user associations for operation and
maintenance of local irrigation systems, monitoring and evaluating their performance, and
integrating their support into existing programs; (c) promotion and support of farmer
cooperatives to enhance services delivery, access to markets, and farmer-based adaptation to
climate change; (d) awareness building, education, and communication on climate smart
agriculture aimed at the wider farmer community and mainstreaming such aspects into the
project institutions’ planning and programs; and (e) training for PMO staff at central, provincial,
and county levels including training on World Bank procedures (financial management,
procurement, safeguards, and project monitoring and evaluation).

 The component would also finance technical assistance and equipment required to provide
specialist and multidisciplinary expertise to farmer groups, and project institutions on various
features of climate resilient agriculture (e.g. mitigation and adaptation to climate change in
agriculture, environmental, social and economic aspects, application of GIS and remote sensing
technologies, ET monitoring, environmental monitoring, decision support tools, and downscaling
of climate impacts and interventions needed at the local level).

 Component 4 - Project Management support (Indicative 5% of total cost).

  The purpose of this component is to strengthen the capacity at each level to manage, implement
and monitor project and to establish and implement an effective project Monitoring and
Evaluation system. Possible activities to be financed under this component include: (a)
equipment and materials - computers, office equipment, training equipment, vehicles (if
required); and (b) establishment of efficient project monitoring and evaluation (physical and
financial progress, impact monitoring, safeguards monitoring, etc.), and management
information systems and provision of other related consultancies.

D. Project location (if known)
The project covers 34 counties/districts in five provinces and Chongqing Municipality: i.e.
Hunan Province(6): Jinjing City, Ningxiang County, Hengdong County, Datonghu District,
Junshan District, and Zixing City; Jiangxi Province(6): Jinxian County, Anfu County, Gaoan
County, Xinguo County, Yushui District, and Jinxi County; Gansu Province (6): Dunhuang
City, Gaotai County, Yongdeng County, Linyao County, Wuxian County, and Lingtai County;
Liaoning Province(6): Zhangwu County, Changtu County, Sujiatun District, Jingzhou City,
Chaoyang, and Lianshan District); Xinjiang Autonomous region(4) (Qitai County, Fukang
City,Yanqi County, and Bohu County; and Chongqing municipality(6): Nanchuan District,
Fuling District, Tongnan County, Dazhu County, Yiongchuan District, and Kai County.

 The above counties were selected based on the selection criteria defined below and agreed to
with SOCAD:
 • Priority would be given to counties, among the CAD areas, with potential for agricultural
development that is yet to be fully realized and that would show measurable impacts from
planned project investments.
 • Selected project counties would have shown some vulnerability to climatic shocks as evident
by frequency of adverse weather events (heat, drought, floods, frost, etc…), and/or changing
patterns of rainfall, temperature, etc…, supported by weather data. • Project counties/sites would
be selected where integrated and comprehensive planning and implementation of proposed
project activities (irrigation, agriculture, environment, institutions, etc…) could be adopted and
demonstrated in order to maximize the benefits and the demonstrative effect of project activities.
 • Proposed project activities and sites selection must be consistent with the National and
provincial development strategies (five year plans), Agricultural development and water
resources management programs and policies, Climate change plans (if available), existing
Master plans for environmental protection and land use.
 • Project sites should have relatively clustered arable land with adequate water resources, albeit
with crucial gaps in infrastructure, access to markets, and with an existing services delivery
network, so as to constitute scale and size for potential development with measurable and
sustainable impacts (economic, environmental, and social, etc…) from project activities.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The State Office of Comprehensive Agricultural Development (SOCAD), in the Ministry of
Finance, through its Comprehensive Agriculture Development Program, is the lead
implementing and coordinating agency for the project. SOCAD currently manages the largest
on-farm irrigation investment program in China and has a long experience in planning,
financing, and implementing a large number of agricultural development projects, including
Bank-financed projects. It is familiar with the Bank implementation procedures and requirements
including fiduciary, safeguards, and monitoring and evaluation. SOCAD will set up a Central
Project Management Office to be in charge of overall project management. At the provincial
level, project implementation and coordination will be carried out by the Provincial offices of
Comprehensive Agriculture Development (POCADs). All the provinces, Xinjiang Autonomous
region, and Chongqing municipality have ongoing Bank supported projects, and each of them
will set up a Provincial Project Management Office under the guidance of a Project Leading
Group consisting of representatives of the various line bureaus and of technical experts. Project
Management Offices (PMOs) will also be established by the County offices for Comprehensive
Agriculture Development (COCADs) for project implementation at the county level. The Bank
team and SOCAD will work on strengthening the implementation capacity of all PMOs in
various aspects of project preparation and implementation.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS)
   Mr Ximing Zhang (EASCS)
   Mr Feng Ji (EASCS)
   Ms Meixiang Zhou (EASCS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
     The impacts of the proposed project on the environment are expected to be overall positive as
the project, by design, puts strong emphasis on the development of sustainable and climate
resilient agricultural production systems. Possible adverse environmental impacts may include:
(i) noise, dust, soil erosion, spoil disposal, associated with small-scale construction for water
conservation infrastructure (e.g. canal lining, small weirs, bridges, culverts, water resources
storage systems such as farm ponds; canal bank roads and farm roads), and dredging to clean up
silt in the secondary or tertiary irrigation channels/ditches. The presence of heavy metals or
dangerous chemicals in the silt is not a concern, which is regulated by relevant national
regulations or standards and is supported by irrigation water quality data provided by the client;
(ii) Other impacts, if not managed well, of improved agricultural irrigation on surface water and
other water-users; and (iii) impacts of improved irrigation facilities and diversification of crop
system (e.g. vegetable greenhouses which potentially involve use of pesticides).

     In accordance with national EA policies and the Bank safeguard policies, an Environmental
Assessment will be conducted for the proposed activities. An EMP, or an Environmental Code of
Practice (ECOP) for a typology of canal repairs, will be prepared to prevent, minimize, and
mitigate the negative environmental effects and enhance the positive ones. A Pest Management
Plan (PMP) will be prepared to address the potential impacts of pesticides which may be induced
by the improved irrigation facilities and diversification of crop systems.

     Although the Project is not financing the construction of dams, the irrigation systems
financed by the Project will divert water from reservoirs formed by a number of existing dams
and/or dams under construction (refer to Dam Safety Policy below). Apart from the Dam Safety
Policy requirements, a due diligence investigation, as part of the environmental assessment
process, will be undertaken to confirm that these reservoirs are in compliance with Chinese
national environmental laws and regulations.

     Based on the available information provided by the provinces and the Bank’s field visits to
a sample of project counties in the project provinces, the Task Team proposes risk category B for
the project after considering the type, location, sensitivity, and scale of the project and the nature
and magnitude of the potential environmental impacts due to the following: (i) the project mainly
includes improvement of the existing irrigation system and introduces agronomic measures to
adapt to climate change and to promote integrated pest management; (ii) the project is located in
existing farmlands with no environmental and cultural important sites that may be affected by the
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                           Yes          No          TBD
project; (iii) the project does not likely have any significant adverse environmental impacts that
are sensitive, diverse or unprecedented. Instead the potential negative environmental impacts are
site-specific short, reversible in nature. The mitigation measures for these adverse impacts can be
designed readily. In addition, the project itself is a set of mitigation measures for environmental
problems and is expected to bring about substantial positive impacts: such as improvement of
water productivity, water use efficiency, better soil quality, improved carbon sequestration; and
reducing the negative environmental impacts of agriculture.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                        X
     Based on the available information and the initial screening conducted by the project team,
the project will not affect any protected areas, known natural habitats, or established or proposed
critical natural habitats.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                 X
     The project will not finance activities that would involve significant conversion or
degradation of critical forest areas or related critical natural habitats as defined under the policy.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                               X
     The project aims to reduce the negative environmental impacts of agriculture such as non-
point source pollution. The project will include promotion of Integrated Pest Management (IPM),
and green, organic and non-polluted production techniques. The project may have potential
impacts from pesticides which are likely to be induced by improved irrigation facilities,
diversification of crop systems, and the plantation and management of wind breaker, shelter
belts, and green belts. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be prepared to address this potential
impact.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                             X
     Based on the available information, the physical investment will be mainly in existing
farmlands. The project will not adversely affect sites with archeological, paleontological,
historical, religious, or unique natural values. Chance finds during construction might occur and
relevant clauses will be included in all construction contracts.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                         X
     Among the six proposed project provinces, there are some ethnic minorities in the 4 proposed
project counties of Xinjiang Autonomous Region. These ethnic minorities include Uygur, Kazak,
Hui, and Mongolian. Most of them fall within the definition of Indigenous Peoples as per
OP4.10. It is concluded that the Bank IP policy is triggered. In addition, there are small numbers
of ethnic minority people - Korean and Mongolian who live scattered in the project area of
Lingyuan City in Liaoning Province.

      According to the OP4.10 policy requirements, a social assessment (SA) and free, prior and
informed consultation among these ethnic minority groups in Xinjiang will be carried out during
project preparation. Based on the SA and consultation, an Ethnic Minority Development Plan
(EMDP) will be developed.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                        X
    The project will not require land acquisition and resettlement in any of the six project
provinces according to the current plan for land use. Civil work is planned only for canal
dredging and on-farm work without new land requirement, and will be undertaken in the crop
idle seasons so as to avoid impact of temporary land occupation on crops as much as possible.
However, there might be some minor readjustment or changes of land use for some irrigation
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes          No         TBD
facility rehabilitation. This will be further examined during project preparation to determine
whether there would be any possibility for temporary or permanent involuntary taking of the
land. If so, the policy will be triggered and a Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared to
guide the events in which involuntary taking of land takes place during project implementation.

      Meanwhile, in Fukang city of Xinjiang, a new Baiyanghe reservoir is currently under
construction and is planned to be completed in 2012. This is a medium sized reservoir with a
total capacity of 12 million m3 of water to irrigate over 10,000 ha of land. Though beyond the
project area, the Baiyanghe reservoir could possibly constitute one of the water sources for
irrigation in the project area in Fukang City. In view of the possible connection, due diligence
will also be conducted during project preparation to determine whether the construction of the
reservoir is directly related to project activities, and hence whether it will be a linked project that
would trigger the policy.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                            X
     Although the Project doesn’t finance construction of dams, the irrigation systems financed by
the Project will divert water directly from reservoirs formed by a number of existing dams and/or
dams under construction (DUC), and they could not function if the dam were to fail. In the
meantime, a number of upstream existing dams may also provide flood protection to the water
diversion works being constructed by the Project. Failure of the upstream dams could cause
damage to or failure of the new Bank-funded structures.

     Based on the requirement of the OP4.37, the project provinces should hire one or more
independent dam specialists to (a) inspect and evaluate the safety status of the existing dam or
DUC, their appurtenances, and their performance history; (b) review and evaluate the owner's
operation and maintenance procedures; and (c) provide written reports of findings and
recommendations for any remedial work or safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the
existing dams or DUC to an acceptable safety standard.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                             X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   12/05/2012
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   All Safeguards related documents, i.e. the EA, EMP (or ECOP), PMP, EMDP, and if needed,
   RPF, will be completed and disclosed prior to appraisal.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Rabih H. Karaky
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Paul Kriss
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
