                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                           Report No.: AC6324


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/23/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: China                              Project ID: P124848
Project Name: China:Fujian Meizhou Bay Navigation Improvement Project
Task Team Leader: Wenlai Zhang
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 21,      Estimated Board Date: August 22, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: EASCS                        Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and
                                            Maintenance Loan
Sector: Ports, waterways and shipping (100%)
Theme: Regional integration (40%);Other environment and natural resources
management (10%);Climate change (10%);Trade facilitation and market access (40%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           50.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                     85.00
                                                                     85.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The development objective of the Project is to improve the capacity of the main navigation
channel and enhance the operational management capacity of Meizhou Bay Harbor.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed Project consists of the following two main components:

 Component 1: Improvement of the main navigation channel. This component will upgrade the
main navigation channel in Meizhou Bay to a 300,000 DWT (deadweight ton) standard that will
allow for unidirectional tide-independent navigation of Q-MAX LNG (Liquefied Natural Gas)
ships, as well as unidirectional tide-dependent navigation of up to 400,000 DWT bulk cargo
ships.

 Component 2: Capacity building to enhance operational management capacity. This
component includes technical studies and training programs that are designed to build the FPTD
(Fujian Provincial Transport Department) and MBHAB#s (Meizhou Bay Harbor Administration
Bureau) capacity of ports planning, business development, operational management, transport
safety and environment management. The following TA activities have been discussed with
FPTD and will be further identified and screened during project preparation:
 #      Providing technical assistance in reviewing and upgrading the draft Master Plan of
Meizhou Bay Harbor;
 #      Developing a comprehensive business and operation plan to improve the competitiveness
of Meizhou Bay Harbor;
 #      Detailing a plan for a port logistics concept and a platform for logistic activities linked to
the port system;
 #      Preparation of a study on utilization and treatment of dredged materials in
environmentally-friendly and economical manner.

 The proposed Project is the second stage of the latest development (Phase III) of continuous
Meizhou Bay marine channel improvement efforts. Phase I was completed in 2007. Phase II is
ongoing and expected to finish by the end of 2011. Phase III is designed to further expand the
channels# carrying capacity to 300,000 DWT standard for unidirectional tide-independent
navigation, as well as unidirectional tide-dependent navigation up to 400,000 DWT bulk cargo
ships. Phase III (Stages I and II) will be financed as follows:
 #      Stage I: 100% financed by the client
 #      Stage II: partly financed by the Bank ($50 million) and the client ($85 million) being
implemented under the proposed project.

  Safeguards policies will apply to the entire Phase III (Stages I and II) irrespective of the
financing arrangements, and will include the transportation and disposal of dredged materials,
and the land reclamation for port expansion utilizing these materials.

D. Project location (if known)
The proposed Project is located in Meizhou Bay in the middle coast of Fujian Province at
southeast China. The Meizhou Bay is under the jurisdiction of two municipalities, i.e. Putian in
the north and Quanzou in the south.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Project owner, Fujian Provincial Transport Department (FPTD), is experienced in managing
safeguards issues through implementing previous Bank-financed transport projects in the
Province in recent years, including the Fujian Highway II, Fujian Highway Sector Investment,
and the most recent Fujian HSIP Additional Financing. It will take the overall responsibility for
managing and coordinating the preparation of safeguards documents during the Project
preparation. During implementation stage, it is expected that FPTD will continue taking a
leading role in supervising the effective implementation of EMP and RP.

  On environmental safeguards, the FPTD has engaged Fujian Environmental Science Institute
(FESI) to conduct EA. FESI is a Class A environmental impact assessment institute accredited
by Ministry of Environmental Protection (MEP), and has previous experience in Bank-financed
transport project. Another two specialist institutes have been commissioned to carry out special
environmental studies for the EA, i.e. Hehai University to do hydrodynamic modeling on
hydraulics, siltation, water quality and oil spilling; Fujian Marine Institute to work on marine
water quality and sedimentation environmental monitoring.

 On social safeguards, although FPTD has previous experience in managing the Bank-funded
projects including social and resettlement actions, the Meizhou Bay Harbor Administration
Bureau (MBHAB), the implementing unit for the construction works, has limited experience and
capacity in handling social and resettlement. The Bank team recommended that MBHAB assign
a dedicated staff to coordinate resettlement preparation and implementation under the Project.
Capacity building related to resettlement will be planned in the RP.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Songling Yao (EASCS)
   Mr Peishen Wang (EASCS)
   Mr Ning Yang (EASCS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes          No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                               X
     The proposed Project will upgrade the main navigation channel of Meizhou Bay for a total
length of 52.2 kilometers, in which about 22.4 kilometers of the existing channel will be widened
and deepened through dredging and rock blasting. This Project is the Stage II under the Phase
III of the ongoing marine channel improvement efforts; while, the Stage I, including
branch/secondary channels and anchorage areas, will be implemented with full domestic
financing very likely before the Bank approves the Stage II funding.

     The Project is anticipated to result in benefits such as improvement of navigation capacity
and overall navigation management performance, including environment management. Potential
environmental issues that will be addressed in the EIA include: 1) impacts associated with
dredging and disposal of dredged materials on marine environment and ecology during
construction and operation; 2) navigation safety, ship waste management and environmental
risks such as oil spill during operation, 3) construction impacts such as waste management, and
4) social impacts such as impacts on local fishery industry especially in shallow sea area. In
addition, induced and cumulative impacts associated with the channel improved shall also be
considered.

     Due Diligence of Phase I and II. The Bank task team (TT) will conduct a due diligence of
the previous phases just to ensure compliance with Chinese environmental laws and regulations.
Major environmental and social safeguard issues, if any, will be included in the scope of EIA of
the proposed Project.

     EA Terms of Reference (ToR). FESI has prepared an EA ToR for Bank review. The ToR
outlines regulation requirements, a preliminary environmental screening and scoping, special
environmental issues to be assessed, environmental management plan, consultation requirements,
and a work schedule. The ToR has been reviewed by the Bank and will be updated based on the
comments provided.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes          No         TBD
     Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA). Currently two SEA studies on the regional and
port development master plans are being conducted following China national EIA laws. They
are supported by Fujian Provincial Development and Reform Commission and MBHAB,
respectively. Relevant findings of these SEAs could be useful as inputs to the EIA of the
proposed Project especially in the analysis of the inducted, cumulative and regional impacts. Key
recommendations from these SEA efforts will be incorporated, as appropriate, in the EMP of the
proposed project.

      Preparation of EIA. The following specific issues shall be addressed properly in the EIA.
      # Scope of the EIA. The project EIA will cover physical activities of the Project, mainly
including dredging, transportation and disposal of the dredged materials, land for reclamation
sites which will be used for the expansion of ports and docks. The EIA shall consider
construction and operation stages of the proposed Project. The EIA shall also consider the
cumulative impacts in terms of other major construction projects (docks or channels, etc) under
reasonably defined geographic and time boundaries. As appropriate, the SEAs of pan-Meizhou
Bay regional industrial development and port development master plans shall be incorporated
into the project EIA to reflect the induced and cumulative impacts associated with the proposed
project. The EIA will cover the two stages of the Phase III development (main channel and
branch channels).
      # Dredging Considerations. The EIA shall assess the dredging requirements and determine
the dredging limits that are environmentally acceptable. In addition, according to the current
FSR, all the materials will be reused as backfilling for the construction of several docks where
embankment dikes have already been completed. The EIA shall also identify the most suitable
and appropriate method of managing the dredged materials. These docks will also be included in
the EIA scope.
      # Indirect and Cumulative Impacts. The EIA shall properly address indirect and cumulative
impacts by identifying and/or synergistic processes among the project incremental impacts and
other relevant projects, plans. These impacts include induced and cumulative impacts due to the
expansion of the operational capacity of the Meizhou Bay (e.g. increased traffic, industrial zone
development, and urban development); and cumulative impacts from project activities and other
plans and programs (port and non-port related plans and programs) on the aspects such as marine
ecology, fishery, harvesting activities, etc. A section on cumulative impacts will be included in
the EIA. The findings and recommendations of the SEA studies currently under preparation by
the counterpart will be incorporated, as appropriate, into the EIA and EMP of the project.
      # Alternative Analysis. The EIA shall address alternative analysis in a separate chapter.
Given the straightforward project concept, alternative analysis shall put focus on dredging
requirements, technologies, process, and management of dredged materials at both construction
and operational stage. In addition, the #without project# scenario shall be considered.
      # Navigation Safety and Environmental Risks during Operation. Environmental risks such
as oil spills from vessels shall be properly assessed. Details of environmental accident, spill
containment and clean-up procedures shall be provided in the EIA/EMP.
      # Sensitive Objects/Areas. Based on information available and field visit, the project area is
highly developed. There is no clear evidence of presence of sensitive or fragile marine
ecosystems, species, or reserves. There are no significant cultural relics identified either.
However, the EIA shall address these issues, providing scientific screening process and
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes          No           TBD
describing clear information, including sites of ecological values, historic and cultural interest,
tourism values, etc.
     # Public Consultation and Disclosure. The World Bank safeguards policy often requires
public consultation and information disclosure to be carried out in a broader and more intensive
way than Chinese EIA regulations. These include two rounds of such activities as questionnaire,
public meetings, and interview of a broad range of stakeholders. Full EA documents disclosure at
public accessible sites is also required. The counterpart and the EIA consultant will be informed
by the Bank team on the need to conduct public consultation and disclosure in compliance with
Bank requirements.
     # Social impacts. Social aspects associated with the Project, following proper screening and
scoping process and including cultural and socioeconomic baselines and specific impacts
analysis, will be included in the EIA.
     # Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The World Bank safeguards policy requires a
specific stand-alone EMP to be prepared. EMP shall include institutional arrangement,
mitigation measures, environmental specifications for contractors, implementation, supervision
and monitoring plans, training, and budget. EMP shall cover both construction and operational
stage. The Bank’s Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines will be applied to the
dredging, disposal operations in the EMP and related activities. A Dredging Material
Management Plan will be included in the EMP.

     EA instrument. The final EA documents will include the following documents:
     # A full Environmental Impact Assessment Report
     # A stand-alone Environmental Management Plan
     # An Executive Summary of EIA
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
    This policy is triggered. The Meizhou Port enjoys a long history of port and marine
transportation. The proposed project is the latest development of continuous marine channel
improvement efforts made in the recent years. However, the dredging and disposal of dredged
materials will have the potential to cause negative impacts on marine habitats, such as benthic
species, fish resources, mudflats, inter-tidal and sub-tidal habits. To address this issue, the EIA
will present a comprehensive description of the marine ecology baseline in the Meizhou Bay. In
the next step, further screening will be carried out by the TT which will cover all project areas,
including the disposal sites, for potential impacts on both critical and non-critical natural
habitats; and especial emphasis on marine ecology baseline and impacts on marine ecosystem
will be given in the EA ToR. Detailed assessment on the potential impacts will be thoroughly
carried out. Mitigation (or any other compensation measures) measures will be incorporated into
the EMP.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                X
    The Project doesn#t involve forests resources. This policy is not triggered.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                           X
    The project will not lead to purchase or use of any pesticides. This policy is not triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                            X
    Based on information available and field visit, the project area is highly developed, and there
are no significant cultural relics identified in the project area of influence. The policy is not
triggered.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No         TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                    X
    The Bank team conducted a social screening via desk review and discussion with the local
officials and villagers, and did not find any ethnic and minority communities in the project area.
Therefore, this policy is not triggered. Prior to appraisal, the TT will conduct a more detail
screening and assessment process for identifying the impacts (positive and negative, temporarily
or permanently, particular attention will be on access of use right to resources) on IP
communities in the project#s area of influence, and will document all ethnic minority
communities (as per definition of OP4.10) related information in the project documents,
including in a note that will be shared with the RSS.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
    Shallow sea is state-owned but its right of use belongs to villages nearby. The Project will
acquire some shallow sea areas with fish farms, on which some villages or individuals are
relying. The Project will not cause any house demolition based on information obtained so far.
Based on Administrative Law of Utilization of Ocean Area in China, the project impacts should
be investigated and compensated. So a Resettlement Plan (RP) is required based on consultation
with the affected villages, the involved township and county authorities. A RP, mainly on
livelihood restoration, will be prepared by the FPTD with assistance from an experienced
consultant. The RP will cover the two stages of the Phase III.

     Consultation with affected people and relevant stakeholders will be conducted in the
preparation of RP. Enhanced Participation Mechanism and Complaints Handling Mechanism
will be set up. And the final RP will be disclosed in publically accessible places.

     Linkage Activities. There are two operation areas, namely Putou and Xiaocuo, on which
docks are being constructed, and will receive a great deal of sludge from the channel dredging.
The two operation areas are being built and financed by other projects, but are significantly
linked to the project. Their resettlement issues will be covered in the RP for the Project.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                        X
    The project will not involve impacts to any dams in the project area. This policy is not
triggered.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                   X
    The project will not involve trans-boundary rivers. The policy is not triggered.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                            X
    The project is not located in any disputed areas. The policy is not triggered.


Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   01/04/2012
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   N/A

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                  Mr Wenlai Zhang                                                            08/17/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Ms Indira Dharmapatni                                                      08/23/2011
      Comments: Acting Regional Safeguards Adviser
    Sector Manager:                    Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez                                                08/18/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
