                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                           Report No.: AC5988


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/18/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: China                             Project ID: P125021
Project Name: Hunan Forest Restoration and Development Project
Task Team Leader: Jin Liu
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 15, 2012 Estimated Board Date: February 1, 2013
Managing Unit: EASCS                       Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                           Loan
Sector: Forestry (100%)
Theme: Climate change (60%);Other environment and natural resources management
(40%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):         80.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                    34.30
                                                                    34.30


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The overall project development objective is to develop and adopt forest restoration and
management models that would strengthen resilience and enhance carbon sequestration in forest
areas damaged by the ice storm in Hunan Province.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
In early 2008, southern-central China experienced an extreme ice storm. Hunan Province
experienced the most severe damage with some 4.5 million ha of forests or 35 percent of the
provincial forest area affected. The proposed Hunan Forest Restoration and Development Project
will support the provincial Government’s effort in restoring the damaged plantation sites, to
prevent further forest degradation and rehabilitate the ecological balance in the storm-affected
landscapes.

 The Government of China will borrow US$ 80 million IBRD to finance this project. The World
Bank Loan would support forest restoration of over an estimated area of 46,000 hectares
degraded forest lands and damaged forests identified by the local government as priority for
forest restoration, as well as the relevant technical support, monitoring and evaluation,
institutional capacity building and project management.

 It is expected that this project will be implemented over a six year period and the following
components and activities are proposed:

 Component 1: Restoration and Rehabilitation of Forest Land Severely Damaged by the Ice
Storm. It would include two sub-components:

 (a) Reforestation of disaster-affected forest lands: Under this sub-component, some 16,000
hectare (ha) of multi-species plantation forest will be newly established in the forestry areas
presently without tree cover due to the ice storm disaster.

 (b) Rehabilitation and improvement of disaster-affected forests: Under this sub-component,
some 30,000 ha of ice storm damaged plantation forests will be rehabilitated by introducting
multiple, locally adapted species.

 Technical models of forest restoration would be developed during project preparation. A main
objective of these technical models is to enhance the stability and resiliency of the restored and
rehabilitated forests, which premarily focus on environmental conditions improvement.

 The component would support the establishment and management of the areas planted under
different types of management arrangements. The project sites will be largely managed by (a)
villages, where the land has not been allocated to households and it is of communal use; (b)
individual households, where the land has been allocated to individual village farmers, and (c)
small portions of state forest farms, when the land to be forested is owned by the farm. These
arrangements will be formalized by Implementation Agreements (IA) to be signed between the
county PMO and the respective implementing beneficiaries.

 Component 2: Technology Extension and Technical Training, and Forest Monitoring. It would
include:

 (a) Project forest stands stability and carbon sequestration monitoring system development and
implementation.

 (b) New technologies extension and training programs to local forest staff, farmers and
planting entities to implement and adapt new restoration and rehabilitation models that promote
resilience and carbon sequestration; nursery improvement to increase number of species and
improve the nursery management.

 Component 3: Institutional Development and Project Management. It includes project
management-related administration, training, and monitoring and evaluation, as well as the
support to forestry cooperatives such as training, technical services, facilities and cooperative
management plan. In addition, the project would support the experience and lessons
dissemination.
D. Project location (if known)
The proposed project would be implemented in Hunan Province and would include around 23
counties and cities. The project location were selected based on the following criteria: (a) areas
of forest land or forests that were severely damaged by the ice storm; (b) areas that have been
designated as ecological forest areas by the government, or (c) areas where land users intend to
manage the forest with the primary objective of environmental condition improvement.
However, the sites will be selected and confirmed after community consultation be conducted
during the project preparation to understand each participating community and farmers’
interesting in participating in the projects and their preference in project management
arrangements, ensuring that the communities will participate in the project on a voluntary basis.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Hunan Province has participated in four previous Bank-supported forestry projects and
demonstrated excellent institutional capacity in the management of projects, including the
implementation of the World Bank’s safeguards policies. All of the previous forestry
development projects required the preparation and implementation of Environment Management
Plans (EMP) in accordance to OP4.01. The "Plantation Environmental Protection Guidelines"
and "Pest Management Plan" developed by the previous projects have proven to be effective
tools in mitigating the potential negative impacts to the environment. The implementation entity
is also familiar with the Bank’s social safeguards policies through the implementation of the
Sustainable Forestry Development Project, in which the Community Consultation and
Participatory Manual as well as Ethnic Minority Development Plan were developed and
implemented appropriately.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS)
   Mr Yiren Feng (EASCS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes        No        TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
    The project objective is to develop and adopt forest restoration and management models that
would strengthen resilience and enhance carbon sequestration in forest areas severely damaged
by the ice storm in Hunan Province.

      Positive impacts on the environment are expected. Nevertheless, negative impacts might
occur if the project is not properly designed or implemented; e.g., improper site selection, poor
site preparation, use of fertilizers and pesticides, etc. Therefore, the project will carry-out an
analysis of potential environmental impacts so as to design the project activities that can
effectively address these impacts in accordance to the Bank’s Operational Policy 4.01 and
Government requirements.

     A review of the experiences and lessons learnt from the implementation of similar Bank-
financed projects will be undertaken. Findings from the review will be documented in the PAD
and found the basis for the preparation of the EMP. One Environmental Management Plan
(EMP) will be prepared prior to appraisal for the project. It will include mitigation measures for
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                            Yes           No         TBD
each of the two types of plantation activities. The EMP will include:
      (a) Environmental Management Guidelines, which will be updated based on experiences
from previous similar projects;
      (b) Principles to be followed to implement the requirements on plantations as stated in
OP4.36;
      (c) Process to be followed to ensure meaningful consultation with locally-affected
communities in developing sustainable forest management arrangements under the project;
      (d) Process to be followed in documenting the voluntary participation of locally-affected
communities in the sustainable forest management;
      (e) Pest Management Plan;
      (f) Chance Finds Procedures for physical cultural resources encountered unexpectedly
during project implementation; and
      (g) Institutional arrangements, monitoring and reporting arrangements and budget for the
implementation of the EMP.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                         X
    The proposed candidate sites for both forest restoration and forest rehabilitation are in
existing forest plantation areas, which do not include or border any natural habitats. In addition,
the agreed site selection criteria exclude critical natural habitat areas. During project preparation
and implementation, further site screening process will be undertaken for each of the candidate
sites to confirm that no critical natural habitats or cultural heritage areas are in the project area.
Such site screening has proven to be an effective tool in previous Bank forestry projects.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
    The project includes (a) new plantation establishment and (b) rehabilitation of existing
degraded/damaged plantation. The project will mainly use local, indigenous species and develop
forest plantation models with significant environmental benefits. The plantation will be largely
managed by the communities and villages to maximize its ecological functions and the forest
cover in the project sites will be kept long-term/become self-sustaining. Only the thinning that
will promote the forest growth, health conditions and the selected cutting for regeneration
purpose will be conducted. It will not entail conversion of natural forests and the introduction of
any invasive species. Communities will manage the improved plantation based on interest and
voluntary participation in the project with the primary environmental functions with
governmental financial support. Policy requirements on plantation and community forests
management will be integrated in the EMP.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
    Since plantation establishment and management as well as nursery management will require
the use of pesticides or herbicides, a PMP will be developed and included as part of the EMP to
guide the application of pesticides during implementation. The PMP will be built on findings
from a review of the strengths and weaknesses of the PMPs used under recent World-Bank
financed forestry projects in China.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                              X
    Initial screening indicated that project sites are not located in or next to any known areas with
physical, cultural, or natural relics. In addition, the site selection criteria exclude such areas. The
site screening results have been confirmed by the Cultural Relics Bureau of each proposed
project county. A chance finds procedure for physical cultural resources will be included in the
EMP.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes         No         TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                     X
   The task team conducted an Indigenous People (IP) screening through field visits, meetings
with local authorities and villagers as well as document review, and confirmed the presence of
some ethnic minority groups in the proposed project counties, including the Miao, Yao, Tujia
and Bai peoples. Some of the ethnic minority groups, Miao and Yiao, are considered IPs as per
OP4.10. Therefore, OP4.10 applies. During project preparation, basic information on ethnic
minority groups in the project areas will be made available to the Bank by each of the project
counties through the City Ethnic and Religious Bureau.

      An ethnic minority development plan (EMDP) for all of the three project components will
be prepared, based on formal social assessment exercise. The EMDP will also include the review
and lessons learnt from the experiences of the similar previous Bank supported projects in China
that involved IP communities. Meanwhile, free, prior and informed consultation with local ethnic
minority communities will be undertaken throughout the course of project preparation and
implementation aiming at getting broad community support before the project can take place in
these communities.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                            X
    The project does not envisage infrastructure construction and involuntary taking of land. All
the forestry work will be carried out on legally designated forestry lands, where the participating
individuals, villages or state-owned farms have the land ownership or use rights, and their
participation is on a voluntary basis. The consultation and participation process will be carried
out during project preparation and implementation, similar to previous WB funded forestry
projects, and be recorded and documented in project files. Although all possible project sites will
be proposed during project preparation, the final sites cannot be ascertained until the meaningful
consultation has been carried out with the affected communities and their participation in tree
planting has proved to be voluntary.

     A Community Participatory Planning Manual is being prepared by social experts for this
project, so as to ensure the voluntary nature of the project.

      There may be some restriction of access to forest resources as a result of application of
certain forest restoration practices. During project preparation, the project will carry out a Social
Assessment (SA) to gather information about the ownership patterns, land use patterns, as well
as to inform and consult with project stakeholders, particularly farmer households and forest
cooperatives, regarding their willingness to participate in the project, the preference in forest
management arrangements and the mitigation measures for the potential negative social impacts.
The SA will also include an assessment of potential project impacts on local forest dependent
communities from access restrictions to resource use as well as from changes in management
arrangement, and an assessment of potential linked activities regardless of financing sources.
Based on the SA, prior appraisal the project will confirm that it will not require the taking of land
or asset, there will be no linked activities, and no access restrictions.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                         X
    The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
policy. No action is required under this policy.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes          No         TBD
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                 X
     The project is not located in any international waterways as defined under the policy. No
action is required under this policy.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                          X
     The project is not located in any known disputed areas as defined under the policy. No action
is required under this policy.


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 01/10/2012

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The preparation of Safeguard-related studies were initiated in July, 2011 and it is expected
   that the first set of safeguards documents will be drafted by September 2011 for the project
   preparation mission review and all documentation related to safeguard policies would be
   available for pre-appraisal mission around February 2012.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Ms Jin Liu                                                     08/08/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan                             08/18/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez                                    08/13/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
