                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/22/2011                                    Report No.: AC6412
1. Basic Project Data
Country: China                               Project ID: P108592
Project Name: GEF Huai River Basin Marine Pollution Reduction Project
Task Team Leader: Xiaokai Li
GEF Focal Area: International waters         Global Supplemental ID:
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 8, 2011       Estimated Board Date: October 31, 2011
Managing Unit: EASCS                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (35%);Solid waste management
(35%);Irrigation and drainage (15%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector
(15%)
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (33%);Pollution management and
environmental health (33%);Water resource management (17%);Other environment and
natural resources management (17%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              5.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            31.00
                                                                       31.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to demonstrate innovative and cost-effective water
pollution control practices in Guangli river catchment of Dongying City contributing to
pollution reduction in the Bohai Sea.

3. Project Description
The proposed GEF project will consist of the following components:

  Component A. Constructed Wetland and Sluice Gate Operation Optimization (Base
Cost: US$22.37 million): This component aims at treatment of Guangli River water
through constructed wetlands to improve water quality up to the level suitable for
landscaping purpose, and increasing the carrying capacity of the river through sluice gate
regulation. It supports: (a) construction of a wetlands at Dongbalu (1.8 km2) which
consists of a free-surface flow wetlands, an ecological retention pool, an entrance gate, a
gated overflow weir and a pumping station, as well as related equipment and
resettlement; and (b) upgrading the automatic gate control system covering three sluice
gates on the Guangli River, and the gates at the entrance and exit of the Dongbalu
wetlands.

  Component B. Agricultural Pollution Control and Rural Waste Management (Base
Cost: US$1.97 million): The component finances facilities and management practices
for agricultural pollution reduction and rural waste management to reduce
nutrient/pollutant loads in selected pilot areas. It covers: (a) wastewater, human and
livestock waste collection and treatment facilities in pilot villages of Kenli county and
Dongying District; (b) introduction of agricultural pollution reduction technologies and
management practices in pilot villages, concerning fertilizer and pesticide applications,
recycling mechanism for used agricultural plastic sheet in crop field, eco-trenches and
buffer strips in crop fields; and (c) establishment/improvement of Farmer Environmental
Protection Associations (FEPAs) in pilot villages within Guangli Watershed.

  Component C. Capacity Building and Policy Studies (Base Cost: US$6.24 million):
This component intends to strengthen the pollution management capacity of Dongying
government and farmer communities. It would support: (a) an environmental protection
education and training center located in Dongying for related training and dissemination
of good practices established under the project; (b) capacity building activities to provide
technical and project management trainings for project entity staff; and (c) policy and/or
plan studies critical to the long-term application and dissemination of the demonstrated
technologies and practices, including development and dissemination of a Huai River
Basin wide Replication Strategy.

 Component D. Project Management and Implementation Support (Base Cost: US$3.46
million): This component would finance project management and implementation
support activities to ensure timely and efficient implementation. The main activities
include: (a) implementation support to the project implementing units and Dongying
PMO; (b) project monitoring and evaluation; and (c) project management by the Huai
River Basin Commission, Provincial PMO, Dongying PMO and three project
implementing units (PIUs), namely, Dongying Water Resources Bureau, Dongying
Construction Bureau and Dongying Agriculture Bureau.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project is located in Guangli River catchment of Dongying Municipality of
Shandong Province bordering the Bohai Sea and Yellow Sea. In terms of river basin
system, the Project is within the Huai River Basin. Guangli river with a total length of
48.8km and a catchment area of 792km2 covers Dongying District and Kenli County.
Guangli River is the main drainage channel for Dongying District and Kenli County with
a total population of 745,000. The River passes through Kenli County and Dongying
District from NW to SE and flows into the Bohai Sea in the east of Dongying District.
Dongying District covers an area of 1,155 km2 with a population of 620,000, while
Kengli County adjacent to the north of Dongying District covers an area of 2,204 km2.
Both Dongying District and Kenli County are within the jurisdiction of Dongying
Municipality which is located in the Yellow River Delta. Dongying Municipality with the
latitude (36°55'~38°10'N) and longitude (118°07'~119°10'E) is 220 km NE of Jinan, the
capital of Shandong Province and 450km SE of Beijing. The project areas feature flat
alluvial land with annual average precipitation of 613 mm.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS)
   Mr Feng Ji (EASCS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
OP 4.01. Environmental Assessment. The EA prepared by the client shows that the
project as a whole has positive environmental impacts, e.g. reduction of CODcr
(430tons/a), and NH3-N (129 tons/a), thus decreasing pollutant loads discharged to the
Bohai Sea. In addition the project would demonstrate in the selected village non-point
sources pollution management by introducing environment-friendly nutrient and waste
management practices, leading to the reduction in nutrient and pollutant loads. The
negative impacts associated with the project are expected to be site specific, reversible,
and easily mitigated. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been prepared
outlining necessary mitigation measures, institutional arrangements, and monitoring plan
to avoid, minimize or otherwise compensate for the adverse impact associated with the
project.

  OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. Project component A contains a wetlands
establishment (an area of 2698 mu or 169 ha.), which would take place on state-owned
land (mostly wasteland) which was previously regulated by the state-owned Shandong
Shengli Petroleum Company. The project entity Dongying Municipal Government
negotiated and agreed with that company for the paid land use transfer between the two
governmental agencies based on the national land law. Part of the land is irregularly
contracted to the company staff individuals for building fish ponds which are mostly
abandoned during the winter time. Meanwhile, there are seven small enterprises leasing a
total area of 241 mu (15 ha.) on this land which have to relocate for the wetland
construction. Mitigation and compensation for the resettlement impact and rehabilitation
of the affected businesses would be the main focus in the project preparation as per OP
4.12 Involuntary Resettlement.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
N/A

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Alternative project designs, involving options of waste treatment technologies, have been
assessed.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
On environmental safeguards: To address the safeguards issues, Dongying PMO
engaged an EA consultant to prepare an EA in accordance with applicable national
regulations and the World Bank safeguard policies. An EMP has been developed to
mitigate the potential adverse impacts associated with the project. Relevant mitigation
measures included in the EMP will be implemented to keep the adverse impacts at an
acceptable level.

 On social safeguards: In view of the potential housing demolition and enterprises
relocation, as well as the possible impact on some temporary land contractors of fish
pond production, Dongying PMO has engaged a resettlement consultant from Hohai
University to take lead on land use survey and resettlement action plan (RAP)
preparation. After the detailed impact survey and consultation with affected
people/enterprises and local authorities, an abbreviated RAP has been developed in
compliance with the Bank safeguard policy and the applicable national laws and
government regulations. The abbreviated RAP inventories and analyzes the land transfer
and relocation impacts, based on which it sets forth compensation measures for building
demolition, enterprise relocation and loss of attachments to the land (power lines, fish
ponds, abandoned oil wells, etc.). These small enterprises will be provided with new
areas owned by the Shengli Petroleum Company.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
On environmental safeguards: In accordance with the World Bank Safeguard policies
and applicable national regulations, public consultations was conducted during the
environmental assessment, including questionnaire survey, meetings of the project
affected people and other stakeholders regarding the project. Their feedbacks and
concerns have been taken into account in the EA process and project design. The EA &
EMP were locally disclosed and uploaded to the website of Dongying Municipal
Government in May 2011. The safeguards documents were sent to the Bank InfoShop for
disclosure before project appraisal.

 On social safeguards: The small enterprises# owners and workers, the fish pond
contractors and the Shengli Petroleum Company are the primary stakeholders to be
affected by the resettlement under this project. Dongying PMO and the resettlement team
consisting of expert from Hohai University and local project staff conducted intensive
resettlement information dissemination and consultation among these groups from April
2010 through March 2011, and carried out on-the-spot impact survey and resettlement
planning for relocation of enterprises and rehabilitation of livelihoods. The final
abbreviated RAP was disclosed to the public in the project area in May 2011, and sent to
the Bank InfoShop for disclosure before project appraisal.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/29/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/31/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/30/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/20/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/31/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/30/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
  ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

  OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
  review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
  credit/loan?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Xiaokai Li                                06/28/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Feng Ji                                   06/24/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Zong-Cheng Lin                            06/24/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez                  07/22/2011
  Comments:
