                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                          Report No.: AC6251


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/14/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: China                                 Project ID: P118597
Project Name: CN Integrated Economic Development of Small Towns
Task Team Leader: Wendao Cao
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 17,          Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: EASCS                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: Roads and highways (55%);Agro-industry (20%);Sewerage (10%);Water supply
(10%);Vocational training (5%)
Theme: Rural non-farm income generation (20%);Infrastructure services for private
sector development (20%);Other public sector governance (20%);Rural services and
infrastructure (20%);Participation and civic engagement (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):          150.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                      100.00
                                                                      100.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed development objective for the project is: to promote sustainable economic
development in selected towns of Gansu, Hunan and Guangdong provinces, creating conditions
for increased employment, income generation and improved quality of life, by supporting public
infrastructure development and strengthening the capacity of related institutions.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The Project will finance subprojects proposed by 33 small towns in the participating provinces
aiming at promoting integrated economic development and improving standards of living of the
towns# population. The final number of towns will be determined during preparation/appraisal.
Tentatively, the project would comprise the following components and main activities:

 Component A: Infrastructure Development (total cost estimate US$240 million). This
component seeks to enhance rural towns# infrastructure by financing sustainable and high
priority public investments aimed at expanding, rehabilitating, and modernizing infrastructure
facilities or increasing their operation efficiency. To be eligible, towns need to have adequate
financial capacity to invest, operate and maintain these facilities. Selected activities should be
part of the towns# Master Plans and should contribute to the overall development strategy of the
respective province. They would also aim at improving the overall investment climate in the
towns, and facilitate backward and forward linkages across supply chains to enhance
productivity, create employment, and increase stakeholders# incomes.

  Possible activities may include, inter-alia: rural roads and associated rain, sewer and water
supply pipelines and landscaping, rehabilitation or expansion of water supply systems, waste
water treatment systems (domestic and industrial), creek rehabilitation and embankments,
irrigation and drainage facilities, marketing infrastructure, logistics and extension service
centers, etc. In total, there may be up to 100 subprojects.

  Component B: Institutional strengthening and capacity enhancement (total estimated cost US$6
million). This component seeks to improve the institutional capacity for managing modern and
efficient infrastructure, and to support services delivery. This may include supporting: (a)
technical, managerial and financial training for stakeholders involved (Government,
Cooperatives, Water Users# Associations (WUA), private entrepreneurs, etc.); (b) research and
development; (c) human resources development; (d) better town planning addressing
environmental and social externalities; (e) marketing studies for value chains development; (f)
market information and analysis, particularly for tradable commodities; (g) technology transfer;
and (h) breeding, feeding, and extension services, etc.

 In addition, this component would support studies, analysis, stakeholder forums, study tours,
and demonstrative pilots. Examples of potential ideas would include innovative approaches for
marginal towns# development, sustainable financing mechanisms including public private
partnerships, demonstrative value chains, etc.

  Component C: Project managements and M&E (total estimated cost US$8 million). The
objective of this component is to support the management and coordination efforts related to the
project in each province. In particular it will support the PMOs at the various jurisdiction levels,
in managing, monitoring, evaluating and effectively reporting on project implementation. It
would include the strengthening of the institutions in charge of project implementation
(incremental project staff, training and workshops) as well as the investments and incremental
operating costs derived from their operations during implementation. An essential part of this
component is the implementation of the M&E system during project implementation at various
levels.

D. Project location (if known)
The proposed project is expected to cover a total of 33 towns of 33 counties (one county each) in
Guangdong, Hunan and Gansu Provinces.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The proposed project will be implemented by the Guangdong, Hunan and Gansu Provincial
DRCs following very similar institutional arrangements. The identification mission was
informed by the respective provinces that the following project structures and arrangements were
proposed: (i) Provincial Leading Group (PLG) or Coordination Committee (CC)to be responsible
for coordinating and reporting to the Provincial Government and the Bank, in terms of
preparation and implementation progress, issues raised and quality assurance. The members of
the PLG/CC include DDG and directors in charge from PDRC, PFD, and other concerned
departments; (ii) Provincial Project Management Office (PPMO, to be set up under the
provincial PDRC and staffed with sufficient and competent staff. (iii) Project Leading Group
(PLG) and County PMO, to be set up at the county level, with functions similar to PLG/CC and
PPMO; (iv) a Technical Support Team, to provide support and technical assistance for project
implementation at the local level.

 It was agreed that three PMOs would select and contract properly qualified and experienced
design institutes, under TOR satisfactory to the Bank, for the preparation of Safeguard
documents, including Environmental Assessment (EA), Environmental Management Plan
(EMP), Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP), Pest Management Plan (PMP), Resettlement
Plan and Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP). Such Institutes should have ample
experience with preparing these documents, which is in line with Bank safeguard policies and
requirements.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS)
   Mr Yiren Feng (EASCS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes         No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                               X
    The proposed project is expected to have a generally positive impact on the environment
through improvement of efficient infrastructure service delivery, reducing pollution discharge to
water bodies through proposed wastewater collection and treatment, providing good quality
water to local residents, and improving economic development and connection through road
infrastructure, irrigation and marketing facilities, etc.

     Based on the initial list of the proposed subprojects from 33 towns, the project may support
small size town-level and rural infrastructure and facilities, including in-town and rural road and
associated facilities, small scale water supply plant and pipe (5000m3/d), wastewater treatment
plants (around 11,000 m3/day and 5,000 m3/day), landfills (one with 40t/d), short length of creek
rehabilitation, irrigation and drainage facilities, transmission lines, marketing infrastructure,
logistics and extension centers and agricultural development activities. Some limited, localized
and size-specific impact on the environment will result from construction of small scale
infrastructure and facilities. However, a thorough environmental and social screening for all the
subprojects, and a full environmental approach following both the Bank#s EA requirements and
Chinese EA regulatory will be followed. The OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment is triggered by
the proposed project.

     Based on the initial review of the sub-projects, the project has a Category B due to the type,
location and scale, nature and magnitude of the potential impacts during the construction and
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                     Yes          No           TBD
operation phase and its expected positive environmental impacts of the project.

     The specific environmental criteria used in evaluating the eligibility of the subprojects
include:(i) Subproject must be consistent with County/Town’s environmental protection
plan/objective;(ii) Subproject directly tackles with some of the key environmental
issues/challenges faced by the Town; (iii) Subproject contributes to the reduction of pollutants
discharge, and environmental, sanitation and safety improvement; (iv) Any subproject that has
potential sensitive environmental issues, serious environmental impacts or subproject, even after
application of effective mitigatory or compensatory measures, will be excluded. This includes
but not limit to, disturbance of natural forests, significant conversion of wetlands, potential
adverse effects on existing/proposed protected areas or sites,and hazardous waste disposal.

     The following approach will be adopted for the project EA/EMP.

     (a) A set of standard Environmental Code of Practices (ECOP) will be prepared for each
type of investment, and included as part of the Operational Manual;

     (b) The ECOPs will include specific instruction for contractors and engineering supervisors
on how to identify and manage any natural habitat or Physical Cultural Resources issue that may
be identified in any of the sites during construction.

     (c) Monitoring, reporting and supervising arrangements to be implemented by the three
provincial governments to implement the ECOPs will be developed;

     (d) The TT will supervise the implementation of ECOPs based on the supervision records
kept by the provincial government, and conducting spot-checking of sub-projects; and

     (e) EIAs and EMPs will be prepared for the one new landfill site (40t/d) and 2 new
wastewater treatment facilities (with a combined ToR and EIA/EMP for the 2 wastewater
treatment facilities as they are located in the same province (Hunan) and have similar treatment
capacity). The ToR shall address both the Chinese regulatory and Bank safeguards requirements
and should be given No Objection by the Bank. The EIA/EMP will include a discussion on
social issue. The environmental institutes will then prepare the EIAs and EMPs based on the
approved ToR.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                 X
    Based on the information available, there are no significant natural habitats found in the
proposed project areas. However, the EA consultant will compile the necessary information to do
a screening as early as possible in the EA preparation, that would allow the Bank team to make a
determination whether the policy is to be triggered or not.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              X
    OP4.36 is not triggered because the project will not involve any logging or planting activities
in forest areas.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                           X
    The proposed project will not finance procurement of pesticides, but the support to the value
chains services would possibly result in increased use of pesticides. A PMP will be prepared for
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No         TBD
each Province for the towns and sub projects which the OP 4.09 will be triggered in that
province. These Pest Management Plans will build in the existing PMP in each province.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                       X
     Based on current information available, there are no any physical cultural relics found in
project areas. In the EA process, related information will be checked and confirmed by relevant
authorities. Chance finds during construction may occur and relevant clauses will be included in
all construction contracts. If the sub-projects will affect household graves considered as physical
cultural resources, the policy will need to be triggered as per OP4.11.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                       X
     The Bank’s social development specialists conducted the primary screening of Indigenous
Peoples# presence in the overall project areas. It was found that some Yugu and Hui ethnic
minority groups are present under two subprojects in Gansu Province. With its special culture,
traditional productive mode, as well as its own language(s), Yugu ethnic minority is viewed to
fall in the IP definition as per OP4.10, and the Policy will be hence triggered by this project. A
Social Assessment leading to an Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) will be prepared as
required, and as the basis of the EMDP for the towns with IPs.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
     The project identification mission conducted a preliminary screening of subprojects and
noticed that 2 subprojects of Guangdong province, 6 subprojects of Gansu province, and 10
subprojects of Hunan subprojects may unavoidably induce land acquisition and structure
demolition. Thus, the Bank policy of OP4.12 is triggered. Since all sub-projects have been
identified, it was agreed that a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared for each
province, with clear description of resettlement actions needed for each sub-project in the
province.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                        X
     The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
policy. For those sub-projects that involve irrigation in Gansu, they won’t rely on water dams,
but on groundwater. Therefore, OP4.37 is not triggered.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                   X
     No sub-project will be located in international waterways. The policy is not triggered and no
actions are required.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                            X
     No project area will be located in disputed areas. The policy is not triggered and no actions
are required.


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 07/14/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   07/14/2011
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The EA/SA processes have began in early June 2011 and should be completed by the end of
   September 2011. At that point all the relevant documentation related to safeguard policies
   will be available in their draft stage for the WB preparation mission review.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                   Mr Wendao Cao                                                             06/08/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr John R. Butler                                                         07/14/2011
      Comments: Acting Safeguards Advisor
    Sector Manager:                     Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez                                               06/30/2011
      Comments: Ede has approved this ISDS on June 30, 2011.




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
