                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                        APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                              Report No.: 81033

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:          09-Sep-2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                       China                 Project ID:                 P127033
 Project Name:                  China Renewable Energy Scale-Up Program Phase II (P127033)
 Task Team Leader:              Xiaodong Wang
 Estimated Board Date:          29-Oct-2013
 Managing Unit:                 EASCS
 GEF Focal Area:                Climate change
 Sector(s):                     Other Renewable Energy (100%)
 Theme(s):                      Climate change (100%)
 Lending Instrument:            Investment Project Financing
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                  No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:        27.28                      Total Bank Financing:       0.00
 Financing Gap:             0.00
      Financing Source                                                                             Amount
      BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                0.00
      Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                               27.28
      Total                                                                                           27.28
 Environmental Category: C - Not Required
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred          No
 project?

 2. Project Development Objective(s)
 The objective of the CRESP program (three phases) is to enable commercial renewable electricity
 suppliers to provide energy to the electricity market efficiently, cost-effectively and on a large scale.
 The objective of CRESP Phase II is to support the ambitious RE scale-up program in China with a
 focus on efficiency improvement and reduction of incremental costs.
3. Project Description
The proposed project would be comprised of the following five components: (a) policy support; (b)
grid integration/access and technical design; (c) technology improvement; (d) pilot demonstration; and
(e) capacity building and investment support, in addition to project management support.

It should be noted that the tasks outlined below are those urgent to be implemented during project
preparation and the initial-year work program, agreed between the NEA and the Bank. Other tasks will
be detailed and confirmed during the annual review of the work program to be carried during the
supervision of the project to leave flexibility during project implantation.

Component 1. Policy Support (indicative cost estimate: US$5 million GEF grant): CRESP II will
support developing and implementing RE legislations and policies to achieve cost reduction,
efficiency improvement, and smooth grid integration. Based on lessons learned from Phase I, it is
envisaged that policy studies under Phase II would cover few essential policy topics, jointly
determined by NEA, Project Management Office (PMO), and the World Bank, with greater
involvement of government selected policy institutions and world class consultants.

The policy support will focus on four sub-components: (a) improving the design and implementation
of the RE Quota Decree, and designing an RE Certificates trading scheme, in coordination with the
existing feed-in tariffs and envisaged carbon cap and trade to avoid conflicting policy requirements;
(b) developing grid access and financial incentive policies for RE distributed generation in pilot New
Energy Cities; (c) supporting preparation for the RE 13th FYP; and (d) if collaborating with the right
Chinese counterparts, engaging dialogues, building consensus, and developing potential policy
recommendations for power pricing reforms and incorporation of RE in power sector reform,
including but not limited to two-part generation tariff, transparent cost-recovery transmission tariff,
incorporation of environmental external costs into power pricing, and feed-in tariffs for off-shore wind
and concentrated solar power.

Component 2. Grid Integration/Access and Technical Design (indicative cost estimate: US$5 million
GEF grant): This component will consist of targeted studies to ensure improved grid integration for
large-scale grid-connected RE and grid access for distributed RE; and strategic and optimal
deployment of key RE technologies to enhance efficiency and reduce costs. The studies would
include, but not limited to: (a) optimization of site layout design to decrease wake effects for
GW-scale Wind Power Bases to maximize outputs; (b) wind penetration development study in
selected provinces to provide analytical basis for improved grid integration; (c) grid access and
connection study for distributed generation in selected pilot New Energy Cities to establish sound
technical standards/specifications for grid connection of distributed generation; and (d) grid codes
study to evaluate Chinese grid codes and recommend cost-effective solutions to meet grid
requirements for wind farms to facilitate dialogues between wind developers and grid company.

Component 3. Technology Improvement (indicative cost estimate: US$7.28 million GEF grant): The
technology improvements would include, but not limited to: (a) increasing efficiency of existing wind
farms and improving quality and reliability and reducing costs of off-shore wind turbine technologies;
and (b) possibly improving concentrated solar power (CSP) domestic manufacturing capacity.

Component 4. Pilot Demonstration (indicative cost estimate: US$5 million GEF grant): This
component will support (a) NEA/Inner Mongolia partnership to pilot and explore new ideas relating to
the scale-up of RE and optimization of wind in power system, primarily through technical and
operational studies, integrated planning, and policy pilots; and (b) pilot RE distributed generation in
1-2 selected New Energy Cities and possibly Green Counties, primarily through planning,
implementation plans, policies, possibly demonstrations of RE distributed generation such as roof-top
solar PV, with adequate enforcement and monitoring. This component will primarily provide technical
assistance on twinning with selected international successful cities, the concept framework of New
Energy Cities, planning, business and financing models, technical design, and policies for distributed
generation applications in pilot New Energy Cities.

Component 5. Capacity Building and Investment Support (indicative cost estimate: US$5 million GEF
grant): This component will (a) build capacity of government officials and staff at national level and at
pilot provincial/municipal levels (e.g. NEA, National Development and Reform Commission Pricing
Bureau (for energy pricing reform), Ministry of Finance (for fiscal measures), Ministry of Water
Resources (for small hydro), Ministry of Agriculture (for biomass), Ocean Bureau (for off-shore
wind), grid companies, RE power generators, pilot provincial and municipal governments, and the
relevant agencies in the pilot demonstration areas); and (b) support investors by building innovative
RE investment pipelines. This component also covers program management costs, donor coordination
activities, and administration including fiduciary duties.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
Research studies are applicable throughout China. Location of pilot demonstrations will be determined
during project implementation, based upon results of various research studies.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Youxuan Zhu ( EASCS )
Peishen Wang ( EASCS )

6. Safeguard Policies                      Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01        Yes             The proposed project primarily consists of
                                                           capacity building, policy analysis, and
                                                           research related to renewable energy
                                                           development. The project will finance a
                                                           limited number of small-scale RE
                                                           investments, (e.g. roof-top solar PV) under
                                                           the pilot demonstration component, these
                                                           activities are environmental enhancement
                                                           measures and have little or no adverse
                                                           environmental impacts. Therefore, the
                                                           project is classified as Category C project
                                                           according to OP4.01. A generic EMP
                                                           (ECOPs) has been prepared to address
                                                           potential impacts, if any, with regards to
                                                           limited civil works and equipment
                                                           installation, e.g. worker and community
                                                           safety, noise nuisance, solid waste
                                                           management, etc. The EMP will be
                                                           incorporated into the bidding documents for
                                                           the sub- project implementation entities
                                                           which will ensure the implementation of the
                                                           EMP is incorporated into construction/
                                                           installation contracts, with adequate budget
                                                           allocation.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                No              The project activities are confined to urban
                                                           areas, and there are no natural habitats
                                                           involved. This policy is not triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                         No              This policy is not triggered. The project will
                                                           not involve any forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09                    No              This policy is not triggered. The project is
                                                           not expected to procure pesticides or impact
                                                           on pest management practice.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No                  The project screening procedure will ensure
                                                           no physical cultural resources be potentially
                                                           affected by the project. This policy is not
                                                           triggered.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10              No              The project will not involve any indigenous
                                                           people. This policy is not triggered.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12        No              The project screening procedure will ensure
                                                           that all project activities will be located
                                                           within the premises of existing buildings,
                                                           and there will be no land acquisition and
                                                           resettlement.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                  No              The project will not involve any dams.
Projects on International Waterways        No              The project will not involve any
OP/BP 7.50                                                 international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60      No              The project will not involve any disputed
                                                           areas.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The CRESP II is a stand-alone GEF project, which primarily consists of capacity building, policy
analysis, and research related to renewable energy development. As part of renewable energy
demonstration, the project might finance a limited number of small-scale RE investments, (e.g.
roof-top solar PV) under the pilot demonstration component. Overall, the project is designed as an
environmental enhancement effort with positive environmental benefits. The limited physical activities
of renewable energy facility installation will have little or no adverse environmental impacts.
Therefore, the project is classified as Category C project according to OP4.01.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The proposed activities are inherently alternatives for reducing the dependence on fossil fuel energy,
and will positively contribute to the renewable energy development and climate change mitigation.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
A generic EMP has been prepared to address potential impacts, if any, with regards to limited civil
works and equipment installation, e.g. worker and community safety, noise nuisance, solid waste
management, etc. The EMP includes screening procedures to avoid adverse impacts, and a set of
Environmental Code of Practice to address potential impacts. The EMP will be incorporated into the
bidding documents for the sub- project implementation entities which will ensure the implementation
of the EMP is incorporated into construction/ installation contracts, with adequate budget allocation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Not applicable for Category C project.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   20-May-2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                24-May-2013
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                                         23-May-2013
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [          ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [          ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [ X ]       No [   ]   NA [       ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in     Yes [ X ]    No [   ]   NA [   ]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [ X ]    No [   ]   NA [   ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [ X ]    No [   ]   NA [   ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:                Name: Xiaodong Wang
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name:                                        Date:
Sector Manager:                  Name:                                    Date:
