                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/14/2011                                       Report No.: 64627
1. Basic Project Data
Country: China                               Project ID: P108592
Project Name: GEF Huai River Basin Marine Pollution Reduction Project
Task Team Leader: Xiaokai Li
GEF Focal Area: International waters         Global Supplemental ID:
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 25, 2011      Estimated Board Date: November 15, 2011
Managing Unit: EASCS                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (35%);Solid waste management
(35%);Irrigation and drainage (15%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector
(15%)
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (33%);Pollution management and
environmental health (33%);Water resource management (17%);Other environment and
natural resources management (17%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              5.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            32.83
                                                                       32.83
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to demonstrate innovative and cost-effective water
pollution control practices in the Guangli river catchment of Dongying City contributing
to pollution reduction in the Bohai Sea.

3. Project Description
The proposed GEF project will consist of the following components:

 Component A. Constructed Wetland and Sluice Gate Operation Optimization (Base
Cost: US$27.19 million): This component aims at treatment of Guangli River water
through constructed wetlands to improve water quality up to a level suitable for
landscaping purposes, and increasing the carrying capacity of the river through sluice
gate regulation. It includes: (a) Construction of wetlands at Dongbalu consisting of free-
surface flow wetlands, an ecological retention pool, an entrance gate, a gated overflow
weir and a pumping station, and provision of related equipment; (b) Upgrading the
automatic gate control system covering three sluice gates on the Guangli River, and the
gates at the entrance and exit of the Dongbalu wetlands; and (c) Provision of cash
transfers to Affected Persons of the wetlands construction.

  Component B. Agricultural Pollution Control and Rural Waste Management (Base
Cost: US$4.59 million): The component finances facilities and management practices
for agricultural pollution reduction and rural waste management to reduce
nutrient/pollutant loads in selected pilot areas. It covers: (a) Wastewater, human and
livestock waste collection and treatment in Participating Villages; (b) Introduction of
agricultural pollution reduction technologies and management practices in Participating
Villages through comprehensive and balanced fertilizer applications, provision and use
of insect luring lamps, and construction of eco-trenches and buffer strips in crop fields;
and monitoring of the results of implementation of these technologies and practices; and
(c) Establishment, equipping and operation of FEPAs in Participating Villages.

 Component C. Capacity Building and Policy Studies (Base Cost: US$1.85 million):
This component intends to strengthen the pollution management capacity of Dongying
government and farmer communities. It supports: (a) Establishment and operation of an
environmental protection education and training centre to be located in Dongying
Municipality for training and dissemination of technologies and good practices in
environmental protection, nutrient management and pollution reduction; (b) Capacity
building activities to provide technical and Project management training for staff
involved in Project implementation and monitoring; and (c) Evaluation study of the
effectiveness of constructed wetlands in the treatment of polluted water based on the
analysis of the Project monitoring results; development of an agricultural pollution
reduction and rural waste management strategy and plan for the Guangli River Watershed
in the Dongying Municipality, including an evaluation study of the related Project
interventions for the purpose; and development of a Huai River Basin-wide replication
strategy for cost-effective water pollution control, including dissemination and training
and workshops as required for the purpose.

 Component D. Project Management and Implementation Support (Base Cost: US$2.29
million): This component would finance project management and implementation
support activities to ensure timely and efficient implementation. The main activities
include: (a) Provision of technical assistance for the review of technical designs and
tendering documents, construction quality of Project facilities, and for Project reporting;
(b) Project monitoring and evaluation; and (c) Support for Project management by the
project management offices (PMOs) and project implementation units (PIUs).

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project is located in Guangli River catchment of Dongying Municipality of
Shandong Province bordering the Bohai Sea and Yellow Sea. In terms of river basin
system, the Project is within the Huai River Basin. Guangli river, with a total length of
48.8km and a catchment area of 792km2, is the main drainage channel for Dongying
District and Kenli County with a total population of 745,000. The River passes through
Kenli County and Dongying District from NW to SE and flows into the Bohai Sea in the
east of Dongying District.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS)
   Mr Feng Ji (EASCS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The project as a whole has positive
environmental impacts with the benefits greatly outweighing the negative impacts. To
reduce point and non-point pollution discharged to the Guangli River, the project will
introduce a set of environmental technologies and best practices in selected villages, such
as (i) use of green/organic fertilizers, and accurate and balanced fertilizer application for
crop fields; (ii) best practices for managing agricultural run-off including use of
conservation buffer strips and eco-trenches; and (iii) collection and treatment of waste
and wastewater. It is estimated that these environment-friendly technologies and best
practices will contribute to the reduction of fertilizer use by 15-20% in demonstrated
villages, alleviating pollutants loads (including pesticides) into the Guangli River. In
addition, the project will further reduce pollutant loads (e.g. reduction: 430 tons of
CODcr, 129 tons of NH3-N, and 12 tons of TP) discharged to the Bohai Sea every year
by financing a free-surface flow constructed wetland (1.8km2) located at the downstream
end of the Guangli River, thus improving water quality and aesthetic amenities in project
area.

 The principal potential adverse impact are associated with construction mainly including
dust emission, noise, spoil disposal, and short disruption to local community. Negative
impacts are expected to be minimal, site specific, reversible, and easily mitigated.
 Pest Management (OP4.09). The project will not finance any procurement of pesticides
nor pesticide application equipment. Instead, the project will cut down the use of
pesticides in the project areas by promoting non-chemical pest control approach such as
moth-killing lamps, and by providing farmers with training and awareness dissemination
activities.

  OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. Project component A contains an artificial wetland
with an area of 2,698 mu or 180 ha, which would take place on state-owned land (mostly
wasteland such as offshore alkalized land which was previously regulated by the state-
owned Shandong Shengli Petroleum Company. The project entity Dongying Municipal
Government negotiated and agreed with that company for the paid land use transfer
between the two governmental agencies based on the national land law. Part of the land is
irregularly contracted to the company#s staff individuals for building fish ponds which
are mostly abandoned during the winter time. Meanwhile, there are seven small
enterprises leasing a total area of 241 mu (15 ha.) on this land which have to relocate for
wetland construction. Mitigation and compensation for the resettlement impact and
rehabilitation of the affected businesses has been the main focus in project preparation as
per OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The project will alleviate pollutant loads discharged to the Bohai Sea, contributing to the
improvement of water quality of the bay area in the long term.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Different alternatives of technologies were compared and analyzed to mitigate water
pollution, which include biological filters, constructed wetlands (e.g. sub-surface flow or
free water surface constructed wetland), floating vegetation bed etc. The option of a free
water surface flow wetland combined with an upstream-side ecological retention pond
was selected after consideration of cost-effectiveness, respective treatment requirements,
costs and complexity of operational management. In addition several technologies for
rural wastewater and waste treatment were analyzed and compared.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
On Environmental Safeguards: To address the safeguards issues, Dongying PMO
engaged an EA consultant to prepare an EA in accordance with applicable national
regulations and the Bank safeguard policies. An EMP has been developed laying out
necessary mitigation measures, institutional arrangements, and a monitoring plan to avoid
or minimize adverse impact associated with the project. The mitigation measures for dust
emission, noise, spoil disposal and disturbance to local community will be implemented
to keep the adverse impacts at an acceptable level.

 On Pest Management: The project will not finance any procurement of pesticides or
pesticide application equipment, but aims to reduce the use of pesticides in the project
areas. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) has been developed in consultation with
Dongying Agricultural Bureau. The PMP will guide the clients to promote the use of
non-chemical technologies and provide farmers with trainings and awareness
strengthening activities.

 On Social Safeguards:       In view of the potential for housing demolition and enterprises
relocation, as well as the possible impact on some temporary land contractors of fish
pond production, an abbreviated RAP has been developed in compliance with the Bank
safeguard policy and applicable national laws and government regulations. The RAP was
the results of detailed impact survey and consultation with affected people/enterprises
and local authorities. It inventories and analyzes the land transfer and relocation impacts,
based on which it sets forth compensation measures for building demolition, enterprise
relocation and loss of attachments to the land (power lines, fish ponds, abandoned oil
wells, etc.). These small enterprises will be re-leased new areas owned by the Shengli
Petroleum Company.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
On environmental safeguards: In accordance with the World Bank Safeguard policies
and applicable national regulations, public consultations was conducted during the
environmental assessment, including questionnaire survey, meetings of the project
affected people and other stakeholders regarding the project. Their feedbacks and
concerns have been taken into account in the EA process and project design. The EA &
EMP were locally disclosed and uploaded to the website of Dongying Municipal
Government in May 2011, and sent to the Bank InfoShop for disclosure in June 2011.
The updated EA and EMP were re-disclosed locally and in the InfoShop in August 2011.

 Pest Management (OP4.09). A Pest Management Plan (PMP) has been developed to
help farmers reduce reliance on chemical pesticides. Consultation with local farmers has
been conducted and their feedbacks incorporated in the PMP. The PMP was locally
disclosed (e.g. village, library, website) and sent to the Bank InfoShop for disclosure in
August 2011.

  On social safeguards: The small enterprises# owners and workers, the fish pond
contractors and the Shengli Petroleum Company are the primary stakeholders to be
affected by resettlement impacts under this project. Dongying PMO and the resettlement
team consisting of expert from Hohai University and local project staff conducted
intensive resettlement information dissemination and consultation among these groups
from April 2010 through March 2011, and carried out on-the-spot impact survey and
resettlement planning for relocation of enterprises and rehabilitation of livelihoods. The
final abbreviated RAP was disclosed to the public in the project area in May 2011, and in
the Bank InfoShop on June 27.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/29/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/30/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/27/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/29/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/30/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/27/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 07/25/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             08/03/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              08/15/2011
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Xiaokai Li                                09/09/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Feng Ji                                   08/17/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Zong-Cheng Lin                            08/17/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez                  09/13/2011
  Comments:
