                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 2/12/2013                                    Report No.: AC3160

 .
1 B astc        . tD at a
         . P rOJCC
Country: China                                Project ID: P099224
Project Name: Liaoning Third Medium Cities Infrastructure
Task Team Leader: Yanqin Song
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 15,        Estimated Board Date: November 30,2013
2013
Managing Unit: EASTE                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: District heating and energy efficiency services (97%)~0il and gas (3%)
Theme: Climate change (P)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            191.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other fmancing amounts by source:
          Borrower                                                     216.93
                                                                       216.93
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple [X]           Repeater 0
Is tb.is project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes []     No[]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to improve the energy efficiency and environmental
performance of heating in selected areas of participating cities in Liaoning Province.

3. Project Description
1)      The project was approved on May 27, 2008 for an IBRD loan of US$ 191 million.
The progress towards the achievement of the PDO was rated Unsatisfactory and the
overall implementation progress was assessed Moderately Unsatisfactory after the March
2013 mission. As of September 30,2013, after five years in implementation, the
disbursement is US$ 70.94 mi)Jjon or 37% of the loan amount. The loan closing date is
December 31,2013.
2)      Restructuring request from Ministry of Finance was received on October 8
proposing: (i) cancel five subprojects which dropped in the Loan Agreement, (ii) add t\.vo
new subprojects: Kangping and Lingyuan, and (iii) one year closing date extension. The
two new subprojects, Kangping disctrict heating project and Lingyuan district heating
project, with IBRD loan ofUS$35.52 million were proposed for restructuring. This ISDS
will focus on the two new subprojects.
3)     The project after restructuring will include:
Component 1: Centralized Heating InfraStructure (US$407.94 million equivalent; IBRD
US$216.93millionj. This component covers 8 subprojects in seven cities and includes
the construction and rehabilitation of centralized heating systems. The eight subprojects
are Benxi Steel, Bernd Nanfen, Gongchangling, Huludao, Yingkou Dashiqiao, Yingkou
EDZ, Kangping, and Lingyuan. Among which, Kangping and Lingyuan are two newly
proposed subprojects for restructuring. The other six are existing subprojects. All of these
six subprojects under operation and construction complied with the requirements in EMP
and RAP and safeguards implementation status is satisfactory.
Component 2: Institutional Development (US$1.39 million equivalent; IBRD US$1.39
million). The component proposes to include: project management and design review
and advisory consultancy services, including follow on training in O&M and pilot project
assessments.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The originally proposed LMC3 project cities are small to medium sized cities located in
Liaoning Province in northeast of China. Under the restructuring, Kangping County and
Lingyuan city are added. The project service areas for heating project proposals are
known. The locations of new heating sources are known.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Xin Ren (EASCS)
   Mr Jun Zeng (EASCS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             x·
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Mana2:ement (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OPIBP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peo}lles (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on Internationai.Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1.      Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project will contribute to the overall reduction in atmospheric emissions of coal
combustion products from the residential heating syste~ namely dust and sulfur dioxide,
per square meter of connected floor area by replacing small inefficient heat-only boilers
with larger and more efficient boilers utilizing more effective control systems for removal
of these pollutants from the flue gases. In order to meet the national air quality
requirement and emission standards, emission control technology proposed for the new
boilers is to install the bag-filter house for dust collection and the FGD system for S02
reduction. Expected efficiency is 99.7% for TSP and 90% for S02. It is expected that
after project, the incidence of respiratory diseases in the two project cities in heating
season should be reduced.
During construction, the two new subprojects will have limited and temporary adverse
environmental impacts that are reversible. The impacts are primarily associated with the
movement of people, machinery and materials (e.g. dust, noise, waste construction
material). The EMPs include provision for management of hazardous materials, in
particular asbestos, that may be found during preparation works in existing boiler houses,
or the removal of old pipelines. Mitigating measures in the EMPs include ~tandard
procedures associated with good engineering and construction practices.
During operation, primary impacts are associated with delivery and storage of coal·and
sulfur dioxide sorbent, management of ash and spent sorbent, water availability for FGD
system operation, and stack emissions of sulfur dioxide and TSP. Boiler houses are sited
in areas that are removed from or downwind of any sensitive receptors during the heating
season with stacks of sufficient height to assure ground level maximum concentrations of
sulfur dioxide and PM10 are within applicable Chinese air quality standards. Gaussian
plume D;lodels for atmospheric dispersion verified the appropriateness of the design
values for the stack heights. The project design complies with Chinese emissions
standards ofS~ and dust for heat only boilers and, if carefully executed, can also meet
emission standards of S02 and particulate matters in the WB!IFC EHS Guidelines for
Thermal Power Plants. In general, coal and sorbent will be delivered in covered vehicles
and storage facilities will be designed to minimize dust generation. Storage and transport
arrangements for ash and spent sorbent will also be designed to minimize dust generation.
In general these materials will be fully utilized for the manufacture of various
construction products (bricks, wallboard etc.)
For the original project, the EMP has been followed during construction. Operation of
completed subprojects has shown compliance with applicable environmental
requirements and emission standards. The original EMP was proved to be pertinent and
practical during implementation. The EMP of new subprojects was thus all modeled after
the original EMP approved by the WB. Contracting of a competent external monitor by
the PMO proves to have greatly fostered the EMP implementation. The Bank team has
also conducted safeguard supervision twice a year and found the EMP implementation
for the original project has been satisfactory.
For the two new subprojects (Kangping and Lingyuan), the Abbreviated RAPs and RPF
were prepared, and were considered acceptable to the Bank. Local disclosure in Chinese
language and disclosure through Infoshop has been conducted. Since the civil works will
be conducted along the existing roads alignments, negative social impacts identified are
very limited. Land taking of state-owned land is needed and temporary taking of state-
owned land is also unavoidable during construction. No structure will be demolished.
Livelihood impact on local people is limit~d. The Social Specialist also conducted IP
screening during the project preparation for these two newly added projects. It was
confirmed that there was no ethnic minority communities present in or have collective
attachment to the project area. The team therefore concluded that the project does not
trigger the Bank's OP 4.10 on Indigenous People.
During the new project preparation, measures to minimize resettlement impacts had been
taken through alternative analysis. When land taking is needed, priority should be given
to use state-owned land and reduce the use of farming land. For instance, selection of a
heat transfer station site should consider the area which will bring less disturb for the
residential area. It is also encouraged to rebuild the station from the old boiler ·room so
additional land taking is reduced. The location for the first-level pipelines will be put
along the alignment of existing roads in order to avoid land taking. Through these efforts,
all identified substations in these two projects will be constructed on based of old small
boilers or old substations. Most of pipelines will be constructed along the alignments of
existing roads. Land taking had been minimized.
For original project, the RAP implementation was rated as "Satisfactory". The Bank's
mission and external monitor found all resettlement practices had been conducted in line
with the prepared RAP, including compensation, livelihood restoration, vulnerable
groups assistance and public consultation. Bank's team conducted regular supervision to
the project and the external monitor was hired and external monitoring reports on
resettlement were submitted regularly.
2.      Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Not applicable.
3.    Describe any project altematives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or
minimize adverse impacts.
Plant site locations and/or stack heights were designed to minimize environmental
impacts on sensitive receptors. Dust removal and desulfurization technologies were
selected to provide the greatest removal efficiency and operational reliability for the
designed boiler size, sorbent and water availability. In terms of minimizing the impacts
associated with involuntary resettlement, efforts have been made during project planning
and design. The resettlement impacts have been significantly reduced through optimizing
the project design and implementation arrangements. These are described in details in
Section 1.3 of Summary RAP and each subproject RAP.
4.     Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues.
Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures
described.
As noted above, EMPs and RAPs, where applicable, have been prepared. A RPF has been
prepared. The provincial PMO has hired an external environmental monitor to assist in
supervision of the EMP implementation in the original project and will cover the two new
subprojects as well.
The borrowers have limited experience with Bank Safeguard policies. Training on Bank's
social and environmental safeguards policy has been provided and will need additional
training on safeguard issues for two new subprojects. An independent resettlement
monitor will be contracted under the project, and semi-annual resettlement monitoring
reports for the Bank supervision teams.
5.     Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Following Chinese regulations, two consultations were held for subprojects involving
construction of new boilers. One consultation was held for subprojects that did not
involve construction of new boilers. The consultations took place either through public
hearing or questionnaire. The Chinese language EAIEMPs for newly added subprojects
were disclosed locally, May 2011 for Kangping and February 2012 for Lingyuan. The
English version of EAIEMP of the two projects was disclosed in the Infoshop on
November 28,2013. Based on survey results the local populations support the project.
RAPs and RPF were disclosed through local newspapers in April and May of2012. The
Infoshop submission date is November 28,2013.
Public consultation and participation was a key element in resettlement planning. The
affected residents, business people and district governments participated in the census,
inventory and formulation of the livelihood rehabilitation strategy, measures and
relocation sites. Their feedback has been incorporated in determining the compensation
rates and livelihood rehabilitation measures. The RAP contains a list of major
consultation sessions. The participation and consultation process will continue in
resettlement implementation. To facilitate active public participation, the following
complaint handling mechanism has been established:
Step 1: Displaced persons can appeal by verbal or paper manner to village committee or
project demolition implementation institution if they are not satisfied with the
resettlement plan. For verbal appeal, village committee and demolition institution should
record in written form and solve the problems within two weeks;
Step 2: lfdisplaced persons are still not satisfied with the decision of Phase 1, they can
appeal to municipal PMOs/ administration institutions after receiving decision notice and
the latter should resolve it within two weeks;
Step 3: If displaced persons are still not satisfied with the decision of municipal PMOs/
administration institutions, they can appeal to subproject leading team or local municipal
construction commission after receiving decision notice. The latter should handle the case
within two weeks;
Step 4: If displaced persons are still not satisfied with the decision of subproject leading
team or local municipal construction commission, they can bring a lawsuit to a civil law
court in case of objection to any aspect of the resettlement plan after receiving decision
notice.


B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                                                   Original                   Restructuring
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?       Yes                         Yes
                                                                              18 Oct., 2011
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  09/19fl007
                                                                              14 Dec., 2012
                                                                        2 May, 2011
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                          09/19/2007
                                                                        1 Feb., 2012
                                                                       28 Nov., 2013
 Date of submission to InfoShop                           09/19/2007
                                                                       28 Nov., 2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the
  Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
  Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?               Yes           YES
  Date of receipt by the Bank                              08/22/2007    1 May,  2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                          08/3112007    1 Apr., 2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                           09/19/2007 28 Nov., 2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:                      N/A
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                            N/A
  Was the document disclosed prior to apprajsal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C.·Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) ·

OPIBP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?           Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the       Yes
credit/loan?                                              ·
OPIBP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process           Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector     Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's    Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a                        Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groW    and local NGOs?
  All afeguard Policies
  HaV:satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities                      Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project                    Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the                             Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                               Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                            Name                              Date
Task Team Leader:                         Mr. Yanqin Song
Environmental Specialist:                 Ms.XinRen
Social Development Specialist             Mr.Jun Zeng
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:                                                        ~
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr. Peter Leonard~~ .                                  1215/2013
 Comments: Cleared with the understanding that air quality monitoring\;tibe included in Kangping EMP
  or a ralionale provided by team not to monitor and that the project Calegorization is based on the initial
  review ofthe project
Sector Manager.      f1AA         0     I ,_    i\                 'IAA    l   o /J    .f/IA -
  Comments:             '11\~ 1\...    L.-1J   Ny/dA-          1    f'~ ~
                                                           /
