                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC5714


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/18/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: China                             Project ID: P122319
Project Name: Zhangjiakou Hohot (ZhangHu) Railway
Task Team Leader: John Carter Scales
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 13,      Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: EASCS                       Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                           Loan
Sector: Railways (100%)
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):         200.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                 4,596.00
                                                                 4,596.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The development objective of the proposed project is to respond to existing and anticipated
transport demand along the Hohhot-Zhangjiakou corridor by providing increased capacity for
freight and passengers, and faster travel time and increased frequency of services for passengers.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project will support the construction of a new double-tracked electrified 287 km
long passenger dedicated railway line (PDL) along the Zhangjiakou to Hohhot alignment, with
the related railway stations. The line will be operated with electrical multiple units, with a
design speed of 250 km/h. The rail travel distance will be reduced from 433 km to 287 km.
About 64 percent of the line will be on bridges or through tunnels.

 The termini of this east-west line will be Zhangjiakou in Hebei Province and Hohhot, the
provincial capital of the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region. Several different alignments are
being studied for two intermediate sections, Zhangjiakou City to Ulan Qab and Ulan Qab to
Hohhot. Alignments are being evaluated based upon impact on cultural relics, resettlement, and
environment, geological conditions, economic benefits, engineering, and cost. A small portion
of the alignment passes through Shanxi Province through a tunnel.

 Implementation is currently planned to commence in early to mid 2011 with commissioning of
the line expected by mid 2016. The total estimated cost for this project is RMB 32 billion
(US$4.8 billion) at an average of about RMB 112 million (US$16.7 million) per main line
kilometer.

 The Bank loan is expected to finance goods and equipment possibly consisting of signaling,
electrification, bridge beams, and track fittings. In addition the project may finance technical
assistance components yet to be agreed.

D. Project location (if known)
The Zhangjiakou-Huhhot Railway Project will pass through the Hebei and Shanxi provinces and
the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region. In the Shanxi Section, the railway will go within a
tunnel, so the social impacts of the project will be mainly in Hebei and Inner Mongolia

 The proposed alignment corridor is a highly developed transport corridor with an existing
railway line, an expressway, a national highway and local road networks. The area around the
alignment is mostly farmland, grassland and rolling hills. There is no indication of the presence
of undisturbed or valuable natural habitats. As such the area of the project presents moderate to
low ecological sensitivity.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The MOR has engaged qualified consultants with experience on Environmental Assessment
(EA), Resettlement Plan (RAP), Social Assessment (SA) under World Bank projects to prepare
the environmental and social safeguard instruments, either through MOR#s FCTIC itself or
through the design institute responsible for the overall project technical preparation.

 The China Railway Consulting Company will be responsible for preparing social aspects of the
project, in accordance with MOR requirements. FCTIC indicated that the Southwestern
Transportation University has been engaged to lead the social assessment process with China
Railway Consulting Company. The University has rich experience on World Bank resettlement
planning and monitoring, working the for Guiguang, Nanguang, and Zhegan Railway projects.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Songling Yao (EASCS)
   Mr Peishen Wang (EASCS)
   Mr Ning Yang (EASCS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes          No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                              X
    The proposed project is a Category A project due to the type and scale of construction
activities. A full EIA and EMP will be prepared according to OP4.01. At present stage, a draft
EIA is being developed. The task team has conducted field visit to the project with the EIA
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                    Yes         No         TBD
consultant and provided comprehensive guidance regarding Bank safeguard policies and
technical considerations for EA preparation. MOR and the EIA consultant confirmed that the EA
preparation will follow domestic and Bank requirements as well. The major environmental and
social issues envisaged include:


     Analysis of alternative alignments. Analysis of alternatives for the selection of the final
alignment is the most important environmental and social impact mitigation tool for this project.
Currently, the final alignment is being considered. The EIA report shall include a dedicated
chapter for alternative analysis that describes the alignment selection process and the
environmental and social criteria used in the analysis. It shall address the various alternative
alignments and stations that have been studied during feasibility study processes, including the
no-project scenario. Comprehensive comparison from environmental, social, technical and
economic perspective shall be conducted and documented in the EIA report, and full justification
of the final selection be provided. Clear maps shall be used to present the comparison process of
various alternatives.

      Ecological impacts. The proposed alignment corridor is a highly developed transport
corridor with an existing railway line, expressway, national highway and local road networks.
The alignment area is mostly farmland, grassland and rolling hills where arid climate conditions
dominate. The area of the project presents moderate to low sensitivity from an ecological
perspective. It is noted that the proposed alignment runs through the Experimental Zone of the
provincial level Huangqihai Wetland Nature Reserve, 5 km away from its Buffer Zone and 7km
away from its Core Zone. The proposed alignment will fall within a 1km wide transport corridor
with existing JiZhang railway, Beijing-Hohhot expressway and G110 National Highway. An
ecological study will be conducted along the entire project corridor, with special focus on the
Nature Reserve, and fully reflected in the EA document. The EA will also include habitat
fragmentation issue that may rise from the construction of the line. Proper engineering design,
restriction to new access roads, camp location, and disposal sites, and environmental sound
construction practices will be adopted to minimize vegetation disturbance; soil erosion and
related ecological impacts.


     Social disturbance and connectivity. The railway construction and operation will have
adverse impact including local traffic disturbance and road safety, community connectivity,
agricultural facilities and accessibility of rural production activities, construction nuisance, and
social disturbance of influx of construction labors, STD/HIV/AIDS concerns, impact on
community livelihood such as irrigation facilities. These impacts will be addressed through
appropriate public consultation and sound engineering design during the feasibility study and EA
preparation, and good construction management during construction.

      Soil erosion control. Given the harsh climate condition, restoration and reclamation of
disturbed areas may take longer time. Therefore, minimization of surface vegetation and
adequate soil erosion control will be critical for the project. Special attention will be given to
sites that will be identified during construction stage, e.g. borrow/disposal areas, new access
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes        No        TBD
roads, new locations of pre-casting plants etc. For these, a set of framework requirement shall be
developed as mitigation measures in the EMP which shall include site selection principles,
requirement of environmental design, and review and approval procedures.

     Cumulative/Indirect Impacts. The EIA will address the indirect impact from induced
development of railway stations in terms of land use, urbanization and related environmental
social and environmental concerns.

      Public consultation and information disclosure. Two rounds of public consultation are
required as per OP4.01 Environmental Assessment, i.e. (1) early stage of EA preparation when
the terms of reference of the EIA is prepared. ; (2) when draft EIA is available. The consultation
shall be conducted, i.e. both formal and informal meetings and interviews with the target groups,
information dissemination campaigns through fliers, posters, and radio announcements; and
questionnaire survey. The EIA is expected to summarize for each round: (i) the dates and venues
of consultation events; (ii) the organizations or stakeholder groups consulted; (iii) the main
comments provided, particularly regarding the perceived adequacy of mitigation and monitoring
measures; and (iv) how the comments and recommendations were or were not taken into account
in finalizing project designs. Once the draft EIA is available, the full report shall be disclosed to
the public (e.g. through websites of local EPB or government forums) with announcement in
local media.


     The final EA documents expected to be submitted to the Bank include the following, in both
Chinese and English:
     - A full Environmental Impact Assessment Report;
     - A stand-alone Environmental Management Plan;
     - An EA Executive Summary.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                        X
    This policy is triggered. An ecological and biodiversity study will be conducted along the
alignment, with special focus on the Huangqihai Wetland Nature Reserve . The study will
address the principles and requirements of the Bank policy on natural habitats, including
identifying critical habitats, assessing short term and long term impacts on the Nature Reserve
from construction and operation of the line, assessment of fragmentation of habitats, specially
the Nature Reserve habitats crossed by the line, and identifying mitigation and compensation
measures. In addition, appropriate consultation with relevant management authority shall be
conducted and documented in the EIA report, and their concerns shall be incorporated into the
project design and mitigation measures.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                             X
    The project is unlikely to cause significant conversion or degradation of natural habitats.
Although some natural forests are expected to be cleared (a few hundred hectares as a
maximum), forest issues will be dealt through the natural habitats policy.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                        X
    The project will not involve procurement of pesticide or have any impact on pest
management practice. This policy is not triggered.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                           Yes         No           TBD
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                            X
    This policy is not triggered. The EIA consultant has conducted site survey and consultation
with cultural relics authorities , only one cultural relic site has been identified in the vicinity of
the project corridor i.e. Xiyanghe ancient city relic. The relic includes compacted soil city wall
and gates remains. The proposed railway alignment avoided the relic protection zone, with an
existing national highway G110 between the relic site and the railway line. The project is
unlikely to pose impacts to the relic site. However, chance-find procedure will be included in the
EMP and will apply during construction.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                                   X
    The Task Team social development specialist conducted an IP screening as part of the
identification mission. The mission IP screening included interviews with counterpart staff and
local people at the visited sites, and did not yet identify any minority groups. Scattered
Mongolian and Man people were identified among the Han population but they are well
integrated into the Han culture.

     A social assessment for the project will be prepared and will collect additional IP data in the
project area to help the Task Team to determine whether or not the policy is triggered.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
    The four selected stations are located far from downtown areas and therefore will have very
limited resettlement impacts. The railway alignment is expected to be optimized to avoid
acquisition of qualified farmland and village demolition. The possible significant impacts are
possibly relating to farmland acquisition, infrastructure disturbance and relocation of enterprises
. The draft Feasibility Study estimates that 852 ha of land are to be permanently required and 317
ha temporarily used.

     Some basic farmland will probably be required by the project, it will require formal review
approval from Ministry of Land Resources (MOL). This usually takes time, so the process,
especially in Hebei province, will be launched as early as possible.

    A RP , with an annex of Resettlement Policy Framework, will be prepared for the project.
The RP will be based on the feasibility study.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                      X
   The policy is not triggered. The project will not involve any dams.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                 X
   The policy is not triggered. The project will not involve any international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                          X
   The policy is not triggered. The project will not involve any disputed areas.


Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A
B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   01/30/2012

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   N/A

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr John Carter Scales                                          10/11/2010
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan                             10/12/2010
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez                                    10/12/2010
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
