                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC6497


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/03/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: China                               Project ID: P126454
Project Name: Xinjiang Yining Urban Transport Improvement Project
Task Team Leader: Zhi Liu
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 25,       Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: EASCS                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: General transportation sector (100%)
Theme: Other urban development (80%);Urban services and housing for the poor
(15%);Municipal governance and institution building (5%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):          100.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                    100.00
                                                                    100.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
In the context of anticipated rapid urban development in Yining, the proposed Project
Development Objective (PDO) is to improve urban transport services in the city of Yining and
develop urban transport infrastructure in the selected new city areas, all in an integrated and
people-oriented manner.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
Yining proposed to the Bank team a package of urban transport investments, including the
construction of new roads and improvement of existing roads, the provision of public transport
infrastructure and services, and the improvement of traffic management and road safety.
According to the proposal and the Bank team#s assessment, it is proposed that the focus of the
project is to provide the basic urban transport infrastructure and equipments to support the social
and economic development of Yining, meanwhile introducing modern traffic management
concept and techniques to ensure the sustainability of development.
 Yining#s existing central city area has a relatively adequate urban road network, but their
functioning is being compromised by the severe deterioration and the lack of Non # Motorized
#Transport (NMT) facilities or auxiliary facilities such as lighting and greening. It is
recommended that these roads should be rehabilitated to improve the living conditions of the
local residents. The two new development zones to the east and west of the existing city area are
rapidly growing, thus new roads are needed to support their development. However, the road
function should be well-defined to determine the cross section design instead of simply building
wide roads as proposed by the city.

 Public transport service in Yining is far from being attractive and convenient. There are only 14
bus lines in operation and 299 buses in total, many of which are rather decrepit. Insufficient
public transport facilities are another constraint to the further development of public transport in
Yining. Moreover, the city currently has no advanced systems for bus ticketing, dispatching or
operation.

 Traffic management capacity is relatively low, leading to the under-utilization of the existing
road capacity and causing safety issues. Even with a small number of vehicle ownership of about
50,000, the city is starting to face congestions. A high fatality rate of 107 fatalities per million
population is registered in 2010.

 In response to these challenges, the Bank revised the proposal with Yining and tentatively
agreed that the project will include the following 4 components:

 1.     Component 1: Urban Road Improvement and Construction. This component aims at
strengthening the existing urban road network, developing new roads for the new city areas, and
improving the city capacity to keep the urban road network clean and well maintained. It
consists of: (a) improvement of selected urban roads in the existing road network, totaling 53km;
(b) construction of new urban roads, totaling 30km, that support the urban land use development,
including auxiliary greening and lighting works and garbage collection bins within the right-of-
ways; and (c) procurement of road maintenance machinery, garbage compression trucks, water
spraying trucks, street sweepers, and snow plows. The Bank team also proposed for Yining to
consider establishing a modern urban road maintenance management system.

 2.     Component 2: Public Transport Improvement. This component aims at improving the
city#s public transport infrastructure, expanding service coverage and upgrading service quality
to meet the future need of the rapidly growing city. It includes: (a) construction of 2 bus depots,
2 public transport hubs, 2 CNG stations, 10 bus terminals and 208 bus stops; and (b)
establishment of an advanced bus dispatching system; (c) development of an IC card system; and
(d) procurement of 200 clean-energy buses.

 3.    Component 3: Traffic Management and Road Safety. This component aims at introducing
modern traffic management tools and practices to the city in line with the anticipated rapid urban
development and traffic growth. It consists of: (a) establishment of a Traffic Command Centre
(TCC); (b) development of an Area Traffic Control (ATC) System accompanied with signal
upgrade and junction channelization; and (c) procurement of E-Police equipments. It was
proposed that 2 corridors, i.e. Jiefang Road and Ahemaitijiang Road, be selected for
improvement of traffic management and road safety through introducing an integrated corridor
improvement approach.

  4.    Component 4: Institutional Capacity Building. This component aims at improving the
city#s human resources and institutional capacity for urban transport planning and management.
It may include training, study tours and thematic studies such as comprehensive urban transport
planning. The specific activities will be further defined during project preparation through the
identification and prioritization of institutional development needs of the city.

 The total estimated project cost is about RMB 1.32 billion (US$ 203 million equivalent), with
an IBRD loan of US$ 100 million.

D. Project location (if known)
The proposed project is in Yining Municipality, the capital of the Yili Kazak Autonomous
Prefecture, located in the northwest of Xinjiang Urgur Autonomous Region and the central of
Yili River Valley with the total area of 676 km2, with current urban built-up area of 30 km2.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Yining Municipal Government has given high priority and strong support to this proposed
IBRD project. A Project Steering Group has been established, led by the Vice Mayor. Yining is
now implementing an Asian Development Bank funded urban transport project. Therefore, the
city PMO that is under the city urban construction bureau has a proper understanding of
safeguard requirements of the international development agencies. Substantial training on
Bank#s safeguard policies has been and will continually be provided to the clients and their
consultants by the task team members.

 Currently the city has engaged the consultants for project preparation. The Xinjiang
Environmental Technology Consulting Center (XETCC) will be in charge of EA preparation.
XETCC is a Class A EA institute certified by the Ministry of Environmental Protection (MEP)
and has experience with World Bank environmental safeguards policies through involvement in
a number of Bank financed projects, including the recent Urumqi District Heating project.
Meanwhile, a team consisting of sociologists and economists from Xinjiang Academy of Social
Science is being contracted to take lead of preparing RAP and EMDP, based on their
professional knowledge and working experience with the Bank supported projects.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS)
   Mr Peishen Wang (EASIN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes        No           TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
    This policy is triggered, as the proposed Project will upgrade and improve ca. 53 km of
existing roads and construct ca. 30 km roads in the city, improve public transport and traffic
management and road safety. The project will also include the construction of 2 bus depots, 2
public transport hubs, 2 CNG stations, 10 bus terminals, and 208 bus stops . The physical civil
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                           Yes         No          TBD
works of the project will be related to either the improvement of existing urban streets, or
construction of urban roads through rural farmlands in the peri-urban area based on the city#s
master plan. Based on field survey of EA consultant and initial screening conducted by the task
team, there are no special ecologically and culturally sensitive sites (natural habitat, protected
area or physical cultural resources) in the area of influence of the project.
      Potential environmental issues that will be addressed in the EIA include: 1) construction
related nuisances, e.g., dust, noise, management of excavated soil, etc., associated with the
component 1 and 2 during construction; 2) social impacts such as impacts on local communities,
traffic safety, accessibility of public and roadside businesses, utility disturbance etc.; and 3)
noise, air quality and safety during operation. Such impacts are site-specific, unlikely to be
significant or irreversible, and mitigation measures can be readily designed with known
engineering and good management practices. Therefore, the project is proposed as a Category B
project as per OP4.01.
      Table of Contents (ToC) for EA. XETCC has prepared an EA ToC for Bank review. The
ToC outlines regulation requirements, a preliminary environmental screening and scoping,
special environmental issues to be assessed, alternative analysis, environmental management
plan, consultation and information disclosure requirements, and a work schedule. The Bank team
reviewed the ToC and provided its comments to the PMO and XETCC.
      EA Preparation. The following specific issues will be addressed in the EIA:
      # Scope of the EA. The project EIA will cover physical activities of the project, mainly for
Component 1 & 2. The EA will screen for sensitive receptors and key issues along all roads and
in all project sites; identify potential environmental and social impacts for both construction and
operation stages (i.e. construction related dust and noise nuisances, spoil materials, utility and
traffic disturbance, accessibility of public and roadside businesses during construction, and
noise, air quality, safety and land-use change etc. during operation); develop necessary site-
specific mitigation measures at each site according to that screening; and prepare generic
environmental specifications for the road rehabilitation and construction activities in the EMP.
      # Alternative Analysis. The EA should address alternative analysis in a separate chapter.
Given the straightforward project concept, alternative analysis shall put focus on design
requirements, technologies, process, and environmental management at both construction and
operational stage. In addition, the #without project# scenario shall be considered.
      # Road Safety and Environmental Risks during Operation. Environmental risks such as
hazardous material transportation should be properly assessed. Details of environmental
accident, spill containment and clean-up procedures shall be provided in the EA/EMP.
      # Environmental Sensitive receptors. The EA should provide scientific screening process
and clear information, including sites of hospitals, schools, and if any, historic and cultural relics
identified during the detailed EA preparation..
      # Public Consultation and Disclosure. The EIA consultant is requested to conduct public
consultation and disclosure in compliance with Bank requirements. These include two rounds of
consultation through various methods, such as questionnaire, public meetings, and interview of a
broad range of stakeholders. Full EA documents disclosure at public accessible sites is also
required.
      # Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The World Bank safeguards policy requires a
specific stand-alone EMP to be prepared in parallel to EA. EMP shall include institutional
arrangement, mitigation measures, implementation, supervision and monitoring plans, training,
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No         TBD
and budget. EMP shall cover both construction and operational stage. Task team has advised the
EA consultant that IFC#s EHS General Guideline, in particular 4.0 Construction and
Decommissioning, should be taken as a reference in the EMP preparation.
      EA instrument. The final EA documents will include the following documents:
      A simplified Environmental Impact Assessment Report covering all project components
which includes screening and assessing key environmental and social issues along all roads and
in all project sites, and an Environmental Management Plan with both site-specific measures for
each component and a generic environmental specifications for construction management.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                     X
    The project is mainly in the urban setting and the areas disturbed by intensive human
activities. According to the preliminary environmental screening, there are no ecological
sensitive areas and natural reserved. This policy is not triggered.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              X
    The Project doesn#t involve forests resources. This policy is not triggered.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         X
    The Project will not lead to purchase or use of any pesticides. This policy is not triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                       X
    Based on currently available information and field survey of EA consultant, there are no
physical cultural resources identified to be affected by the project.Since the detailed EA
preparation and social survey are underway, the TT proposes #TBD# at this stage. Chance-find
procedures will be included in EMP.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                       X
    The TT conducted a primary social screening during the ID mission, and identified the
presence of ethnic minority groups in the proposed project areas of influence. In Yining city
which has a population of 540,000 people, there are 37 ethnic groups of whom 13 are aboriginal
populations, including Uygur, Kazak, Han, Hui, Mongol, Kerkez, Russian, and so on. Uygur is
the largest ethnic group accounting for 49 percent of the total local population. Han is the second
one accounting for 34.9 percent, while Hui the third for 7.5 percent and Kazak the fourth for 4.5
percent. Overall, the ethnic minorities account for about 65 percent of the local population.
Discussions with local authorities and site visits found that in most of the proposed project areas,
either in the urban or periphery urban areas, there are Uygur communities and Kazak
communities. These Uygur and Kazak ethnic minority communities are aboriginal inhabitants
there possessing their own languages and governing themselves with traditional cultures. Their
ethnic characteristics fall in the definition of Indigenous Peoples as per OP4.10. Therefore,
OP4.10 will be triggered under this project.

      The project entity has invited social experts from the Xinjiang Academy of Social Science
to prepare a project social assessment (SA), based on which an Ethnic Minority Development
Plan (EMDP) will be prepared in accordance with OP4.10. The TT has provided the project
entity, the local authorities and the social consultants with SA/EMDP guidance/TOR and
training, and will continue to oversee the preparation process.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
    Because of construction and improvement of 30 roads/streets with a total length of 83 km
and some related facilities and bus stations under this project, the TT identified that there would
be land acquisition (including temporary land occupation as well), housing demolition and
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes         No          TBD
population relocation caused by this project. Therefore, OP4.12 will apply. In the meantime, the
TT provided the project entity with guidance to pay attention to any linked projects during
project preparation.

     The project entity has set up a resettlement team consisting of PMO staff, practitioners from
local authorities and social and resettlement experts from Xinjiang Academy of Social Science to
prepare the resettlement work. The Bank TT has provided the project entity and the resettlement
team with guidance and training on RAP preparation. Based on the project information
dissemination and consultation campaign, the resettlement team has started census and socio-
economic surveys and impact inventorying in cooperation with local authorities and
communities/households, and a RAP will be developed with participation of the affected people.
The TT will continue the oversight and support to the resettlement preparation work.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                        X
    The project will not involve impacts to any dams in the project area. This policy is not
triggered.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                   X
    The project will not involve trans-boundary rivers. The policy is not triggered.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                            X
    The project is not located in any disputed areas. The policy is not triggered.


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 11/15/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   middle December 2011




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Mr Zhi Liu                           10/27/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan   11/03/2011
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Mr Paul Kriss                        10/28/2011
   Comments:
