                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/07/2011                                      Report No.: AC6513
1. Basic Project Data
Country: China                               Project ID: P099992
Project Name: Liaoning Medium Cities Infrastructure Project
Task Team Leader: Gerald Paul Ollivier
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 13, 2006     Estimated Board Date: June 27, 2006
Managing Unit: EASCS                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Roads and highways (70%);General transportation sector (16%);Sanitation
(14%)
Theme: Other urban development (50%);Urban services and housing for the poor
(25%);Municipal governance and institution building (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           218.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                    254.97
                                                                     254.97
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the Project is to assist the Borrower's Project Cities in enhancing: (i) the
performance and quality of their existing urban transport infrastructure in terms of
mobility, access, and safety; (ii) the efficiency and effectiveness of their urban public
transport and road maintenance services; and (iii) the responsiveness of their urban
transport systems to the needs of population without access to private motorized vehicles.

3. Project Description
The project covers the center cities of Panjin, Jinzhou, Fushun, Benxi, and Liaoyang
municipalities, and the county town of Dengta in Liaoyang municipality. The project has
been designed to reverse the deterioration of the asset base, improve the "livability" and
investment climate, and support initiatives that reflect national and provincial priorities
related to urban transport. The design has been refined through extensive consultation
with user groups.

 The Project consists of the following parts:
 Part A: Benxi
 1. Road Infrastructure: Construction of about three (3) kilometers (km) of new
secondary roads, reconstruction of about fourteen (14) km of trunk, secondary and
branch roads, and construction of a bridge of about eight hundred and twenty meters in
length.
 2. Road Maintenance: Rehabilitation of selected roads and provision of equipment for
regular and emergency maintenance.
 3. Traffic Safety and Traffic Management: Provision of traffic management equipment,
redesign of traffic intersections and lane separation between motorized vehicles (MVs)
and non-motorized vehicles (NMVs) on about eleven (11) km of arterial roads, and
provision of technical assistance for the annual supervision of safety performance on
selected intersections and arterials roads.
 4. Public Transport: Construction of about six (6) km of bus lane and installation of bus
bays, bus stop signs, information plates, bus shelters and one bus terminal.

 Part B: Fushun
 1. Road Infrastructure: Rehabilitation of existing main traffic corridor, including about
seven (7) kilometers of trunk road (including three (3) bridges).
 2. Road Maintenance: Rehabilitation of selected roads, provision of equipment for
regular and emergency maintenance, and installation of street lights.
 3. Traffic Safety and Traffic Management: Provision of traffic management equipment,
redesign of intersections and lane separation between MV and NMVs on about twenty
(20) km of arterial roads, provision of technical assistance for annual supervision of
safety performance of selected intersections and arterials roads.
 4. Public Transport: Construction of bus bays.

 Part C: Liaoyang
 1. Road Infrastructure: Construction of about seven (7) km of new roads, and upgrading
of about nineteen (19) km of roads including about six (6) km of branch roads and alley.
 2. Road Maintenance: Rehabilitation of selected roads, installation of street lights,
improvement of drainage on about fifteen (15) km of roads, and provision of maintenance
equipment.
 3. Traffic Safety and Traffic Management: Provision of traffic management equipment,
and provision of technical assistance for annual supervision of safety performance of
selected intersections and arterial roads.
 4. Public Transport: Construction of about three (3) km bus priority, bus turnarounds,
bus parking facilities, bus stop shelters, and signage.

 Part D: Jinzhou
 1. Road Infrastructure: Construction of about five (5) km of new roads and upgrading of
about thirty two (32) km of roads including about two (2) rail crossings.
 2. Road Maintenance: Rehabilitation of selected roads including drainage
improvements, installation and repair of street lights, and provision of road and facility
maintenance equipment.
 3. Traffic Safety and Traffic Management: Provision of traffic management equipment,
construction of about twenty three (23) km of lane separations between MVs and NMVs,
and provision of technical assistance for annual monitoring of safety performance of
selected intersections and arterial roads.
 4. Public Transport: Construction of about three (3) km bus priority lane, and about five
km of public transport corridor, interchange terminals and bus turnarounds.

 Part E: Panjin
 1. Road Infrastructure: Construction of about two (2) new roads, with a total length of
about three (3) km.
 2. Road Maintenance: Rehabilitation of selected roads including drainage, and
installation of street lights, as well as provision of road and facility maintenance
equipment.
 3. Traffic Safety and Traffic Management: Provision of traffic management equipment,
channelization at selected road intersections, signs and markings and lane separations
between MVs and NMVs on selected roads, and provision of technical assistance for
annual supervision of safety performance at selected intersections and arterial roads.
 4. Public Transport: Procurement of an Integrated Circuit (IC) card system and a
hundred and ten (110) buses.

 Part F: Dengta
 1. Road Infrastructure: Construction of two (2) new roads covering about two (2) km in
length, and upgrading of about fifteen (15) km of roads including about six (6) alleys.
 2. Road Maintenance: Rehabilitation of selected roads, and provision of road and
facility maintenance equipment.
 3. Traffic Safety and Traffic Management: Construct 274 road signs and 9,064 m2 road
markings, 8 traffic signals and 16 traffic lights.
 4. Public Transport: Construction of about ten (10) bus stops.
 Part G: Institutional Development
 Carrying out a program of institutional capacity building, including provision of training
and/or technical assistance with respect to: (a) the use of the transport planning models
developed under the Project; (b) preventative maintenance planning good practices; (c)
bus priority and road network planning; (d) traffic control, enforcement, and parking; (e)
implementation of the National Road Safety Law to improve traffic safety management,
monitoring and control systems; (f) public transport and road maintenance reforms; and
the development and implementation of a traffic safety audit program; (g) public
participation in the transport planning process during implementation of the Project; and
(h) supervision, monitoring and evaluation of the progress of Project implementation.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Liaoning Province, located in the northeast of China, is one of the heavy industrial bases
in the country. Fushun, Benxi, Jinzhou, Panjin and Liaoyang are important cities in the
Liaoning regional development plan, and are located along the two priority development
corridors that will receive financial and institutional support for infrastructure
development in the context of the Revitalization of Northeast Program.

 Detailed geographical locations of these project cities are given below.
 Geographical Location of the Cities

 Fushun        East longitude 12°39'-125°28', north latitude 41°41'-42°38'
 Benxi East longitude 123°34'-125°46', north latitude 41°49'-41°35'
 Jinzhou      East longitude 121°8', north latitude 41°7'
 Panjin        East longitude 123°31'-122°28', north latitude 40°40'-41°27'
 Liaoyang     East longitude 122°35'-123°41' north latitude 40°42'-41°36'
 Dengta       East longitude 122°54'-123°40 ' north latitude 41°13'-41°36'

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Zhefu Liu (EASCS)
   Mr Peishen Wang (EASCS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                           X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                    X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                               X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                         X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                             X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                        X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                 X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
From a social perspective, the project supports the improvement of the secondary and
feeder road networks; the development of public transport, pedestrian, and bicycle
facilities; and traffic safety measures. The pioneering public participation process
undertaken during preparation enables the project to address the transport-related needs
of vulnerable groups. It was also designed to be sensitive to gender issues by conducting
women-only focus groups.

  From an environmental perspective, the project facilitates environmentally desirable
planning and physical improvements in the urban transport networks of the six project
cities by supporting safety, the development of secondary roads that promote NMV
travel, pedestrian and bicycle ways and public transport. In addition, all project
investments have been designed to minimize any adverse impact on the physical
environment; none of the components encroach on any environmentally sensitive terrain.
 The objective of the EA is to determine the potential negative impacts of the project at
the project planning/design stage to ensure the development environmentally sound and
acceptable. The EA has also identified and assessed, quantitatively to the extent possible,
the project benefits and positive impacts to the natural and social environments.

 The Liaoning Academy of Environmental Sciences, a State Environmental Protection
Agency (SEPA) Class A - accredited agency for EIAs in China, jointly with local
environmental institutes, prepared Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) and
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for each project city, according to national
policies and regulations as well as Bank guidelines. The required two-step consultation
was conducted during the EIA preparation process. These documents were disclosed
locally and in Washington, D.C., in January 2006. The final EIA reports were furnished
to the Bank in mid-March 2006.

  Project resettlement impacts include permanent land acquisition, residential house
demolition, demolition of buildings belonging to enterprises and public institutions,
demolition of shops, infrastructure and ground attachments. These impacts will be
scattered in 12 districts/counties: Baita, Wensheng, and Taizihe districts of Liaoyang city;
Linghe, Guta, and Lingnanxin districts of Jinzhou; Xinglongtai, and Shuangtaizi districts
of Panjin; Xihu, Pingshan, and Mingshan districts of Benxi; Shuncheng district of
Fushun; and two streets of Dengta. The project will affect 4,994 households and 677
enterprises and shops, and will affect 31,547 people in all. The collective land acquired
is currently being used primarily for housing and a very limited amount of farm land will
be acquired.

 During project restructuring in 2011, additional activities are proposed from Fushun and
Liaoyang cities using the loan savings. The newly proposed activities are road
rehabilitation within the right-of-way of existing urban streets, which are Category B type
of activities and represent lower environmental and social impacts than the existing
project (which was classified as Category A). The main environmental concerns of the
newly proposed activities are mostly construction related (i.e. disturbance of traffic and
public/business accessibility, traffic safety, construction nuisance of noise and dust,
construction wastewater and solid waste management, etc.), which are well known site-
specific impacts and can be readily managed and mitigated through good construction
management. There is no land acquisition and resettlement involved for these newly
proposed road rehabilitation activities.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Project components will potentially cause a variety of short-term construction and longer-
term operational impacts. A series of mitigation measures have been planned to reduce
the impacts to acceptable levels during construction and operation. Mitigation
monitoring procedures have been established and the organizations responsible for
monitoring have been designated.
 Construction Phase. Project components could cause short-term impacts, such as dust,
noise, traffic, soil erosion, workers# safety, and solid wastes from construction activities,
community activities and public health issues. Various measures planned to reduce them
to acceptable levels have been described in the EIA and the EMP, including restrictions
on night-time construction, mandating the use of low-noise machinery and construction
methods, and the development of detailed plans for the disposal of soil and waste
disposal.

 Operation Phase. Project impacts on air quality are limited and pollutant concentrations
comply with applicable standards. The primary negative impact of the project is
predicted to be higher than standard noise levels at a selection of identified locations.
However, some sensitive receptors in project locations have baseline noise levels higher
than standard. In other locations, the project is expected to lower noise levels through
eased congestion and improved road quality. The impact of the project on noise will be
most significant in green field sites and alleys, where there is no motor vehicle traffic at
present.

 During implementation noise levels at affected sensitive receptors will be monitored,
and residents and other affected people will be consulted on the actual noise impact with
regard to their life and/or work. The results of this monitoring and consultation will serve
to identify locations where window ventilation or air conditioners will be installed to
mitigate noise impact. Details of all mitigation measures and the responsible agencies for
their implementation and supervision are provided in the EMP.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Alternatives were considered for each component during the preparation of the feasibility
studies. As has been described in the PAD, this resulted in enlarging the scope of the
secondary road rehabilitation component, and focusing on reducing existing transport
congestion on the road infrastructure component. Most of the project investment focuses
on reconstruction, rehabilitation, and traffic management of existing road construction.
Choice of roads was based on a combination of a formal technical analysis based on
overall traffic levels and the needs of bicyclists and pedestrians; and the preferences of
the public expressed in the public consultation process. In Fushun, the results of bicycle
user survey provided additional insights with regard to traffic management.

 All projects that required significant stand-alone investment were subject to rigorous
alternatives analysis including an effort to minimize involuntary resettlement and
negative environmental impacts. For example, the red line for Xinggong Road was
modified to minimize resettlement impacts in Panjin. Similarly, an analysis of
alternatives considered for the proposed Hu Bin Road in Panjin led to a modification of
the original design to avoid encroachment in a neighborhood lake. Details of these and
related analyses are in the component RAPs, Chapter 6 of the consolidated EA report and
are summarized in the PAD.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
LUCRPO is very familiar with Bank safeguard policies (as the proposed project would be
the fifth Bank-financed project managed by LUCRPO) and Liaoning has a good track
record of implementing resettlement consistent with Bank guidelines. A recently
completed independent assessment of resettlement activities conducted as part of the just
completed Liaoning Urban Transport Project found that resettlement had been properly
implemented in compliance with Bank policies.

 Environment

  LUCRPO will manage the EMP implementation. The staff responsible for EMP
implementation at LURCPO and the city PMOs will be trained on environmental
regulations and their application, mitigation measures, public consultations,
environmental monitoring and producing progress reports. An environmental specialist
from the supervisory consultant team will ensure that construction is done in an
environmentally sound manner.

  Supervision and Reporting. The Bank will supervise project related environmental
issues twice a year. Semi-annual progress reports from LUCRPO will include a
section/chapter on EMP implementation. During project implementation, an annual
report on the EMP implementation will be furnished to the Bank by March 31 of each
year, along with any revisions proposed to the EMP to achieve its objectives.

 Training Requirements. To ensure smooth EMP implementation, staff will be trained
on environmental issues, including appropriate responses to accidents. The training
program will covers issues such as environmental laws and regulations, standards,
project-related environmental science and environmental management.

 Funding Arrangements and Schedule of Implementation. Each city#s EMP includes a
budget that the city has formally committed to. The costs of mitigating the effects from
construction will be covered in the cost of facilities. Monitoring of air and water quality,
noise, worker health, and site safety/hygiene will be conducted by local environmental
monitoring units or consultants, and financed from counterpart funds.

 Monitoring. The EMP lists environmental performance indicators, such as air and water
quality, noise levels, construction sites and camps, as well as details on where and when
they will be monitored, and the agencies responsible for reviewing them. LURCPO will
be responsible for reporting on the environmental monitoring.

 Furthermore, a monitoring and consultation program has been developed to monitor
actual noise impacts during operation. The actual indoor noise levels at the affected
sensitive receptors will be measured. Residents and other affected people will be
consulted on the impact of the noise on their lives. The monitoring and consultation will
serve as the basis for implementation of noise mitigation.
 For the newly proposed road rehabilitation activities in Fushun and Liaoyang, EIA
documents have been prepared to screen the potential impacts, and EMPs have been
prepared based on the existing EMPs. The EMPs will continue the environmental
management arrangements of the existing project, and adequately address the potential
environmental and social impacts including proper traffic diversion, rational construction
schedule and method arrangement, provision of temporary access to public and roadside
stores, adequate traffic safety measures, adequate measures to mitigate construction
nuisance of noise and dust, proper disposal of construction waste, information disclose,
consultation and grievance taking measures etc. The EMP measures will be incorporated
into the bidding document and contract for implementation.

 Resettlement

 Resettlement Planning. The project includes six cities. Individual RAPs were prepared
for each project city in Chinese by following local policies and regulations, as well as
Bank#s policy on Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12. A summary RAP was prepared in
both English and Chinese based on guidelines provided by the Bank.

 Resettlement Implementation Capacity. LUCRPO will take the lead to ensure
compliance with Bank resettlement policies. At the city level, Leading Groups, Project
Management Offices, and Project Implementation Units have been established and
resettlement officials are assigned in each of the municipal PMO.

 Resettlement Monitoring. Internal and external monitoring has been designed as part of
the project resettlement management. The project resettlement offices will carry out
internal monitoring of the resettlement implementation. The monitoring procedures,
content, staffing, responsibility, timeframe and reporting have been detailed in the RAPs.
An external monitor has been selected for independent monitoring of the RAP
implementation. Independent monitoring will cover physical progress of RAP
implementation, including compensation payment, allocation of residential sites,
farmland allocation, and restoration of infrastructure.The independent monitor will also
review the public consultation process, operation of the resettlement project offices,
grievance redress mechanisms and restoration of livelihood of the affected farmers.
Independent monitoring will be conducted twice a year during the project implementation
period.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The PAD provides details on the public participation processes conducted both for
project design, and under the EIA and resettlement planning processes.

 Public Participation in Project Design

 A major achievement of this project has been the successful development of a
meaningful public participation process that influenced project designs. Public
participation was integrated into the project cycle and carried out in three phases: (a)
Phase I (project design and feasibility stage), participation was designed to identify key
issues of concern to the public; (b) Phase II (post appraisal stage), when solutions were
presented to the public for review and comments; and (c) Phase III (project
implementation stage), during which the satisfaction level of the public with project
implementation will be ascertained.

 Public Consultation during Environmental Impact Assessment and Resettlement
Planning

 Public Consultation during EIA Process. Two rounds of public consultation were
carried out during the EA: the first round during the preparation of EA terms of reference
(TOR), between August to November, 2005; and the second round at the draft EA report
stage in early January, 2006 in the six project cities/county town. The primary technique
used in public consultation was public opinion survey through questionnaires and public
meetings, or both combined. This was supplemented by interest group interviews such as
temple/mosque communities, cultural properties management, and relevant agencies.
Consultation was focused primarily on the project areas, and the people consulted
included mainly those who will be affected directly by the project. Relevant government
and non-government organizations, and experts from academic institutions on various
environmental and socio-economic issues, have also been consulted. In total, 599
individuals responded to the questionnaire survey in the first round of consultation, and
about 438 person-times have participated in the second round of consultation.

 The draft EIA reports were released on January 25, 2005 on the Liaoning Academy of
Environmental Sciences website. The printed city EIA reports were distributed during
the week of February 6, 2006 to the city PMOs and/or local environmental protection
bureaus for public review.

 Information about the project and the process of the EIA was published in the local
media through advertisements or public notices. These include brief announcements of
project content, the process of environmental impact assessment, the contact persons and
their telephone numbers for the public to express their concerns or opinions on the EIA.
The media disclosure is summarized in the table below.

 Benxi Fushun Liaoyang         Panjin Jinzhou
 Date December 15, 2006 January 12, 2006              January 16, 2006        November 30,
2005 January 13, 2006
 Media         Benxi Daily Fushun Daily Liaoyang Daily                Panjin Daily
       Jinzhou Daily
 Content       Brief description; major environmental impacts, benefits, invitation for
public opinions         Brief description; major impacts, invitation for public opinions
       Brief description; major impacts, invitation for public opinions       Brief
description; major impacts, invitation for public opinions Brief description; major
impacts, invitation for public opinions
 Contact Persons        City PMO officials PMO official PMO officials PMO officials
       EA team
 Public Consultation Process during Resettlement Planning. The project RAPs have
been prepared after consultation with the affected persons, as detailed in the tables below:

 Public Participation Process



 Disclosure Procedure for Resettlement
 Topic/documents      Disclosure language and media        Disclosure Period
       Remarks
 Liaoyang      Jinzhou        Panjin Fushun Dengta Benxi
 Project introduction Chinese; municipal radio stations and TV stations October 2005
       2005.7 2005.9 2005.12          2005.10       2005.12
 General introduction of project land acquisition Chinese; municipal radio stations
and TV stations               2005.10        2005.10       2005.12        2005.11
       2005.12
 Municipal policies of land acquisition and house demolition       Chinese; municipal
web sites      November 2005          2005.12       2005.12        2005.12
       2005.12        2005.12
 Resettlement plan report disclosure Chinese; municipal radio stations and TV stations,
newspaper      Liaoyang Daily
 2006. 1.12 Jinzhou Daily
 2006. 1.13 Panjin
 Daily 2006. 1.11     Fushun Daily 2006 1.25        Liaoyang
 Daily 2006 1.12      Benxi Daily, 2006.
 1.11 Residents committee
 PMO, library PMO, library PMO PMO PMO, library Urban infrastructure
construction office
 Demolition department
 Resettlement plan booklets Chinese; hand out to displaced persons        After the Bank
approval


 A mechanism has been designed for grievance redress under each of the project
components. All grievances can be filed in both written and verbal forms. The redress
channel lies within the project management and government systems. Recording
requirements and timeframe have been established for grievance resolution. This
mechanism will be disclosed as part of the resettlement information booklet (RIB).

 The project has obtained a waiver from Bank Management with regards to the current
BP 4.01 requirement relating to translations of EIA reports. Chinese language EIA and
RAP reports have been prepared for project activities proposed in each city; these have
been reviewed and disclosed separately in each project city and in the Bank Infoshop and
in the Bank Beijing Office Website. In addition, a Consolidated EIA and EMP for the
project covering all cities, and a Summary RAP for the entire project, have been prepared
in English and disclosed. These documents include detailed findings and
recommendations, and address in sufficient depth and detail all the critical issues and data
needed to support their findings and recommendations. Bank Management is satisfied
that on the basis of staff review of these documents, as well as a review of the local
language reports by qualified country office staff, that the Bank has complied with the
review obligations set out in OP 4.01 without the need to resort to translate all of the
detailed city specific reports into English. In addition, Bank management is satisfied that
the Bank would meet the disclosure objectives set out in the policy through disclosure of
the above English language documents, together with the disclosure of city specific EIAs,
EMPs and RAPs in the Chinese language.

 For the newly proposed road rehabilitation activities in Fushun and Liaoyang, public
consultations were conducted during EA preparation in line with OP4.01. The final EA
documents have been locally disclosed in Fushun and Liaoyang, and have been sent for
disclosure to Infoshop.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 01/31/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             01/25/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              02/06/2006
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                              04/10/2006
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 01/25/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             01/27/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              02/03/2006
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                 Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Gerald Paul Ollivier              09/05/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Peishen Wang                      09/05/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Zhefu Liu                         09/05/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan   09/06/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez          09/05/2011
  Comments:
