                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC6056


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/07/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: China                               Project ID: P123323
Project Name: Ningbo Municipal Solid Waste Minimization and Recycling Project
Task Team Leader: Jian Xie
GEF Focal Area: P-Persistent Organic         Global Supplemental ID: P126823
Pollutants
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 17,        Estimated Board Date: April 30, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: EASCS                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Solid waste management (85%);Public administration- Water, sanitation and
flood protection (15%)
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (85%);Municipal governance
and institution building (10%);Environmental policies and institutions (5%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           80.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                         80.00
        Financing Gap                                                     0.00
                                                                         80.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed Project Development Objective is to assist selected districts in Ningbo
Municipality to reduce the proportion of municipal solid wastes disposed at landfill or
incineration through waste minimization, source separation, recycling and institutional
strengthening.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
Major outstanding issues in Municipal Solid Waste management in Ningbo City, as identified by
the municipal government and the Bank mission, include: (i) lack of source separation and
collection: (ii) inadequate waste minimization and utilization of recyclable materials; (iii) poor
environmental management in e-waste processing; and (iv) needed institutional reforms. The
proposed project aims to address these issues and it includes the following components.
 Component 1: Waste Reduction through Source Separation
 1.1 Community-based Waste Separation
 #      Purchase of separated storage containers and other equipment needed for source
separation at household and neighborhood levels ;
 #      Creation of a performance-based reward system which will reward communities and
households based on their performance in waste separation.
 1.2 Separated Transportation
 #      Design of a system and implement technologies for separated waste types that will
increase efficiency of existing system operations;
 #      Purchase or retrofit of Collection/transfer vehicles dedicated to hauling separated waste
streams.
 1.3 Resource Separation and Extraction
 #      Construction of sorting facilities to separate and sort separated dry and wet waste into
recyclable resources before final disposal.

 Component 2: Materials Recycling
 2.1 Recyclable Materials Processing and Trading Center
 #      Construction of a new processing, packaging and trading facility for further sorting and
processing recyclable materials separated by communities;
 #      Development of an integrated recycling network with additional recycling sites which
will further align informal and formal recycling operations;
 #      Development of a digital information management system for recyclable material
processing and trading.
 2.2 Development of E-waste processing and environmental management facilities. The e-
waste processing center will only conducting dismantling and further transport the segregated
wastes to existing landfills and incinerators. Hazardous waste will be sent to an existing
company.
 #      Enhanced e-waste processing facilities through private sector participation;
 #      Improved environmental pollution treatment facilities for e-waste processing.

  Component 3: Institutional Reforms and Technology Innovations
  The following activities have been discussed with the Municipal PMO and will be further
identified during the preparation.
  #     Development of a sustainable long-term policy and strategy for comprehensive solid
waste management in Ningbo Municipality, including stakeholder participation in waste
separation, incentives, etc.
  #     Development of a Comprehensive integrated waste management plan with investment
targets and goals of waste reduction from landfill
  #     Development of regulations for solid waste management, in general, and for waste
recycling that poses significant environmental risks, in particular
  #     Study and design of a performance-based reward system and other programs for public
awareness-raising and community participation for waste separation
  #     Household and community performance monitoring and evaluation
  #     Market assessment for recyclable materials and improvement of the business
environment for recycling and resource recovery
 #     Review and enhancement of markets for bio-fuel and compost
 #     Development of a Research, Knowledge-sharing and Education Center that will extract
additional value from capital investments made and linking to education, research and
development and technology certification
 #     Training and study tours

 There will no linked project according to the three criteria in para. 4 in OP 4.12.

D. Project location (if known)
Ningbo Municipality is an important port city on the southeastern coast of China, about 300 km
south of Shanghai. It comprises six central urban districts (Haishu, Jiangdong, Jiangbei,
Yingzhou, Beilun, and Zhenhai Districts) within the boundary of Ningbo City which is the
proposed project area, three county-level cities (Cixi City, Yuyao City and Fenghua City) and
two counties (Xiangshan and Ninghai). In 2009, Ningbo City along had an urban population of
approximately 2.22 million, and a rural population of approximately 1.43 million. For the last
five years, Ningbo#s GDP has grown at an annual rate of 14%. In 2009, the municipality#s GDP
was over RMB 65,000 per capita (about US$10,000), much higher than the national average of
$3,670.

  The city has placed a special emphasis on the collection and treatment of industrial, food, and
medical waste, and could be considered advanced in China in this regard. Ningbo City produced
1.19 million tons of total MSW in 2009. So far there are 2 incineration facilities in operation
with designed processing capacity of 1,600 tons per day and 2 sanitary landfill facilities with
design capacity of 1,300 tons per day, serving Ningbo City. In addition, there are an incinerator
specialized for medical wastes with daily treatment capacity of 24 tons, a treatment center
specialized for industrial waste and hazardous waste, and a bio-fuel facility for food waste from
restaurants. The treatment rate of collected domestic waste from central city districts is 100%. In
2008, the rate of restaurant waste collected and transported had reached 81%. According to the
information provided, the landfill operation has been evaluated by the Ministry of Housing and
Urban and Rural Development as Class I because of good performance. The proposed project
will not invest in the existing landfill and incineration facilities but minimizing the wastes
transported to some of those facilities through waste separation and recycling.

 With the steady growth of Ningbo MSW, insufficiency of processing capacity is becoming a
severe problem. Facilities for daily garbage disposal can only satisfy the basic domestic waste
disposal demand. Landfill operation is overloaded and the two waste incineration plants are also
approaching their design capacity. According to the forecast from #Ningbo 12th Five-Year
Waste Disposal Facility Construction Plan#, the central city will generate 1.443 million tons of
waste by 2015, with an expected shortage of processing capacity of 1000 ton/day. Although the
rapid increase in waste generation as projected under the business-as-usual scenario in the Five
Year Plan may be questionable, the important point of a capacity shortfall is made. The new
Five-Year Plan puts an emphasis on waste separation and minimization through community
participation, material recycling as well as environmental management of recyclable material
processing. These practices will be the key to the city#s endeavor of minimizing solid waste
disposal, reducing raw material exploitation, and protecting public health and natural
environment.
 Component 1 will be implemented in Haishu District only. Component 2 will cover Haishu and
other central urban districts (namely Jiangdong, Jiangbei, Yingzhou, Beilun and Zhenhai) of
Ningbo Municipality for recyclable material collection and processing.

 The proposed project will not invest in landfill and incineration facilities, but will minimize
MSW transported to those facilities through waste separation and recycling. Residential waste
separation and recycling will be the main focus of the project. The project may consider
inclusion of pilot composting or bio fuel generation demonstrations, subject to agreement with
the Ningbo Municipality.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
At the municipal level, the existing World Bank-financed Project Management Office of Ningbo
Municipality (NMPMO), which has rich experience with the responsibility for the preparation
and implementation of three ongoing Bank lending projects, has been designated as responsible
for coordinating the preparation and subsequent implementation of the proposed project.
However some implementing agencies (namely participating district governments and the
entities responsible for waste transportation and treatment and material recycling) are new to the
Bank project and the related Bank requirement and safeguard policies.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Chongwu Sun (EASCS)
   Mr Chaogang Wang (SDV)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes         No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
    A preliminary environmental screening of proposed project components carried out by the
TT during the identification mission indicated that most potential issue will be associated with
Components 1 and 2, that is Community-based Waste Separation, Recyclable Materials
Processing Center and E-Waste Processing and Environmental Management. Likely
environmental issues during construction of these facilities will be of short duration and
localized. However, siting issues and long term operational impacts need to be analyzed
carefully in the EA process. Most of the potential issues are well known and manageable with
good engineering practices during construction and operation. Based on the understanding of
project investment directly related environmental issues through environmental screening as well
as impression of well performed and managed project associated facilities, i.e., existing landfill,
incineration, and hazardous waste disposal facilities, from site visits and meeting/discussion with
the operators, a Category B is proposed for the project.

     Proposed EA instrument. With regard to EA instrument and documentation, an EA and
EMP document will be prepared in accordance with China#s Environmental Impact Assessment
Law and other relevant national policies/regulations and the Bank#s safeguard
policies/requirements. The EA process will follow the necessary steps such as environmental
screening, risk assessment, public consultation, and information disclosure, etc.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                            Yes          No         TBD
     A due diligence review of three associated facilities - one landfill site, one incinerator, and
one existing hazardous waste disposal facility - will be carried out as part of the EIA and EMP
process based upon Chinese requirements and applicable World Bank Group EHS Guidelines.
This due diligence will not be limited to certifying compliance with of local environmental
legislation , and pollution standards for all facilities, but also include the information/data from
monitoring and operation records, evaluation of performance and management, environmental
effectsimplications, and results of environmental supervision and management by local
environmental authority, etc. If warranted, remedial measures will be integrated into the EMP.

    The scope of the EA and EMP will also need to cover additional need for parking space,
which might be considerable as the project will purchase many waste transfer vehicles.

      Relevant social impacts related to the project within the area of influence of the project
including, if applicable, potential impacts of the project on the livelihood of poor waste pickers
that derive part of their livelihood from these areas.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                       X
    Most facilities will be located in well developed urban areas. Based on the information
provided by NMPMO and the initial screening by the TT, there are no natural habitats found in
the proposed project areas.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                X
    The project will not finance any activities related to forests, and the proposed project
components are not located in forest areas.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                           X
    The proposed project will not finance procurement of pesticides, so that this policy is not
triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                        X
    Based on current information available, there are no any physical cultural relics found in
project areas. In the EA process, related information will be checked and confirmed by relevant
authorities. Chance find procedures will be prepared and included in construction contracts.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                     X
    There are no ethnic minority communities which possess the characteristics as defined in OP
4.10 found within Ningbo municipality based on the social screening results carried out by social
development specialist in the team. Therefore the proposed project will not trigger the policy.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                  X
    The project will include new construction of sorting facilities for wet waste and sorting
center for dry waste, waste transfer stations, recyclable materials processing and trading center
and e-waste processing facility. However, the sites of these new constructions have not been
defined but it seems that involuntary land acquisition will not be avoidable. In such case, OP
4.12 will be applied to this project and the appropriate instruments will be prepared along with
the project preparation. Most likely, Resettlement Action Plans will be prepared for all known
project sites at appraisal; an RPF will be prepared if specific sites are not identified before
appraisal.

     The project will likely build some facilities on land that has already been acquired. A due
diligence review of land acquisition will be carried out in the case of land acquisition was
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes       No            TBD
conducted within two years before project identification in any existing sites or at the sites for
new construction. If the land acquisition is not in compliance with Chinese laws and regulations
as well as the Bank Policy on Involuntary Resettlement, remedial measures will be taken. The
project will also use some existing waste transfer stations. Retroactive review of land acquisition
will be carried out in the case of land acquisition was conducted within two years before project
identification in any existing sites or at the sites for new construction.

      The project will not invest in landfills and incinerators but will utilize these existing
facilities. Analysis of resettlement linkage will be carried out for these facilities and documented
in the project appraisal documents and ISDS at PAD stage.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                          X
    The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
policy. No action is required under this policy.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                     X
    There are no known project components involving international waterways as defined under
the policy. No action is required under this policy.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                              X
    There are no known project components involving in disputed areas as defined under the
policy. No action is required under this policy.


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 07/11/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   EA/EMP and social assessment and RAP will be completed by October before appraisal.




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Mr Jian Xie                          05/12/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan   06/02/2011
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez          05/23/2011
   Comments:
