                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                           Report No.: AC6507


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/09/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: China                              Project ID: P125458
Project Name: China: Yan'an Water Supply Project
Task Team Leader: Sing Cho
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 5,       Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: EASCS                        Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                            Loan
Sector: Water supply (80%);Sub-national government administration (20%)
Theme: Urban services and housing for the poor (80%);Municipal governance and
institution building (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):         60.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                    95.00
                                                                     95.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The development objective of the proposed project is to increase the water supply for Yan'an city
in a sustainable manner, and improve management of the city's water systems.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The Bank supported project will have three interrelated components supporting the project
development objective: (i) Water Diversion pipeline and pumping station and Treatment
Facilities; (ii) Institutional Development and Water Supply Operation Improvement; and (iii)
Project Management and Implementation Support. Brief preliminary description of the
components is as follows.

 Component 1: Water Diversion Works and Treatment Facilities (Approx. US$147 million of
which Bank loan of US$55 million). This includes: (a) water conveyance works from Gaojiawan
WTP in Yanchuan County to Dongchuan WTP conveying 13 Mm3/year of water to Yan#an city;
(b) Three online pumping stations located at Gaojiawan, Xuejia-gou and Gaojia-geda with
capacities of 1.25 m3/sec; (c) two treatment plants - one a pretreatment plant at Gaojiawan and
another full treatment plant at Dongchuan; (d) a regulating reservoir at Kangjiagou; (e) a
supervisory control and data acquisition system (SCADA) for the water transfer scheme
operation.

 Component 2: Institutional Development and Water Supply Operation Improvement (Approx.
US$5 million of which Bank loan of US$2 million). The objective of this component is to
provide support for: (a) the implementation of an integrated water management system in
Yan#an municipality, including all water sources, watershed management, and water pollution
control; (b) the development of a decision-support system (DSS) for the operations of the water
supply system; (c) a water demand management program (water pricing, water conservation,
reduction of unaccounted-for water, wastewater reuse and other efficiency improvements).

 Component 3: Project Management and Implementation Support (Approx. US$3 million fully
funded by the Bank loan). This component covers: (a) project management (including M&E);
and (b) consultancy services for engineering design review and construction supervision, and
supervision of the implementation of environmental assessment, and resettlement action plan.

D. Project location (if known)
The project will be located in Yanchuan County and Baota District, Yan#an Municipality, which
is in the northern part of Shaanxi Province. Yan#an is situated on the loess plateau featuring
ravines crisscrossing over Yan#an. The main uses of land that will be acquired include idle land,
woods, vegetable land, and orchards. To minimize land acquisition, most of the water pipeline
will be laid along the riverbed of Yanhe River and existing roads. The project beneficiary areas
are in the Yan#an city, namely, Baota District.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Shaanxi Province has several Bank-financed projects under implementation. Yan#an
Municipality has experience in implementing Bank financed projects, such as the Loess Plateau
Project, and some staff are familiar with Bank policy requirements and procedures. The
government has established a Project Leading Group at municipal level to oversee and
coordinate the preparation and implementation of the Project. This Leading Group is chaired by
a Vice Mayor assisted by officials from a number of governmental agencies. In addition Yan#an
has established a project management office (PMO) to take overall responsibility for project
preparation. For project preparation, the PMO has engaged Shaanxi Water Environment
Engineering, Investigation and Design Institute (SWEEIDI) for the feasibility study, and
engaged Shaanxi Hydropower Investigation, Design & Research Institute (SHIDRI) to undertake
the environmental assessment. The institute (SWEEIDI) has registered as Grade B level of EA
institute in China with no experience to prepare Bank-financed project, and the PMO has hired
an EA consultant with Bank-financed project experience. The PMO also hired Shaanxi Academy
of Social Science as the Social consultant to assist their social related work during project
preparation. The Academy has sound experience in working on Social Safeguards issues with
Bank-Financed project, especially with transport sector. Yan#an PMO will receive necessary
training from the Bank on safeguard polices at an early stage of project preparation. Necessary
capacity building will be integrated into the project.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Yiren Feng (EASCS)
   Mr Jun Zeng (EASCS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes         No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                              X
    The Bank financed component includes water conveyance works from the Gaojiawan WTP
in Yanchuan County to the Dongchuan WTP including the two WTPs, three booster pump
stations, a regulation reservoir (Kanjiagou), conveyance pipes. The Government financed
component includes advanced works from the diversion point (intake) at Wangjiaqu to
Gaojiawan WTP (including three booster pump stations, Yangjiashan tunnel, limited conveyance
pipes and a regulating reservoir(Baishugua)), and necessary works to connect Dongchuan WTP
with the existing water supply network and new service areas, will be financed entirely by the
government.

     The project is classified as Category A project, given the diversion and transfer of water
from the Yellow river, and the large footprint of the project. An Environmental Assessment
covering both Bank and government financed components will be prepared for the proposed
activities, and an EMP for all components will be prepared to prevent, minimize and mitigate
adverse environmental impacts and enhance positive impacts. An Executive Summary will be
prepared for submission to the Board.

      An initial EIA Report for the Project was provided to the Bank team during the
identification mission. The EIA Report was prepared by Shaanxi Hydropower Investigation,
Design & Research Institute (SHIDRI) in Sept 2009. The mission reviewed the EIA Report for
the Project, and held discussions with the Yan#an PMO and its EIA consultant (SHIDRI). It was
found that the EIA report was basically well prepared. It identifies the key environmental
concerns of the project and developes mitigation measures. However, the presentation, format
and context of the EIA are different from the Bank#s EA requirements (the key aspects for
improvement are listed at below paragraph). PMO with the assistance from their EIA consultant
started to conduct the second stage public consultation from June 24, 2011 to meet the Bank#s
requirements on public consultation.

    To meet the Bank#s EA requirements, the PMO and SHIDRI need to prepare an EIA
Report, one stand-alone EMP, and EA Summary. The following key aspects of the EA
documents will be supplemented or further strengthened based on the review of the EIA already
completed by the client:
    # a separate chapter for alternative analysis
    # more baseline information,
    # preparation of stand-alone EMP,
    # public consultation and information disclosure,
    # more specific soil and water conservation measures,
    # resettlement and social impacts assessment,
    # cumulative impacts analysis,
    # special attention will be paid to the impacts of water diversion from the Yellow river.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes         No           TBD
     Given that the bidding process for part of the 19.2 km government-funded work (11.36 km
long Yanjiashan Tunnel), it will be ensured that the implementation of works for this section will
be done with the same standards/requirements specified in the EMP of the revised EA,
specifically for the following aspects:

     During the revision of EIA and preparation of EMP, if there are any different additional
mitigation measures requirements are identified, these requirements will be included into the
bidding documents and contracts together with the existing mitigation measures as contract
variations;

      A special clause will be included into the contracts as contract variations, that is, the
contractors must comply with all the environmental safeguard requirements of revised EIA/EMP.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                   X
     According to the project proposal, the draft EIA conducted by the SHIDRI, and the site visits
and the initial screening conducted by the project team, the proposed project locates mainly
along the existing road and Yanhe River (dry waterbed, no water flow for many years), and have
intensive agricultural and other production activities. The areas of influence of the project will
not convert, degrade or restore any natural habitats or critical natural habitats from Wanjiaqu raw
water intake to Dongchuan WTP. However, the project will divert raw water from Wanjiaqu
water intake of the Yellow River, and as such the significance of the potential impacts on aquatic
habitats in Yellow River, if any, is yet to be confirmed. The screening process will be
undertaken for all project components, including their ancillary aspects. If any of them are likely
to cause significant conversion/degradation to natural habitats, suitable mitigation measures and
offset mechanisms will be included in the EIA and EMP.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                 X
     The project will not finance activities that would involve conversion or degradation of
critical forest areas or related critical natural habitats as defined under the policy.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                            X
     The project will not pro cure any pesticides nor will any use of pesticides result from the
project.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                             X
     The policy is not triggered as the screening confirmed that the project will not affect any
above-ground artifacts with archaeological, paleontological, historical, religious or unique
natural values. However, the policy will be applied if any family or household graves are to be
affected, and the relocation costs and the appropriate relocation process in light of
customs/religions shall be taken into account during project preparation.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                      X
     The Social Specialist visited the project area to conduct a screening to determine whether
ethnic minority peoples are present in, or have collective attachment to, the project area. The
project will be constructed within Baota District and Yanchuan County of Yan#an Municipality.
During the site visit, no ethnic minority community has been identified within the project area.
Census data also shows that within its more than 2 million populations, some 2000 people are
ethnic minority people (0.1%), and these people are scattered within Yan#an Municipality. The
team also discussed the issue with Yan#an Municipal Government, and they confirmed that there
is no ethnical minority community in the project area. Based on above information, the Social
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes        No         TBD
Specialist concludes that no ethnic minority communities are present in, or have collective
attachment to the project area. Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
    According to the project proposal, 782 mu (or 52 ha) of land will be acquired for the project
construction, and 2218 mu (or 148 ha) of land will be temporally occupied during the
construction period. This land is consisted of vegetable land, dry land, woods, unused land and
orchards. There are also a few households need to be relocated. Detailed resettlement inventory
survey will be conducted during the project preparation.

     A complementary project from the yellow river water intake to the Gaojiawan WTP will be
constructed financed by the Government. The construction of the 19.6 Km line, one regulating
reservoir and pump stations are an integral part of the projectand all related resettlement
practices will be in line with the Bank#s OP4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.

     Based on above mentioned information, the team concluded the Bank#s OP 4.12 on
Involuntary Resettlement is triggered for the project, and a Resettlement Action Plan will be
prepared in both Chinese and English to address the resettlement impact caused by the project,
including component financed by the Bank and the government. The plan should cover
resettlement practices caused by project construction, including conveyance pipes, regulating
reservoirs, Water Treatment Plant, booster pump stations, access roads, borrow pits, spoil
disposal sites and Reservoir protection zones.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                          X
    The project will finance construction of a regulating dam/reservoir (Kangjiagou, 42m high
earthfill dam). One new dam # Baishugua dam (59m high earthfill dam) is also part of the
advanced work (to be financed entirely by the government funds). In addition, two existing
reservoirs/dams - Wangyao (55m high earthfill dam) and Hongzhuang (50.2m high earthfill
dam) supply water to the existing service areas of Yan#an city. The OP 4.37 is therefore
triggered. An independent panel of dam safety experts (POE) will be established by Yan#an
PMO in September, 2011, and a special section on dam safety will be included in the project
feasibility study report. Further, dam safety plans will be prepared for the new dams in due
course, and The first dam safety review report by the POE will be prepared by appraisal.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                 X
    Not applicable.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                          X
    Not applicable.


Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 10/31/2011
B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   EA summary/EA/EMP/RAP/Dam Safety Review Report final draft reports by October 17,
   2011 and final reports by October 31, 2011.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Sing Cho                                                    08/25/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan                             09/06/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez                                    09/05/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
