                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC6329


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/06/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: China                               Project ID: P124978
Project Name: Changzhi Sustainable Urban Transport Project
Task Team Leader: Zhi Liu
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 6,       Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: EASCS                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: General transportation sector (100%)
Theme: Other urban development (60%);Municipal governance and institution building
(40%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):          100.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                    100.00
                                                                    100.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The Proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve transport mobility in the
central city of Changzhi in a safe, sustainable, and efficient manner for all users.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project includes five integrated components, which are, briefly:

  Component 1: Integrated Corridor Improvement.
  The first and most significant component of the project will be the development of
demonstration #integrated corridors#, which will serve as models for holistic transport
infrastructure and service improvements. More specifically, these improvements will: (a)
increase corridor capacity (passengers moved per km per hour); (b) improve the level of public
transport service and infrastructure; (c) improve the quality, safety, and accessibility of non-
motorized transport (NMT) infrastructure and services; (d) improve traffic safety; and (e)
directly support capacity building within the Municipal Government of Changzhi (MGC) ,
which in turn will support scalability of integrated transport system development.
 Based on congestion levels, traffic volumes, accident rates and physical width, four main
corridors have been identified for integrated improvement: Yingxiong Rd. (11.56 km), Chengxi
Rd. (5.04 km), Taihang St. (14.86 km), and Fuhou St. (6.61 km), totaling 38 kilometers. Specific
investments in these corridors may include: traffic channelization, bus priority planning and
infrastructure, improved pedestrian and cycling facilities, implementation of a new area traffic
control system, improved street light, bus stop improvements, improved parking management,
and related measures.

 Component 2: Intelligent Urban Transport Management System. To meet current traffic
management and data collection deficiencies, the project plans to include area traffic control
(ATC) system and ancillary Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) improvements. The
proposed ATC system would replace, at a minimum, all 32 existing signals in the city over a
period of two years. The goals of the improved ATC and ITS system would be to: (a) reduce the
number of accidents at junctions (especially NMT accidents); (b) more effectively manage
congestion and traffic flows throughout the city (especially on the demonstration Integrated
Corridors); (c) give priority to buses; d) collect data for more effective transport planning and
management; and (e) provide timely traffic and transit information to travelers.

 Component 3: Public Transit Supporting Infrastructure. The project will include three types of
public transit infrastructure: transit hubs, terminals, and depots. These facilities would improve
the capacity and efficiency of the transit network and accommodate the growing number of buses
required to support Changzhi#s growing demand. During the pre-feasibility study, many
candidate locations have been identified, including a transit hub at Ba#yi Square and a bus depot
at Shijiazhuang. The final selection of locations will be made after completion of the pre-
feasibility study.

  Component 4: Comprehensive Parking Management. Vehicle parking management is an
immediate and urgent concern, where limited supply, increasing demand, and lack of a
coordinated pricing or management program has resulted in unsafe travel conditions for both
drivers and NMT users (i.e., with drivers parking on sidewalks and in the middle of traffic lanes).
The goal of this component is to mitigate these safety issues associated with parking through a
comprehensive parking supply (vehicle and bicycle) and management program. During the pre-
feasibility study, 55 candidate parking locations have been identified, as well as a detailed set of
technology and institutional management recommendations. These recommendations will be
further narrowed during the feasibility study, based on budget and needs to support the integrated
corridors.

 Component 5: Institutional Capacity Development. To support the long-term sustainability of
the Project, the project includes institutional capacity development actions, such as thematic
studies and training on green corridors, traffic management policy, and integrated transport
planning and design.

D. Project location (if known)
The proposed project is located in Changzhi City in the central Chinese province of Shanxi, with
a total area of 13,864 km2 and population of about 3 million. The central urban area of Changzhi
is about 55 km2, with a population of 390,000. All the proposed project components are within
the urban built-up area of the city.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Changzhi has demonstrated outstanding competence in terms of environmental protection and
city management capacity in line with national laws and regulations. It maintains an honorable
title of National Garden City, National Health City, and one of the official Ten Charming Cities
of China.

 However, the project will be the first World Bank-financed project in Changzhi, and hence the
local government is not familiar with World Bank safeguards policies. Thus, the project will
include substantial training with regards to World Bank policies throughout the project
preparation and implementation.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Peishen Wang (EASIN)
   Ms Meixiang Zhou (EASCS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes          No        TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
    The proposed project is anticipated to have substantial net positive environmental benefits
through integrated improvement of transportation corridors, public transport and traffic
management, and consequent improvement of road safety and reduction of vehicle emissions at
city level.

     The main physical activities include limited construction works related to channelization,
junction improvement, and bus stops and parking facilities along the existing corridors, and a
number (yet to be detrmined) of transit hubs, terminals and depots. All components are within
the urban built-up area of the city. Based on initial screening, apart from some negative impact
on urban green spaces, there are no ecologically and culturally sensitive sites (natural habitat,
protected area or physical cultural resources) in the vicinity of the project.

     Environmental issues will be mainly related to construction activities, i.e. traffic disturbance
and traffic safety, accessibility of pedestrian and business operation, nuisance of dust and noise,
construction wastewater/solid waste management, etc.; and those related to operation, i.e. road
safety, noise, safety and waste management of depots and terminals. Such impacts are site-
specific, unlikely to be significant or irreversible, and mitigation measures could be readily
designed with known engineering and management practices. Therefore, the project is classified
as a Category B project as per OP4.01.

     Changzhi has established a Project Management Center with mandate for project
preparation, which will hire an EIA institute to prepare the EA documents in accordance with
national environmental laws/regulations and the World Bank safeguards policies. The Bank
Team will provide safeguards training and guidance to PMC and EIA consultant throughout
project preparation and implementation.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No          TBD

     The following documents will be prepared and submitted to the World Bank for review and
approval prior to the project appraisal:
     - An Environmental Impact Assessment Report, which will encompass all project
components
     - An Environmental Management Plan with site specific measures for each component and
standardized environmental measures for all contractors based on EHS guidelines.

      The project will also include environmental enhancement measures such as landscaping and
urban improvements along the corridors. All areas affected during construction (by equipment or
traffic deviation) will be restored. All green/recreational areas will be restored and enhanced.
The project will include inclusive designs to guarantee access to the handicapped.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                       X
    The project will not affect any natural habitats or critical natural habitats.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                X
    The project will not cause significant conversion or degradation of natural forest.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                           X
    The project will not involve procurement of pesticide or have any impact on pest
management practice. This policy is not triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                            X
    Based on currently available information, there are no physical cultural resources to be
affected by the project. However, further detailed investigation and consultation with local
authorities and communities will be conducted in this regards. Bus depots, bus stops, etc. will
respect local architectural values. Chance-find procedures will be included in the EMP.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                     X
    Initial screening found that a few Hui households live scattered in the affected villages. They
speak mandarin Chinese, live in the suburban area of the city in almost the same way as the
majority of the people, and are integral part of the population. They do not meet the Bank criteria
for IP definition. The Social Development Specialist in the team has concluded that the Bank IP
policy (OP/BP 4.10) is not triggered.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                  X
    The project will fund and support several major transport corridor improvements, one public
bus hub and parking places and depots. These will require land acquisition as well as housing
demolition. Thus the Bank safeguards policy OP/BP 4.12 is triggered.

     There will be construction of a public bus hub and a bus terminal parking station which will
be located in the suburban area of the city, thus land acquisition will affect two villages. In total,
about 100 mu (about 7 hectares) of village collectively-owned land needs to go through the
whole land requisition procedures with the local government and affected villages. In addition,
there will be a small number of street shops, possible street vendors, houses and buildings to be
dismantled along the Bank project-supported transport corridors.

     Changzhi has established a Project Management Office with mandate for project
preparation, which will hire an institute to prepare the RAP document in accordance with
national land acquisition laws/regulations and World Bank safeguards policies. The Task Team
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                   Yes         No         TBD
will provide safeguards training and guidance to PMO and the RAP consultants throughout the
project preparation and implementation.

     A Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared and submitted to the World Bank for review
and approval prior to the project appraisal.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                  X
   Not applicable.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                             X
   Not applicable.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                      X
   Not applicable.


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   09/06/2011

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The safeguard instruments will be subject to public consultations and will be disclosed both
   in the InfoShop and locally prior to appraisal. Time frame for launching and completing the
   safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing should
   be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Zhi Liu                                                     06/24/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan                             07/06/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez                                    06/30/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
