                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated:                                               Report No.: 66446
1. Basic Project Data
Country: China                             Project ID: P116852
Project Name: Power Sector Transformer Efficiency Program
Task Team Leader: Ximing Peng
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 15,2011 Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: EASCS                       Lending Instrument: Carbon Offset
Sector: Energy
Theme: Climate Change
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 0.0
IDA Amount (US$m.): 0.0
GEF Amount (US$m.): 0.0
PCF Amount (US$m.): 0.91
Other financing amounts by source:
        Self-financing by SGCC: US$ 363.9 million

Environmental Category: B
Simplified Processing                        Simple [X]          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)      Yes [ ]      No [X]

2. Project Objectives

The objective of the China Power Sector Transformer Efficiency Program (the Project) is
to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions of China’s power industry by reducing distribution
system losses. This will be accomplished through the expanded adoption of non-
mandatory energy efficient transformers as part of sector modernization in distribution
networks of SGCC. To ensure adequate scale for national impact and to place the carbon
finance transaction on a financially viable footing, the Carbon Finance Operation will
pool a number of replacement activities under the distribution networks of 15 provincial
subsidiaries of SGCC in a single agreement and SGCC as intermediary is responsible for
managing the carbon finance transaction.

The key project performance indicator is the actual Emission Reduction (ERs) induced by
the replacement of more efficient transformers and verified by an independent
verification entity.

3. Project Description

The proposed program falls under the small-scale CDM Program of Activities (PoA) and
applies the approved methodology of AMS II.A: Supply side energy efficiency
improvements – transmission and distribution. The PoA, titled “SGCC In-advance
Distribution Transformer Replacement CDM Programme? (hereinafter referred to as
SGCC DT PoA, or the PoA) was registered at the CDM Executive Board on February 12,
2011. This arrangement allows subprojects, individually or as groups, to be added as
CDM Program Activities (CPAs) under the PoA on a rolling basis, upon submission of
adequate documentation. Monitoring data for activities under each of the programs will
be verified periodically by a Designated Operational Entity (DOE) and subsequently
undergo certification and issuance by the CDM Executive Board.

SGCC has identified about 53,000 inefficient Type 7 and 8 distribution transformers to be
replaced with more efficient Type 11 and Type 15 transformers from 2011 to 2016,
which are covered by the PoA. Of which about 37,000 transformers will be implemented
from 2011 to 2013 and are included in the Project. These transformers are operated at 6
kV and 10 kV, a low voltage level managed by SGCC. The yearly implementation plan is
illustrated in Table 1.

Table 1. Replacement Plan by SGCC under the PoA
                            the Project                            post-2013
              2011        2012     2013     Subtotal    2014    2015     2016   Subtotal
CPA #1        1,100                           1,100
CPA #2        5,094     12,782               17,876
CPA #3                  13,067               13,067
CPA #4                             5,834      5,834
CPF etc.                                                5,888   4,742   5,256     15,886
Total         6,194     25,849     5,834     37,877     5,888   4,742   5,256     15,886
Cost Estimate
(US$ million)  48.2     251.2       64.4      363.9      65.2   51.7     58.0      174.9
Note: Implementation period of the PoA is from 2011 to 2016.
Source: SGCC

Total investment: This Project involves early retirement of around 37,000 low efficiency
Type 7 transformers in 15 provincial distribution networks of the country. On average the
total investment (inclusive of purchase of equipments, installation, and pre-operative
expenses) ranges from about US$ 3,676 for a Type 11 transformer to around US$ 5,882
for a Type 15 distribution transformer. The cohort of high efficiency transformers to be
included in the program is expected to mainly comprise type 11 and type 15. The total
capital investment of the Project is estimated at US$ 363.9 million.

Sources of Funding: The SGCC is responsible for arranging the source of financing of
the subprojects. Program financing is derived 100 percent from equity financing. The
financing for the first CPA of 1,100 high efficiency distribution transformers had been
secured from the SGCC by the end of 2009 and the replacement of the first 1,100 high
efficiency transformers in CPA#1 was completed by November 2011. The emission
reductions from the implementation in 2011 will be credited on retroactive basis.

Purchase of Emission Reductions. The PoA arrangement allows subprojects, individually
or as groups to be added as CPAs under the program on a rolling basis, upon submission
of adequate documentation. Total four CPAs are planned under the Project. Monitoring
data for CPAs under the program will be verified periodically by a Designated
Operational Entity hired by the Bank, and subsequently undergo certification and
issuance by the CDM Executive Board. The World Bank, acting as Trustee of the
Spanish Carbon Fund (SCF), will purchase the successfully Certified Emission
Reductions (CERs) through a single Emission Reduction Purchase Agreement (ERPA).
The quantity of CERs to be contracted is estimated to be 85,000 tons of carbon dioxide
equivalent (tCO2e). generated from 2011 to 2013. The estimated value of the purchase is
approximately US$ 0.91 million.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis

The project activities would be implemented in SGCC’s power distribution grids
involving 15 Provinces, municipalities and autonomous regions where SGCC owns and
operates the power grids. The project activities will be implemented along selected
existing 10 kV distribution lines owned and operated by the SGCC where eligible
(eligibility criteria are presented below) inefficient, 10 kV distribution transformers are
currently installed, and where the removed transformers will be stored, and dismantled.
These places are owned by SGCC or by licensed contractors. No land acquisitions, either
permanent or temporarily, are required. Criteria for transformers replacement eligibility
are as follows:

   •   6 kV and 10 kV distribution transformers;
   •   Type 7 or type 8
   •   Manufactured after 1985 (including 1985) and before January 31, 1999;
   •   Free of any current oil leaks or other insulation problems;
   •   Located at a site which currently meets environmental, health and safety
       requirements of the People’s Republic of China and related SGCC environment,
       health and safety provisions as determined by SGCCs’ due diligence review and;
   •   Free of any oils containing polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)

The new transformers will be required to meet the following criteria:

    • Dry types, modern oil immersed, and/or other modern types of transformers
      manufactured to meet current related Chinese and related international industrial
      standards, as well as related environment, health and safety regulations in China
    • S11 efficiency or better
    • Free of PCBs.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

   Mr. Bernard Baratz (Consultant, Environment), and
   Mr. Feng Ji (EASCS, Environmental Specialist)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                              X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

Some of the transformers involved are air-cooled. For these transformers, the main issues
are minor and short lived: associated with dismantling and disposal of the old
transformers (noise, traffic disruption, management of old transformer scrap materials-
disposal, recycle reuse etc.). Some of the transformers are anticipated to be oil cooled.
For the oil cooled transformers there are additional issues of managing the waste oils
(disposal, reprocessing/reuse) drained from the transformers, and remediation of any land
that may have been contaminated from previous transformer oil leaks (transformers that
are currently leaking would be disqualified from the project). Disposal of polychlorinated
biphenyl’s (PCBs) in cooling oils is not an issue. China never produced oil cooled
transformers containing PCBs and agreement has been reached with SGCC that only
Chinese made transformers would be eligible under the proposed project. The absence of
PCBs in Chinese manufactured oil cooled transformers was verified in 2003 under a
separate GEF operation for both Liaoning and Zhejiang Provinces. For the new
replacement equipment, there is the minor issue associated with disposal of the non
hazardous packing materials in which the replacement transformers are contained.

Occupational health and safety (OHS) procedures and emergency preparedness and
emergency response (EPR) systems of SGCC were reviewed and found to be satisfactory.
There would be no additional requirements for the removal and disposal of the old
transformers or for the installation and operation of the replacement equipment.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
N/A

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A
4.Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

A comprehensive EMP acceptable to the World Bank was prepared by the SGCC. The
EMP will be the primary safeguards instrument and it includes mitigation and monitoring
requirements to insure appropriate environmental management for: replacement, storage
and disposal of old transformers, (e.g. disposal to approved sites or recycling to permitted
reprocessing facilities) for handling and management of scrap materials, and waste
cooling oils produced from replacement of the old transformers by licensed/certified
operators, and remediation of any oil contaminated soils by licensed remediation
specialists and adherence to SGCC procedures for OHS and EPR and management of
issues associated with operation of the new transformers. The EMP describes institutional
arrangements and responsibilities for environmental monitoring, data analysis, reporting
and decision making.

The EMP specifies that the transformers to be replaced meet the following criteria:

   •   6 kV and 10 kV distribution transformers;
   •   Type 7 or type 8
   •   Manufactured between after 1985 (including 1985) and before January 31, 1999;
   •   Under normal operation conditions (without oil leakages or other insulation
       problems); and
   •   In locations meeting the environmental, health and safety requirements of the
       People’s Republic of China and related regulations of the SGCC.
(Note: S7, S8, S11 and S15 are the model numbers of distribution transformers in China,
the higher number of the series, the more advance technology and the higher efficiency)

The EMP will be the primary safeguard instrument. It includes measures to mitigate soil
contamination from transformer leakage and standard SGCC procedures for worker
health and safety, emergency response, and environment where appropriate.

SGCC has 5 regional power grid companies and 25 provincial electric power companies.
Each subsidiary:



   •   adopts the SGCC enterprise-level safety, emergency response and environmental
       protection guidelines into regional-specific guidelines.
   •   has a Safety Management Unit (SMU) responsible for the in-field monitoring and
       enforcement of state, sector and enterprise level safety regulations
   •   has an Environmental Protection Unit (EPU), staffed with fully or partially
       specialized environmental protection personnel, centrally manages the
       environmental protection efforts within the subsidiary.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Public consultation was conducted on July 8, 2009 in Beijing and on July 9 and 10, 2009
in Shenyang City of the Liaoning Province where subprojects have been identified for
CPA #1. Before the public consultation, an announcement was posted in the State Grid
News, on June 25, 2009. The State Grid News is an accredited newspaper publicly issued
both paper and internet editions in China and the newspaper covers all the project areas.

Representatives of the SGCC (implementing agency), government (the Ministry of
Environment), affected communities, manufacturers and academics participated in the
public consultation.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  06/11/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              11/18/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               01/20/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                   NA
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Cultural Property, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. NA
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes, EMP
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the             Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the               Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                            Name                             Date
Task Team Leader:                               Ximing Peng                      12 January
                                                                                 2012
Environmental Specialist:              Bernard Baratz and Feng Ji                24 November
                                                                                 2011
Social Development Specialists             NA                                    NA


Approved by:
Sector Manager                           Paul Kriss in EASCS.                    16 January
                                                                                 2012
