                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                          Report No.: AC6172


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/15/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: China                                 Project ID: P125528
Project Name: Dioxins Reduction from the Pulp and Paper Industry
Task Team Leader: Jiang Ru
GEF Focal Area: Persistent Organic             Global Supplemental ID:
Pollutants
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 24,          Estimated Board Date: March 15, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: EASCS                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (50%);Public
administration- Industry and trade (30%);Other industry (20%)
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (60%);Environmental policies
and institutions (20%);Other environment and natural resources management (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             15.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               60.00
                                                                         60.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The project development objectives are to demonstrate the result of BAT/BEP adoption in four
selected non-wood pulp mills and to strengthen environmental monitoring and enforcement in
four participating provinces. In turn, this would support China to develop its long-term action
plan to guide the promotion of a sector-wide BAT/BEP adoption, aimed at achieving sector-wide
reduction in UPOPs formation and releases.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project will include the following components.

 Component 1: BAT/BEP Investment in Selected Non-wood Fiber Mills (estimated $64 million,
including $11 million GEF grant, and $53 million contribution from the four demonstration
mills). This component will support four selected non-wood pulp mills to minimize their UPOP
formations and releases by adopting elemental chlorine free (ECF) bleaching based BAT/BEP
and eliminating their elemental chlorine bleaching-based production. Four candidate mills have
been selected by MEP based on a set of criteria agreed with stakeholders. The selected
demonstration mills will typify the production line for the most common non-wood fibers (reed,
straw, bagasse and bamboo) and are located in four different provinces (Hunan, Ningxia,
Guangxi and Sichuan, respectively). It is expected that the project’s GEF grant support will be
about 20% or less of the total investment costs needed for BAT/BEP adoption at the four mills.
The counterpart financing will be used to support the rest (about 80%) of BAT/BEP investments.

  These mills currently have elemental chlorine bleaching based technology that forms UPOPs
during its bleaching process. Using ECF technology will enable these mills to significantly
reduce water consumption and discharge of key pollutants including TSS, COD/BOD and
dioxins. China#s national standards Wastewater Discharge Standards for the Pulp and Paper
Industry (GB3544-2008) specifies stringent requirements on the above mentioned pollutants
(TSS, COD/BOD, dioxins) and water consumption of unit pulp production. As the stringent
Standards will be effective on July 1st, 2011 for existing mills established before 2008, the four
mills are taking actions to adopt BAT/BEP and thus to ensure their compliance with the
Standards in a timely manner. The ECF-based technology is accepted worldwide and is
considered as a cost-effective option to ensure the four mills improve their long-term
environmental performance.
  Component 2: National Action Plan, and Institutional Strengthening (estimated $6.2 million,
including $2.8 million from GEF and $3.4 million from co-financing sources). The objective of
this component is to create an enabling environment for the replication of the BAT/BEP
technology tested under Component 1. It will provide support to 3 main activities: development
and implementation of a national action plan, monitoring and evaluation and institutional
strengthening and capacity building. For the development and implementation of a national
action plan for both wood and non-wood production, the following activities will be undertaken:
(a) policy review to identify gaps in monitoring and enforcement in China#s pulp and paper
sector and providing recommendations to address the gaps; (b) update of industrial and
environmental guidelines and standards; and (c) development of a strategy with sufficient
incentives to promote sector-wide BAT/BEP adoption.
  Under monitoring and evaluation, the project will support activities to (a) incorporate UPOPs
monitoring and enforcement into the current environmental monitoring, reporting and
enforcement system; (b) monitor UPOP releases from the demonstration mills; and (c) evaluate
effectiveness of BAT/BEP options in controlling and reducing UPOP releases. Activity (a) is
very important for the long-term UPOP reduction as it will help institutionalize UPOPs
monitoring into the country#s pollution management system and provide continued pressures for
the remaining mills in the sector to adopt BAT/BEP to improve their environmental
performance.
  On institutional/capacity building, this component will support (a) development of BAT/BEP
guidelines for non-wood pulp production; and (b) awareness-raising activities and dissemination
of guidelines and lessons learned from demonstration projects to other non-wood pulp mills; (c)
training of industrial institutions on BAT/BEP; and (d) training of relevant agencies on UPOPs
enforcement.
 Component 3: Project Management (estimated $4.8 million, including $1.2 million GEF grant
and $3.6 million from co-financing sources). This component will support project management
activities to be carried out by the implementing agency.

D. Project location (if known)
The project will target four non-wood pulp mills for the investments on BAT/BEP located in the
provinces of Sichuan (bamboo), Hunan (reed), Guangxi (baggasse) and Ningxia (straw).

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Foreign Economic Cooperation Office (FECO) of the Ministry of Environmental Protection
(MEP) will be the implementing agency for the proposed project and will be responsible for
managing project implementation. FECO manages bilateral and multilateral assistance for the
ministry. FECO has led the implementation of three GEF-financed POPs projects managed by
the Bank. FECO also houses the POPs unit which oversees all POPs activities in China. Past
experience shows FECO has a strong commitment and good records in managing environmental
and social safeguards issues satisfactory to the Bank. For the proposed project, FECO will
mobilize all necessary resources to coordinate and help local EPBs and the candidate paper mills
meet Bank safeguards policy requirements during project preparation and implementation.

 In the four provinces, the pulp and paper sector is subject to close monitoring and supervision
by provincial and municipal EPBs. The EBPs will review the project EIAs, using on-line
monitoring equipment and perform quarterly on-site monitoring to monitor the mills’ emissions,
and enforce relevant regulations and standards. Review of the EPBs’ performance shows they
also have strong commitment, institutional and technical capacity to ensure successful
achievements of the projects’ environmental objectives during project implementation.

 The four candidate paper mills have their established environmental and safety management
systems with dedicated environmental and safety management offices and staff in place. Waste
collection, treatment and disposal appear to be well managed in the two mills visited during
identification mission. Further, it is noted that the candidate paper mills have strong incentives to
implement the proposed BAT/BEP options as these options do have positive economic impacts
in terms of reducing water and energy consumption and improved product quality.

  Project specific capacity building will be needed for key stakeholders. These considerations
will be included in the project design and EA process. For example, for local EPBs, ensuring
proper dioxin monitoring enforcement of the 2008 dioxin standard will be a major challenge to
be addressed by the project. For the candidate mills, how to improve their current environmental
and safety management systems for a comprehensive set of environmental, health and safety
issues will be addressed during project preparation and implementation through improvements of
their EIA and EMP preparation and implementation.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Ning Yang (EASCS)
   Ms Meixiang Zhou (EASCS)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes           No        TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
     The project will address environmental problems of China’s non-wood pulp and paper sector
with a focus on four mills using elemental chlorine bleaching based pulping process. The
proposed project will support China to promote cleaner production and reduce discharges of key
pollutants (TSS, COD/BOD and dioxins) from these mills. Key activities include implementing
elemental chlorine free (ECF) based BAT/BEP technology to replace old elemental chlorine
bleaching based production, which generates UPOPs (dioxins and furans) that may pose serious
threats to the environment and public health. It is expected that a successful BAT/BEP adoption
at the four mills will result in significant net positive environmental benefits in terms of
reduction of water consumption and pollutant discharges into the environment. Little impact is
foreseen for construction given the production line renovation limited within the existing
industrial enterprises.

      Starting July 1, 2011, pulp mills established before 2008, will face more stringent discharge
standards on their key pollutants (TSS, COD/BOD, dioxins) and water consumption, as set forth
in China’s national standards Wastewater Discharge Standards of Pulp and Paper Industry
(GB3544-2008). Although the candidate paper mills all have secondary wastewater treatment
facilities which appear to be able to meet current discharge standards, they will not be able to
meet the new Standards. The proposed project will support the candidate paper mills to achieve
the new Standards by adopting technically and financially sound BAT/BEP options.

     The four selected pulp mills are:

     Ningxia Zhongye Meili Paper Mill. The mill proposed to combine current two straw-based
elemental chlorine bleaching lines into one Element Chlorine Free (ECF) line. No capacity
expansion or land acquisition is needed. Current wastewater is being treated in secondary
treatment facilities and an oxidation pond. The effluents is used to irrigate woodland (wood pulp
materials) owned by the mill at the edge of the Gobi desert.

    Sichuan Leshan Jinfu Paper Mill. The mill proposed to renovate current bamboo-based
elemental chlorine bleaching to an ECF line. No capacity expansion or land take is needed.
Current wastewater is treated in secondary treatment facilities and discharged into a major river -
Dadu River. The effluents meet current national standards.

    Nanning Sugar Company Paper Mill. The mill proposed to renovate the current bagasse-
based elemental chlorine bleaching to an ECF line. No capacity expansion or land take is needed.
Current wastewater is treated in secondary treatment facilities and discharged to a major river #
Yongjiang River.

     Hunan Yueyang Paper Mill. The mill proposed to renovate the current reed-based elemental
chlorine bleaching to ECF line. No capacity expansion or land take is needed. Current
wastewater is treated in secondary wastewater treatment facilities and is discharged to Yangtze
River.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes          No          TBD
     Framework Environmental Assessment (FEA). An FEA was prepared for the project under
a TA study financed by Canadian POPs Trust Fund in 2009. The purpose of the FEA was to
provide guidance to project EIA preparation which was supposed to start in early 2010 provided
the GEF funding was in place then. The FEA analyzes sector context, the domestic EIA
regulatory framework, the Bank#s safeguards policies and procedures, the baseline data of
candidate paper mills, and provides technical guidelines for project EIA preparation of actual
investment activities, including public consultation and disclosure, and a template for the EMP.
The FEA was reviewed and commented by the Task Team. Bank comments were properly
incorporated into the final FEA. Therefore, the FEA lays a solid foundation for the project EIA
preparation.

     Review of the Completed FSRs and EIAs. However, the GEF funding was not available in
2010, and project preparation was suspended until early 2011. During this period, the candidate
paper mills started project preparation on their own. As of now, the four paper mills have
prepared Feasibility Study Reports (FSRs) and three of them have prepared EIA reports
following domestic EIA regulations and technical guidelines. These FSRs and EIAs were
received by the Bank on April 1, 2011 and were reviewed by the Task Team.

      The main conclusion of the review of the already completed EIAs and feasibility studies is
that potential negative environmental impacts associated with the project are site specific, limited
to the existing industrial compound, and manageable by applying well known engineering
measures. These initial conclusions match the observations by the project team during field visits
to two of the four mills carried out during the identification mission. For example, in Leshan
Jinfu Paper Mill, the current secondary wastewater treatment facility is well operated.
Monitoring records presented in the EIA show the downstream receiving water body Dadu River
meets its functional water quality criteria. In Ningxia, the effluent from secondary treatment
facilities is pumped to an oxidation pond in semi-arid steppe area; The final effluent is used to
irrigate fast-growing trees which are used as wood-pulp materials.

     Project EA Preparation. The EIAs prepared under domestic regulations have not fully
incorporated the FEA recommendations and are not fully compliant with Bank safeguards
policies. Further public consultations and thorough review of the current environmental
performance of the pulp mills appear to be the main actions to be taken. In conclusion, the three
completed site-specific EIAs/EMPs will need to be updated, and one EIA/EMP needs to be
prepared in order to meet Bank safeguards policy requirements. The following issues will need
to be given particular attention during this update and preparation:

     Review of Current Environmental Pollution and Management Status: The EIA will address
the current pollution prevention and control measures and environmental performance of each
mill. This will cover raw material, manufacturing, products and by-products, air emission,
wastewater treatment and discharges, solid waste, noise, health and safety, emergency response
and management capacity.

    Environmental Baseline. The EIA will need to present information on the natural
conditions, environmental quality, socio-economic conditions, and environmentally sensitive
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes          No         TBD
areas (if any) of the project area.

     Alternative Analysis. The proposed BAT/BEP will replace the current elemental chlorine-
based with elemental chlorine free bleaching technology, which will result in substantial
reduction of water use by about 60% and AOX/dioxin concentration in the effluents. Based on
information available, the renovation will be undertaken inside the current mill site and no land
take will be needed. That said, the EIA will need to describe alternative analysis in terms of
comparisons between ’with and without project’ scenarios, compatibility with national, local and
sector development plans, different resource conservation and waste control strategies, and
technical designs.

     Decommissioning of old facilities. The EIA will need to address the decommissioning of
old facilities, including the dismantling, removal, transportation and final disposal.

      Wastewater Management. Currently all candidate paper mills have secondary wastewater
treatment facilities. Field visits to Ningxia and Sichuan show the collection and treatment
facilities are in good shape and the effluents can meet current national standards. Implementing
BAT/BEP will substantially not only reduce key pollutants (COD and dioxin) concentration but
water consumption as well. However, if not implementing the proposed BAT/BEP they will not
be able to meet new and more stringent standards to be effective on July 1st, 2011. In addition to
the above-mentioned review of current status, the EIA will need to address water conservation
strategies, wastewater collection, treatment and discharges of the paper mills after the BAT/BEP
is implemented.

     Air Emissions. Based on information available, all candidate paper mills have dust and
sulfide removal facilities in place. The EIA will need to address the process gases (including
sulfur compounds, particulate matter, nitrogen oxides, volatile organic compounds, chlorine,
carbon dioxide, etc) and flue gases and auxiliary units. Ambient air quality impact assessment,
including break-down scenario.

     Residues and Waste. Pulp and paper mills typically generate significant quantities of non-
hazardous solid wastes and very little hazardous wastes. The EIA will need to address the
management and safe disposal of hazardous and non-hazardous waste and explore approaches to
reduce waste to extent feasible through reuse and recycling of materials.

     Noise. The EIA will need address noise impact associated with mechanical equipment,
transport vehicles, physical activities, etc.

     Occupational Health and Safety. The EIA will need to address occupational health and
safety as part of the hazard or risk assessment, including chemical (such as the chlorine dioxide
production system), physical hazards, wood dust, biological agents, heat, confined spaces and
noise etc.

     Public Consultation and Disclosure: Public consultation shall be conducted among
potentially affected groups and communities at the early stage of EA preparation, during which a
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes         No          TBD
variety of approaches (public meetings, interviews and questionnaire survey) shall be used to get
public concerns on the project. Project information shall be provided or introduced to the public
prior to consultation. It is important to record the details of these two rounds of consultation in
the EIA report (the consultation process, i.e. date, locations, number/type of people participated,
key issues raised and how these issues are addressed in EIA and the project design). The draft
EIA shall be disclosed in publicly accessible places (e.g. local government and/or internet) with
announcement published through local newspaper.

      Environmental Management Plan (EMP): The EMP should include sufficient details for
implementation, including environmental management and supervision organization setup
(institutional arrangements for each party involved, responsibilities and staff capacity
requirements); mitigation measures/specifications and cost estimates; environmental monitoring
plan; institutional capacity analysis and necessary training plan; environmental mitigation
measures investment estimate, etc.

     Application of IFC Environment, Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSG) - Pulp and Paper
Mills. The EIA will consider the applicable EHSG. The applicability of the EHS Guidelines will
be tailored to the risks identified by project based on the results of the Environment Assessment
which will take into account site-specific conditions related to country context, the assimilative
capacity of the ambient environment and other project specific factors. If municipal, provincial
or national regulations differ from the EHS Guidelines and/or less stringent measures are
considered appropriate in view of the project specific circumstances, the appropriate explanation
will be provided in the EIAs.

     EA Category and Instruments. Given the potential impacts especially the uncertainty
regarding the current operation performance of the four mills and concerns about accidental
break-down, a Category A is assigned to the project at this stage as a precautionary approach.
Full EIA will be prepared to entail the waste streams and potential pollution of these mills. This
environmental Category will be revisited by appraisal based on the review of the exiting EIAs
and EMPs and operation performance of the mills. A review of the assigned EA Category will be
carried out at the appraisal stage when all EA reports are prepared.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                      X
    The proposed project will take place in existing paper mills that have been in operation for
years. Available information shows no evidence that any natural habitats have been impacted by
the operation of the four paper mills. The proposed project will help reduce water and energy
consumption and pollutants discharge into the environment, and is not expected to create any
significant ecological impacts or disturbance. Construction and decommissioning will take place
within the paper mills or contracted waste disposal sites. Hence, the proposed project will not
impact any impact to natural habitats, and the policy is not triggered.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                               X
    The project is intended to non-wood pulp and paper production. It will not involve any
activities that will cause negative impacts to forests resources. This policy is not triggered.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                          X
    The project will not lead to purchase or use of any pesticides. This policy is not triggered.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No          TBD
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                            X
     The project will take place in existing paper mills that have been operation for years. It is
unlikely to cause any impacts to any known PRC resources. The policy is not triggered.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                     X
     The project social screening by the Team#s social development specialist during the
identification mission confirmed that OP4.10 Indigenous Peoples would not be applicable to this
project there is no presence of IP/EM groups as defined in OP4.10 in the projects areas of
influence. One of the mills located in Ningxia has 2% of staff who are from Hui minority out of
its total over 3000 employees. These Hui people all speak mandarin Chinese, living scattered in
the urban area and do not meet the definition of IP of OP4.10.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                               X
     The project will support four existing pulp mills. All four mills have been in operation for
many years. The project investment will be mainly upgrading /replacing of existing production
facilities within the existing mill compounds. Therefore, it is expected that there will be no need
for any new land acquisition for project implementation. This policy is not triggered.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                         X
     The project will not involve impacts to any dams in the project area. This policy is not
triggered.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                    X
     The project will not involve trans-boundary rivers. The policy is not triggered.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                             X
     The project is not located in any disputed areas. The policy is not triggered.


Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 06/02/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   10/03/2011

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   n/a




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Mr Jiang Ru                          07/08/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan   07/26/2011
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez          07/22/2011
   Comments:
