                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                              Report No.: AC6245


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/14/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: China                               Project ID: P123729
Project Name: China: Jiangxi Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Development
Task Team Leader: John Carter Scales
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2012     Estimated Board Date: October 15, 2012
Managing Unit: EASCS                         Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and
                                             Maintenance Loan
Sector: Aviation (80%);Public administration- Transportation (20%)
Theme: Other urban development (80%);Regional integration (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):          50
IDA Amount (US$m.):            0
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                      19.00
                                                                      19.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed development objective of the project is to respond to emerging passenger transport
demand for increased capacity and fast travel times by providing accessibility to air transport.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
It is proposed that the project have two components:

 Component 1: Airport. The project will finance the construction of the terminal building,
runway and apron. Other airport facilities such as air traffic control facilities, power and water
systems, lighting and navigation systems may be financed. It is also anticipated that the project
will provide technical assistance in areas related to the operation of the airport.

 Component 2: Airport access road.

D. Project location (if known)
The proposed airport is located at Houmentang Village of Zunqiao Township, about 8 km south
from the center of Shangrao City. The airport (component 1) will acquire land of about 1.6 km2
which features low hills covered by shrubs, woods, farmland, unused land, and water ponds. The
land requirement for the access road (component 2) is still being determined.

  Shangrao is located in the east of Jiangxi Province bordering Zhejiang Province, Fujian
Province and Anhui Province. It has 12 cities and counties under its jurisdiction with a land area
of 22,791 km2. It is the second largest municipality of Jiangxi province in terms of population
(total 6.54 million).

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Jiangxi Province has several ongoing Bank financed projects. Shangrao Municipality, though
new to the Bank projects, has established a Project Leading Group at municipal level to oversee
and coordinate the preparation and implementation of the Project. This Leading Group is chaired
by a Vice Mayor assisted by officials from a number of governmental agencies. In addition
Shangrao has established a project management office (PMO) to take overall responsibility for
project preparation. Currently, the PMO has five full-time staff and will recruit more qualified
staff. For project preparation, Shangrao PMO has engaged China Airport Construction Group
Corporation for the feasibility study, and will engage an experienced EA consulting firm to
undertake the environmental assessment. The PMO will hire an experienced social consultant to
assist their social related work during project preparation. Shangrao PMO will receive training
on project management and on the Bank safeguard polices in early stage of project preparation.
Necessary capacity building will be integrated into the project.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Juan D. Quintero (SASDE)
   Mr Feng Ji (EASCS)
   Mr Jun Zeng (EASCS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes         No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
    The policy is triggered. An EA with an English-language executive summary and an EMP
will be prepared. Whether an Environmental Management Framework is required will be
determined prior to appraisal based upon the extent of unknown social and environmental
impacts, if any. In addition environmental enhancements to the project such as green airport
design approaches are being discussed.
     The EA will be carried out following World bank environmental policies, Chinese EA
requirements, relevant international aviation standards/guidelines, and Bank#s EHS Guidelines
for Airports. The Bank's task team provided a guidance note on the EA and EMP to the client
which includes:
     Project components: It is proposed that the project components will include the main
terminal and airstrip plus ancillary infrastructure such as: hangar and maintenance yard, taxiing
and parking area, cargo storage, parking lot, fuel storage areas, and administration building, and
the airport access road and by-passes (if any). The sources of materials (borrow pit and quarry)
and construction related facilities (casting yard, mixing plant, workers camp, and temporary
access road) will also be included.
     Area of Influence: The area of influence of the project will include:
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes           No         TBD
     - The area directly affected by the project components as described above.
     - A broader area spanning beyond the physical boundary of the airport affected by induced
impacts, including the alteration of surface transportation patterns, change of transportation
networks and land use
     - "Noise corridors" for landing and take offs, based on predicted noise levels from airport
operation. Noise contour maps will need to be prepared.
     Analysis of Alternatives: The EIA report should include the different alternatives
considered in pre-feasibility and feasibility reports, comparing them against technical,
environmental and social criteria.
     - Alternative means of transportation
     - Alternatives for size and type of airport
     - Alternatives sites for selected airport

     This analysis should be based on the pre-feasibility and feasibility analysis carried out for
the project.

     Main Issues: The EIA should address both direct and indirect impacts from all components
of the proposed airport, including its ancillary infrastructures as described above during
construction and operation. Attention should be given to:

      - Direct impacts of airport construction (including ancillary infrastructures as described
above) on natural ecosystems, natural drainage, any cultural sites, forests, and local communities
including population to be resettled.
      - Socio-economic impacts at regional and local level due to (a) shifts in patterns of
population movement and growth; (b) increased demands of public service; (c) changes in
business and economic activities; and (d) other substantive impacts identified by the public. At
the local level, the EIA will summarize all resettlement related impacts (from the Resettlement
Plan).
      - Induced and cumulative impacts on regional transportation networks, rural connectivity,
local economic activities. Regional impacts will include the cumulative effects of the airport and
the new access road, as well as other ancillary infrastructure such as connections to the power
grid. The regional impact will also include an analysis other plans such as tourism plans and their
interrelationship with the airport.
      - Impacts on land use patterns at the regional and local level, restrictions on land use on
surrounding areas and along "noise corridors" for landing and take-off; restrictions for land use
for different noise level contours need to be prepared (land use, building heights, etc,). Changes
in land use in the immediate areas to the airport, new industrial parks, commercial areas.
      - Direct impacts on water, air and soils from airport operation, generation of liquid and
solid wastes (including hazardous wastes), air pollution. And impacts of airport operation
(including the ancillary infrastructures described above) on natural ecosystems, natural drainage,
any cultural sites, forests, and local communities.
      - Drainage network. Perhaps one of the most sensitive social issues stemming from airport
construction, the interruption of natural drainage system may affect the livelihood of local
farmers (e.g. irrigation), both in quantity and quality, including restrictions of flows,
exacerbation of flood events, water quality changes by sediments and other wastes generated at
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes        No         TBD
airport. The EIA report will include relevant aspects of the Soil and Water Conservation Plan
that is being prepared separately for the project.
      - Noise and vibration impacts on surrounding communities near the airport and located
along the landing and take-off corridors. The EA will include a comparison of local standards
and the Bank's guideline on airport noise and vibration.
      - Impacts on landscape and visual effects.

   For potential significant impacts, quantitative analysis will be carried out, including
modeling for noise and air quality at the airport.

      Environmental Management Plan. The Environmental Management Plan for the project
should include the necessary mitigation measures for addressing relevant direct and indirect
impacts from airport construction and operation. Special attention should be paid to:
      - Regional management plan to ensure restoring rural connectivity, necessary adjustments
to regional transport and land use plans, restriction for land use in "noise corridors" and area in
the vicinity of the airport to be delimited in the EA.
      - Waste Management: domestic wastewater, hazardous waste (maintenance) and
chemicals(e.g. for de-icing and anti-icing activities) management, solid waste management, run-
off management for entire facility especially from strips, containment of fuel deposits, and
management of liquid and solid wastes from airplanes.
      - Water and soil conservation plan: measures to minimize impacts on drainage and
irrigation networks both in quantity and quality.
      - Noise and vibration mitigation measures for surrounding communities including
operational restrictions such as possible restrictions on night air traffic.
      - Air emission management measures for surrounding area and communities.
      - Mitigation measures to protect sensitive ecological and archaeological areas, protected
species, if any.
      - Emergency plan including procedures in case of accidents in airport (fueling and fuel
storage of aircrafts and vehicles) and operations.
      - Management of Construction: including run-off management, noise and vibration and
dust during construction, management of construction traffic on local roads, workers camp
management (water and sanitation, health), and quarry and borrow pit management.
      - Environmental monitoring during construction and operation.
      - Landscape and scenic impact management, including all greening and affected area
restoration
      The EMP should specify:
      - Clear responsibilities among all actors participating in project implementation.
      - The reporting requirements and controls.
      - The budget for implementing the EMP differentiating between mitigation measures
already included in design and bill of quantities, from those that are outside project design.
      - Regional impact mitigation measures, land use recommendations and adjustments.
      - The responsibility to ensure the major contractor maintains contact with the local
population regarding matters of safety and timing.
      - The responsibility to ensure the contractors comply with contractual specifications related
to the environment which may include: management of sediments and protection of cultivated
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes           No         TBD
areas and water courses during construction; waste management and disposal; camp management
including workers behavior; traffic safety and nuisance control along access roads; health; and
social communications.
      - The schedule of implementation of the EMP.
      - Environmental supervision requirements and a definition of supervision protocol and a
compliance framework possibly including financial incentives and penalties.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                       X
    Physical investment of the project will be in suburban area of Shangrao Municipality, about 8
km south from the center of Shangrao. The project is not located within protected areas, though
the development of the project aims to boost tourists to visit Mt Sanqingshan, a National Scenic
Park 59km NE of the airport. The available information (pre-feasibility study) indicated that the
project would not have the potential to cause any significant conversions or degradation of
natural habitats which would be further investigated and confirmed in the EA.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                X
    Based on the available information, the project will not finance activities that would involve
significant conversion or degradation of critical forest areas or related critical natural habitats as
defined under the policy. It would be further investigated and confirmed in the EA.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                           X
    The proposed project will neither procure nor result in increased use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                            X
    Based on the available information including a survey conducted by Shangrao Cultural
Heritage Bureau in February 2009, the project will not affect any sites with archeological,
paleontological, historical, religious, or unique natural values. Chance finds during construction
might occur and relevant clauses will be included in all construction contracts.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                     X
    The Bank's project social specialist visited the project area to conduct a screening to
determine whether ethnic minority peoples are present in, or have collective attachment to, the
project area. The project will be constructed within Houmentang of Zunqiao Township,
Shangrao County, about 8 km south from downtown of Shangrao Municipality. During the site
visit, no ethnic minority community has been identified within the project area. The screening
concluded that no ethnic minority communities are present in, or have collective attachment to
the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                  X
    Based on the site visit and primary project siting, land acquisition and structure demolition
caused by the project construction will be unavoidable. The main involuntary resettlement
impact will include collective land acquisition, relocation of houses, and temporary land taking
during project construction. Therefore, the Bank's policy on Involuntary Resettlement will be
triggered and a Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared and disclosed by the client in both
English and Chinese prior to appraisal. Detailed resettlement impact surveys will be carried out
during RAP preparation. Whether a Resettlement Policy Framework is required will be
determined prior to appraisal based upon the extent of unknown social and environmental
impacts, if any.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                         X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
    Not Applicable.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                              Yes              No             TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                    X
   Not Applicable.


Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 11/15/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Environmental Safeguards: EA and EMP will be undertaken, with first draft available ahead
   of the preparation mission, draft final report to be completed by pre-appraisal and final report
   by appraisal.

        Social Safeguards: RAP will be prepared and the first draft of RAP will be submitted for
       comments by preparation mission, and final report to be completed by project appraisal.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr John Carter Scales                                          08/18/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr John R. Butler                                              12/15/2011
      Comments: as acting RSA
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Paul Kriss                                                  12/14/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
