                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/30/2011                                     Report No.: AC5266
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P082520                  Original Project Name: CO Sustainable
                                              Development Inv Project
Country: Colombia                             Project ID: P115639
Project Name: Colombia Sustainable Development Investment Project - Additional
Financing
Task Team Leader: Irina I. Klytchnikova
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 16, 2011        Estimated Board Date: October 13, 2011
Managing Unit: LCSEN                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (50%);Public
administration- Information and communications (20%);Public administration-
Transportation (20%);Public administration- Health (10%)
Theme: Water resource management (50%);Pollution management and environmental
health (30%);Environmental policies and institutions (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            10.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                        1.00
                                                                         1.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]     No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the Sustainable Development Investment Project (additional financing)
is to support the design and implementation of policy reforms and related investments in
line with the Sustainable Development DPL Program framework, particularly those
policies and plans that address environmental problems affecting the quality of life and
wellbeing of the Colombian population. In particular, the project will support (i) the
incorporation of environmental considerations in the policies of the sectors that result in a
high cost of environmental degradation (e.g., water and health); (ii) the implementation
of policy measures for integrated water resource management; and (iii) the strengthening
of the planning, monitoring, and oversight of national, regional and local environmental
management and policies.
 By supporting these objectives, the project is expected to help alleviate the effects of
environmental degradation on the most vulnerable segments of the population,
particularly children who are typically the most affected by this degradation, through
improvements in public health and quality of life. These improvements will be supported
through reductions in air and water pollution, as well as through improved hygiene and
urban environmental management.

3. Project Description
The objective of the Project is to support the Borrower in the development and
implementation of policy reforms and related investments in line with the Program#s
framework, particularly those polices and investments that address environmental
problems affecting the quality of life and well being of the Borrower#s population.

 The Project consists of the following parts, subject to such modifications thereof as the
Borrower and the Bank may agree upon from time to time to achieve such objective:

 Through the proposed additional financing, this investment project will finance targeted
actions and investments to ensure the sustainability of the reforms that have been
supported by the DPL Program#s policy reforms and by the parent project. Specifically,
the Sustainable Development Investment project aims to support policies and programs
that address environmental problems affecting the quality of life and wellbeing of the
Colombian population (e.g., air pollution, inadequate hygiene) and that strengthen the
process of formulating, coordinating and overseeing national environmental policy. A
summary of the project components is presented below.

 Component 1: Environmental Health (US$2.0 mln). The Environmental Health
Component will include three sub-components.

  Subcomponent 1.1: Air Pollution Control: finance the installation of an emissions
testing laboratory (Homologation Center) in Colombia for mobile sources (light and
medium duty vehicles and motorcycles) in order to ensure accurate measurement of
emissions by these sources in the conditions specific to Colombia, taking into account the
characteristics of the vehicle fleet and high altitude in many cities in the country.

  Subcomponent 1.2: Policy Implementation Guidelines: Development of guidelines for
the implementation of the Environmental Health Policy (CONPES 3550) on mercury and
lead exposure, to reduce the risks of exposure to mercury and lead from anthropogenic
sources by children.

 Subcomponent 1.3: Hygiene Practices Campaign: provide continued support to the hand
washing campaign and for the monitoring and impact evaluation of the program.

 Component 2: Water Resources Management (US$6 mln). Building on previous
achievements and the GoC issuance of the National Water Policy in March 2010 that was
supported by the environmental DPL series and the parent project, the proposed AF
Project will help continue to strengthen Colombia#s institutional capacity for integrated
water resources management and the implementation of parts of the National Water
Policy by supporting the following subcomponents:

 Subcomponent 2.1: Institutional Strengthening: This subcomponent will: (i) strengthen
the capacity of the Water Resources Management Group (GRH/MAVDT) with technical
experts required to implement the key components of the National Water Policy and to
ensure smooth Project implementation and (ii) support capacity building and training
programs targeted at regional environmental authorities in technical topics related to
WRM, such as the concept of Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM)
introduced by the new Water Policy and the newly developed water resources
information system (SIRH).The capacity building and training programs will also cover
water regulations, developed to implement the existing national water policy.

 Subcomponent 2.2: Integrated, Participatory River Basin/Aquifer Planning and
Management: This subcomponent will support the implementation of the priority
measures set by the National Water Policy such as the development of priority planning
and technical instruments for integrated water resources management and testing the
application of integrated water management tools in pilot watersheds:

 (i)   Pilot Project to Update a Participatory Groundwater Management Plan in a
Watershed. Support the updating of the integrated participatory plan for the aquifer of La
Sabana de Bogotá, which has been significantly impacted by over-exploitation, and
support activities aimed at strengthening the understanding of the aquifer for its
management (for example: hydrological modeling, water quality monitoring, developing
inventories of water users).

  (ii) Legalization of Water Use and Associated Discharges: Implementation of Pilot
Projects and a Communication Strategy. Only around half of water use is by legalized
users with registered concessions for water use in Colombia, according to IDEAM. This
situation is similar with discharge permits. The low extent of formalization of water use
in Colombia was identified by the National Water Policy as one of the main obstacles to
sound water resources management. This subcomponent will develop a methodology for
legalizing water use and discharges through water rights (concessions) and wastewater
discharge permits in two pilot watersheds#Chinchina and Guali. The project will support:
(i) the implementation of a public communication strategy and a media campaign to raise
awareness about the need for and benefits from legalization of water use and associated
discharge, and (ii) the implementation of pilot projects in Chinchina and Guali
watersheds, which will entail developing a participatory methodology to legalize water
use rights.

 (iii) Strengthening Technical Norms and Implementation Capacity of the Regional
Environmental Authorities. This component will support the development of guides and
manuals for environmental zoning and definition of ecological flows and discharge
monitoring protocols to be used to strengthen the capacity of the regional environmental
authorities (CARs) in the future process of watershed management plan (Planes de
Ordenamiento y Manejo de Cuencas, POMCA) preparation and in the administration of
water rights and discharge permits; and it will support updating and/or development of
new proposed technical norms on water quality criteria for various water uses and
wastewater discharge to the soil and coastal areas. These instruments will be developed in
a participatory manner and will be discussed in a series of consultative workshops with
key stakeholders.

 Subcomponent 2.3: Management of Climate Risks in the Water Resources Sector:
Implementation of a pilot project to deliver technical support to at least one CAR to
strengthen the mainstreaming of climate risks within watershed management and
contingency plans at the local level through (i) the identification of flood risk areas, (ii)
elaboration of environmental risk maps at regional and local levels, (iii) formulation of
preventive measures, management, and restoration of flood-affected areas, and (iv)
formulation of contingency plans to cope with water supply reduction in the event of
natural hazards.

 Subcomponent 2.4: Water Resources Monitoring and Information: This sub-component
will support the development of additional modules to the Water Resources Information
System (Sistema de Informacion de Recursos Hidricos, SIRH, created since 2007),
including modules of water resources status, risk, and management indicators, and the
operationalization of the system#s pilot modules. This sub-component will also support
the strengthening of the national monitoring network through the acquisition, assembly,
and installation of 14 hydrological stations and other necessary equipment for the
strengthening of the national program of water monitoring.

 Component 3: Planning and Oversight of Environmental Management (US$2.0 mln).
This Component will include four sub-components:

 Subcomponent 3.1: Strengthening of the National Planning Department (DNP):
strengthen DNP#s capacity for inter-sectoral coordination to implement the National
Environmental Health Policy (PISA), the National Water Resources Policy, and
strengthen the national environmental information system in coordination with MAVDT
and IDEAM.

 Subcomponent 3.2: Strengthening of Environmental Planning and Information:
strengthen the Directorate of Planning, Information and Regional Coordination
(DPICR/MAVDT) and the capacity of the regional and urban environmental authorities
(CARs) to monitor and report environmental indicators in a systematic manner;
strengthen the information systems and portals; and provide training on the information
systems for environmental indicators at the local levels by the regional and urban
environmental authorities.

 Subcomponent 3.3: Single Environmental Registry (Registro Unico Ambiental, RUA):
implement an information system on the use of natural resource use and emissions at the
user level in the manufacturing sector and support the implementation of the registry by
the local environmental authorities, to be implemented by the IDEAM with the overall
coordination by MAVDT.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Colombia

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Ricardo Hernandez Murillo (LCSEN)
   Mr Fabio Pittaluga (LCSSO)
   Ms Adriana Soto Carreno (LCSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The policies and reforms supported by the parent project have had a positive effect on the
country#s environment, as they have fostered improved environmental governance and
urban environmental management. Since the raison d#être of the parent as well as the
additional financing project itself is to help the government to mainstream environment in
a number of key sectors, the operation#s design is proactive with respect to internalizing
environmental and social safeguards concerns within the operation at the macro level. In
addition, both the parent and the additional financing projects have been designed to
directly address environmental problems that had been identified as priorities, through
detailed analytical work, such as ambient air pollution and inadequate water, sanitation
and hygiene.

 The parent project did not trigger any safeguard policies and was categorized as #C#.
The environmental category of the AF will be raised to #B#. The World Bank safeguard
policies triggered for this Additional Financing are: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01)
and Natural Habitats (OP 4.04).

 This Additional Financing will not trigger the Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) and
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) safeguards since: (i) project activities will not be
carried out in areas where Indigenous peoples are present (according to the official map
of indigenous territories, or resguardos, of Colombia) and could potentially be affected by
the Project and (ii) pilot projects on groundwater and legalization of water rights will not
require land acquisition or the establishment of protected areas that would restrict access.
Pilot projects will be implemented through a participatory process, described in the
Environmental and Social Management Framework.

 Environmental Assessment Safeguard. The following subcomponents of the projects
will trigger the EA safeguard: (i) the construction of the Homologation laboratory for
emissions testing included in Component 1 of the AF Project (Environmental Health),
and the following three subcomponents in Component 2 (i.e., Integrated, Participatory
River Basin/Aquifer Planning and Management): (i) the preparation of new water quality
norms, (ii) the pilot project to develop the methodology and prepare a groundwater
management plan for the aquifer of the Sabana de Bogota, and (iii) pilot projects on the
formalization of water rights in Chinchina and Guali watersheds.

 Natural Habitats Safeguard. The overall aim of the AF Project#s Component 2 (the
Subcomponent on Integrated, Participatory River Basin/Aquifer Planning and
Management) is to improve the management of water resources and preserve the
ecosystems and the ecological flows they depend on. Three subcomponents might affect
natural habitats, mostly likely in a positive manner: (i) pilot project to develop the
methodology and prepare a groundwater management plan for the aquifer of the Sabana
de Bogota, and (ii) pilot projects on the formalization of water rights.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The subcomponents of the Integrated, Participatory River Basin/Aquifer Planning and
Management component are very unlikely to have adverse effects on the environment or
on natural habitats, since one of the main goals of integrated water resources planning in
accordance with the National Water Policy of Colombia and particularly of those
components is to preserve the ecosystems# flow requirements. However, from a
precautionary standpoint and in order to reduce the risks that these measures may have
unintended effects on natural habitats and ecosystems flows (such as adversely affecting
one ecosystem while attempting to preserve another ecosystem or reducing
overexploitation of groundwater aquifers), the Project will trigger the Natural Habitats
safeguards.

 The subcomponent of the Environmental Health component on the construction of the
Homologation Center may have minor adverse environmental effects, which will be easy
to mitigate by following the construction standards and the environmental licensing
procedures in place in Colombia. These mitigation measures are specified in the
Environmental and Social Management Framework.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The adverse environmental impacts of the project#s components which have triggered the
safeguards are very unlikely and small in magnitude. The construction of the
homologation laboratory will follow the construction protocols and licensing procedures
stipulated by the GoC and any adverse effects are expected to be very minor; thus no
project alternatives were considered for these subcomponents. For the subcomponents
included in the Water Resources Management Component, the environmental and social
impacts are expected to be positive. Since no adverse environmental or social impacts are
anticipated, the project did not consider alternatives. Nevertheless, the consultation
procedures in place in Colombia as part of the design and implementation of new
environmental regulations, norms, and as part of devising management plans, will be
followed by this project, thus minimizing any potential unexpected and unlikely adverse
impacts of the project.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Environmental and Social Management Framework has been prepared to mitigate
any potential adverse effects of the above subcomponents. The implementation of the
homologation laboratory will follow construction codes and will be subject to the
environmental licensing procedures of Colombia. The design and implementation of the
updated water quality norms, as the case of any other regulations issued by the Ministry
of the Environment, will follow the consultation process established by the national law
and the framework for consultations with key stakeholders (such as the Quality
Management System, or Sistema de Gestion de Calidad) . The Environmental and Social
Management Framework describes the consultation processes, procedures and principles
the GoC follows in the course of designing new regulations, and which will also be
followed in the implementation of these subcomponents of the Project to ensure
successful development and the acceptance of the regulations and strategic planning
activities supported by the Project. The principles guiding the mitigation measures and
the process to be followed during project implementation to ensure compliance with the
safeguards policy on Natural Habitats are integrated in the Environmental and Social
Management Framework.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Indigenous Peoples Safeguard. It is not expected that the Component on Water Resources
Management in all its sub-components, or any other project component, will require the
application of WB social safeguards. The pilot projects on groundwater and the
legalization of water rights will be implemented in the watersheds of Chinchina and
Guali where, according to the official map of the indigenous groups in Colombia, no
Indigenous peoples and/or tribal groups are present. The groundwater pilot will be
implemented in the area of the Sabana de Bogota, where, according to same source, there
are no Indigenous Peoples present. On the basis of these observations, the World Bank
Indigenous Peoples# operational policy does not apply.

  With regards to the processes covered in subcomponent 2.2 (ii), Colombia has very
strong participatory and consultative frameworks in place. The pilot projects on the
legalization of water use and associated discharges in Guali and Chinchina watersheds
will occur following the legal and policy provisions established in the applicable laws of
Colombia. The following steps will be followed in the process of defining and assigning
water use rights: (i) technical diagnosis of current water use and allocation patterns and
the analysis of social and environmental implications of the program, (iii) disclosure of
the proposed water allocations through notification and publication, (iv) consultations
with key stakeholder groups, and (v) grievance resolution mechanism, as established in
the Colombian legal framework for water use and the associated discharges, and the
mechanisms. These processes are highly participatory in nature and involve multiple
stakeholders, as detailed in Annex 1 of the Environmental and Social Management
Framework for this project.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/24/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             08/24/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              08/29/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
  OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
  review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
  credit/loan?
  OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
  Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
  critical natural habitats?
  If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   No
  (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
  acceptable to the Bank?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s        No
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        No
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                           Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Irina I. Klytchnikova                      08/23/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Ricardo Hernandez Murillo                  08/24/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Carlos A. Molina                           08/24/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms Adriana Soto Carreno                       08/24/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan                            08/24/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Richard Damania                            08/24/2011
  Comments:
