Date prepared/updated: 04/23/2012                                    Report No.68696:




Country: Colombia                       Project ID: P078220
Project Name: Amoya River Environmental Services
Task Team Leader: Leopoldo Montanez
Estimated Appraisal Date: N/A              Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: LCSEG                      Lending Instrument: Carbon Finance
Sector: Renewable energy (80%), Water supply (20%)
Theme: Climate Change (P), Biodiversity (S), Water Resource Management (S)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):           0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):           0.00
ER (tons of CO2 equivalent): NCDMF-ERPA amendment: 211,971 CERs
UCFT2 LOI: 485,000 CERs
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                       0.00


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)



The development objective is “to contribute to the reduction of greenhouse gas (GHG)
emission from the power sector in Colombia through the promotion of an 80MW, run-of-
river, generation facility. Once in operation, the project is expected to displace an
estimated 1.87 million metric tons (Mmt) of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) up to
2012, and an estimated 4.56 Mmt CO2e up to 2019. It will also support an environmental
and social program that will contribute to improvements in the welfare of the community
in the area project, and the protection of the local environment?.




                                                                                       1
 The project consists on a run of the river power plant, with a nominal capacity of 80 MW
and an anticipated generation of 510 GWh/year. The turbines and other ancillary facilities
are being installed underground, along one side of the river, thus minimizing impacts on
the landscape. The power plant will be connected to the grid through an 18km
transmission line.

Moreover, the project will support the implementation of a Social and Environmental
Program that will contribute to improvements in the welfare of the community in the area
project, and the protection of the local environment. The Environmental and Social
Program will be financed with 20% of the value of the carbon credits.




The Project is located in the mid range of the Amoya River at 1,400 meters above sea
level. The project site is downstream of the National Park Paramo de Las Hermosas
where the headwaters of the Amoya River are found.

The Amoya Hydropower Project has an installed capacity of 80 MW and a design flow of
18 m3/s. The project will affect about 13 km of the Amoya river flow. The project will
maintain 1 m3/s as ecological flow downstream of the dam. This ecological flow is
expected to improve with the discharge of several small streams (which are estimated to
provide an additional mean flow of 16.9 m3/s). The mean annual flow for the Amoya
River is estimated to be 44.6 m3/s and the minimum flow: 15.6 m3/s.

The project is located in a narrow cannon covered with agricultural land and patches of
riparian vegetation. The conduction of water is completely underground (12 km) which
has reduced significantly the project environmental impacts. The powerhouse is also
underground. The transmission line is 18 km long and mainly crosses agricultural land.
The water of the Amoya river is very clean.

The Amoya River Environmental Services Project is located in the municipality of
Chaparral in the south of the department of Tolima at the Colombian Central Andes at an
altitude ranging from 800 m to 4,500 m. Chaparral has a population of 41,052 habitants,
51% of which live in urban areas. In the rural areas, the main activities are agriculture,
with the most important crops being coffee, sugar cane, corn, and cattle.

The rural population in the project area is around 7,000 inhabitants, out of which 802
inhabitants, representing around 11.4% of the total population are members of recently
recognized indigenous            . They belong to four settlements: El Escobal, La
Virginia, Rionegro and Cimarrona Alta (see further information below).
Ruth Tiffer-Sotomayor, Sr. Environmental Specialist, LCSEN
Alonso Zarzar, Sr. Social Scientist, LCSSO (Social Safeguards)




The agreed Environmental Program in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (which
included activities to conserve and research the paramo ecosystems of Las Hermosas
National Park) is not going to be implemented as agreed before, mainly because the
ownership changed and the current Project Entity (PE) named ISAGEN will implement
directly their own social and environmental programs. ISAGEN has established a
cooperation agreement with the local communities and the new programs will strengthen
their cooperation to increase local environmental conservation and social development.
The new programs will be agreed with the local communities after a consultation process,
and will be in accordance with WB operational policies.

ISAGEN is a mix public-private company with an excellent environmental capacity to
perform its environmental management plan (http://www.isagen.com.co/comunidades/gestion-
ambiental/). The company has a staff of more than 20 professionals (biologists, engineers,
sociologist, etc) working in the different projects under construction and operation in the
country. In addition, ISAGEN hires universities (e.g. Universidad Católica de Oriente) or
independent consultants to perform specific environmental studies. ISAGEN has
environmental and social policies and corporate environmental programs.



                                                                                         3
The environmental impacts have been monitored and the environmental management
plan has been followed. The project has complied with all the terms of the environmental
license agreed with the National Environmental Authority (CORTOLIMA). Most of the
environmental impacts which were identified in the Environmental Impact Assessment
(EIA) are generated during the construction phase of the project. Some of the impacts of
the project and mitigation measures being implemented by ISAGEN are indicated in the
following table:

Impacts                              Caused by                        Mitigation
Diversion of the Amoya river flow Construction of the dam, Environmental flow of 1m3/s
                                   intake and retention tanks in
                                   the Amoya River
Cutting of about 70 ha of riparian Removal        of       riparian A reforestation program which will be
vegetation                         vegetation to build civil implemented in the project area.
                                   works,      roads,       camps,
                                   excavation disposal sites.

Impact on the soil and subsoil Excavation of tunnels            Selection of 10 ‘disposal sites? in a civil
structure and composition to place                              design to ensure security, drainage and
about 444,000 m3 of blasted rock                                slope conformations
waste.
Riverbed alterations               Extraction of rock materials Mining permits given by the National
                                   (from aluvional sources or Environmental Authority
                                   quarries)

Discharge of contaminated water Camp sites, oil changes, etc          Grease and oil traps built in each camp
(domestic, taller, etc)                                               site. Monitoring of water quality
                                                                      downstream of camp sites.
Solid wastes (domestic, toxic, etc) Generated by the camp sites. Recollection of wastes by contractor
                                      Oil, grease, paint, solvents, and proper disposal
                                      contaminated soil.
Air quality                           Cement plant                    Monitoring of air quality in the project
                                                                      area.
Recycles waste (metals, batteries, Different activities               Recollection of wastes in special site
paper, tires, etc)                                                    and transported by a contractor to
                                                                      recycling site.
Accidents during construction Construction of works                   A clinic was installed in the camp site.
(health and safety issues)                                            Health and safety training is given to
                                                                      contractors. Personal health safety
                                                                      equipment is mandatory in the project
                                                                      sites.
Intervention      of   small    rural Construction of overall project Creation of formal local committees to
communities                                                           facilitate communication and
                                                                      negotiations with the company.
                                                                      Rehabilitation of roads and
                                                                      rehabilitation of health clinics, schools,
                                                                      water systems, bridges, etc.

ISAGEN has invested to August 2011 in the implementation of mitigation, prevention
and compensation of environmental and social measures, and community projects
27,357,244 USD in the project area.
                                                               Investments
Themes
                                                                  (USD)
Human Rights and related issues                                 120,572

Enviromental management (water, soil,forestry)                  884,912

Community infraestructure                                      23,614,600

Health                                                          339,715
Education and Culture                                           457,125

Community Development                                           284,940
Others (archaeology, land acquisition, unforeseen impacts)      1,655,380
TOTAL                                                          27,357,244




The Amoya Hydropower project affected aquatic and terrestrial (forest land) natural
habitats for the construction the different components of the project. Aquatic
communities have been affected during the construction of the dam and will also be
affected during the operation of the project in a stretch of about 13 km.

The environmental staff of ISAGEN has developed a broad monitoring program in seven
sites of the Amoya river and several tributaries in the project area (upstream and
downstream of the dam) to assess the environmental impact caused during construction to
the aquatic communities (fish, algae and macroinvertebrates) and water quality. The
program will continue the monitoring during operation of the power plan to monitor the
benefits to the ecological flow. ISAGEN has invested in this monitoring program about
USD 232,294. This program follows the Environmental Permit given by the Regional
Environmental Authority.

The project is located 7 km downstream of the Las Hermosas National Park boundary;
the project does not affect critical habitats.




The following safeguards were not originally triggered in the planning phase of the
project, but need to be triggered now:


During project preparation no Indigenous Peoples had been identified either by the Bank
team or ISAGEN in the project area. During project supervision the Bank team was
unable to perform field visits due to security reasons. The project area and the Paramo de
las Hermosas has been for several years and still is a territory with high FARC and
                                                                                        5
military presence. After several attempts at field supervision the team was finally allowed
by the client to make a field visit in 2011, based on the assessment of the security
circumstances. During meetings with the Asociacion Las Hermosas, representing all the
people in the project area, the team learned of the presence of Indigenous Peoples. The
team requested information as to why no reference had been made by the client to the
presence of Indigenous Peoples in the previous supervisions that were held in the offices
of ISAGEN in Medellin and Bogota. The team was informed that only in 2010 and after
following a required Colombian legal process, four settlements (El Escobal, La Virginia,
Rionegro and Cimarrona Alta) changed its legal status to be considered indigenous
settlements by the Ministry of Justice and Interior. Due to this new circumstance
ISAGEN will provide the Bank with an Indigenous Peoples Plan as per OP/BP 4.10. The
IPP should include a summary report of the consultations made to the 4 indigenous
settlements and the indigenous communities’ broad support of the proposed IPP.

Before the beginning of the civil works, and following the national legal procedures,
ISAGEN had requested the MIJ to determine the presence of Indigenous Peoples in the
Amoya Project area of influence. The MIJ certified at that point that there were no
Indigenous communities in the area and this was communicated to the Bank. Also, before
the beginning of the civil works, and during two years, ISAGEN developed a process of
consultation and benefit agreements with all the communities in the Amoya area. During
this process the community representatives requested ISAGEN to financially support the
realization of the ethnographic studies so that the MIJ could further determine the legal
status of the above mentioned settlements. ISAGEN agreed and signed a collaboration
agreement with the Governor of Tolima Department to support those studies that the MIJ
will carry out in order to determine if those settlements fulfilled the legal requirement to
be considered indigenous under Colombian law. Later on the MIJ considered these
settlements as being indigenous communities.

There are four Indigenous communities in the Project area that are made up by 802
inhabitants, representing around 11.4% of the total population in the Amoya area which
has approximately 7,000 inhabitants. These Indigenous communities have not been
adversely affected by the Project’s investments or activities as they live at higher
elevations and thus any river flow alterations do not affect their access to water sources
or the fish and fauna that depend on these sources. Their agriculture is entirely dependent
on rain. However, they have been participating in the consultation processes and benefits
of the social program ISAGEN is implementing in the Amoya project area.

Whereas these Indigenous peoples no longer maintain their native languages, they self-
identify and are identified by others as Indigenous and, with the help of ISAGEN, have
recently gained official recognition as Indigenous peoples by the Ministry of the Interior
and Justice.

The Indigenous Peoples Policy was not originally triggered for this Project as the Bank
team was informed that there were no Indigenous peoples in the project area. Given the
lack of security in the region, the Team was unable to verify this until a recent mission
related to this Restructuring at which point the Team recommended the Policy be
triggered and that a separate yet Indigenous Peoples Plan be prepared commensurate to
the limited level of impact of the Project.




The project intervened several sites along the Amoya River (terraces) to place many tons
of blasted rocks from the tunnel construction and many excavations that were needed for
the project construction. Some archeological artifacts were found in the area. The EMP
includes procedures that are consistent with the policy such archeological surveys,
communication with the Local authority, conservation of artifacts, environmental
education activities with contractors and communities, among others. ISAGEN will
provide the Bank with an updated Environmental Management Plan (EMP), including an
annex with a list of preservation and protection measures, and chance find procedures.



The construction of the power plant has led to relocation of five families, with whom land
and housing purchase arrangements have been made. The Project Entity (PE) ISAGEN
has handled the issue with adequate standards that are at the level of the Bank policy and
has provided the Bank with the resettlement compensation plan. See attached table.

The PE is building a transmission line with the total length of 18.6 km, requiring 20m
wide right of way throughout. The line goes through 79 properties. The construction of
the transmission line does not require relocation of houses or farms and does not entail
land acquisition. Even after the transmission line is completed, the area will remain in the
hands of the owners and they are free to continue all activities, apart from growing tall
trees and building permanent structures closer than 10 meters to the transmission line on
both sides. ISAGEN has finalized the process of negotiating the compensations with the
property owners. ISAGEN has reached legal agreements with 67 owners but 12 have not
accepted ISAGEN offers, and are currently been processed in the judiciary following the
country legal procedures. The Bank has received evidence of these agreements.




                                                                                          7
                                                                Affected person’s
                         Potential type of impact                                               Compensation
                                                                    eligibility                                                                                 Change in
Description                                                                                                 Moving                        Current house         access to
                                                                                                                         Use of cash
of affected                                                                                       Cash     allowance                      and livelihood     social services
                               House/                       Property                 Cash for                           compensation
  family      Property                         Livelihood                Occupant                  for         &                          compensation             and
                            Improvements                     Owner                   property
                                                                                                  house    Livelihood                                         infrastructure
                                                                                                           assistance
Property 1:
Couple w/ 2                                                                                                             Bought new       Works in the        Now lives in
kids in                                                                                                                 house and land   Amoya               town & closer
school        X             X                               X            X           X            X        X            in town          company             to services
                                                                                                                        Bought new
                                                                                                                        land & house     Left the area
                                                                                                                        & continues      after joining the
Property 2:                                                                                                             their            Presidential
Couple w/3                                                                                                              agriculture      Demobilization
kids                        X                 Partial                    X                        X        X            activities       Program             N/A

                                                                                                                                         Left the area
                                                                                                                                         after joining the
Property 3:                                                                                                             Bought new       Presidential
Couple w/3                                                                                                              house and land   Demobilization
kids                        X                                            X                        X        X            in town          Program             N/A
Property 4:                                                                                                                                                  Kids now
Couple w/5                                                                                                              Bought new                           have access to
kids                        X                                            X                        X        X            land and house   Agriculture         school
                                                                                                                                         Works on his
Property 5:                                                                                                             Bought new       own land & kids
Couple w/5                                                                                                              house and        have access to
kids          X             X                                          X                         X         X            arable land      school              N/A
                                                            Property owners were different from Occupants in cases
                                                                                     Cash for
Property 2    X                                             X                        Property
                                                                                     Cash for
Property 3    X                                             X                        Easement
                                                                                     Cash for
Property 4    X                                             X                        Easement
The project needed to cut 514.9 m3 of riparian vegetation along the Amoya River in order
to build the components of the project infrastructure. The Regional Environmental
Authority established several measures to compensate this environmental impact.
ISAGEN will have to provide the Bank with an updated EMP, including an annex with a
description of the Forestry Program (species to be protected, areas to be restored, strategy
to follow with the local communities, etc.).



This policy needs to be triggered since the project is building a dam and associated water
retention tanks to store about a maximum volume of 20.000 m3 (13.000 m3 in the
desilting chambers y 7.000 m3 by the dam) of water upstream of local infrastructure and
the project management camp sites. The project will install dam safety instrumentation
and will prepare an emergency and maintenance plan to comply with the policy. The
procedures follow by ISAGEN during the design and construction stages of the dam are
consistent with the policy requirements for small dams. Geological and hydrological
studies were contracted to experts to select the dam site and final design plans included
dam safety security factors for stability and monitoring. Civil engineers and dam safety
experts have supervised the construction of the works.

ISAGEN will provide the Bank with an updated EMP, including an annex with
documents related to the maintenance and safety of the dam by June 30, 2012.

The updated EMP and the IPP should be developed by ISAGEN and delivered to the WB
team no later than June 30, 2012. The new ERPA to be signed before January 31, 2012,
will include a condition precedent of receiving a revision of Amoya's EMP and IPP to the
satisfaction of the World Bank Team




                               : The project will no finance the use of pesticides or
herbicides. In the maintenance of vegetation around facilities only manual or mechanical
instruments will be used (machete, weed cutters).

                                           The project is not located in an international
waterway.

                             The project is not located in a disputed area.




                                                                                          9
Some permanent impacts are related to (i) the construction of the run of river dam which
has reduced the river flow of about 13 km of the Amoya River which will cause long
term impacts to the river aquatic communities, and (ii) the creation of rock disposal sites
along the river banks. In the long term, the project will not change the current trends in
land use in the area. The design water flow for the Amoya project is 19,0 m3/s.

The mitigation measures apply by the project to the reduced flow are:
(i) an environmental flow of 1m3/s which is expected to increase with the additional flow
of 16.9 m3/s from downstream tributaries;
(ii) an aquatic monitoring program of the Amoya River before and during project’s
construction, as well as during the operation of the plant. The Amoya river flows reported
in the EIA were: mean annual flow: 44.6 m3/s, minimum flow: 15.6 m3/s and maximum
flow: 88.1 m3/s. Ten aquatic monitoring campaigns (including physical-chemical
parameters and aquatic fauna) have been performed from February 2008 till 2011, which
have been coordinated with river experts from the Universidad Catolica de Oriente. The
monitoring reports have been sent to the regional environmental authority
(CORTOLIMA) periodically. Moreover, levels of dissolved oxygen which is recorded as
part of aquatic monitoring program, has remained with adequate levels (similar to levels
existing before the construction of the plant).

The disposal sites of rock debris built along the Amoya river banks does not affect
critical habitat. The placement of these debris (produced by tunnel excavations mainly)
were following a construction plan taking into consideration the volume, a drainage
system, security factor and slope stability. ISAGEN will perform maintenance and
security supervision of these areas during the operation of the power plant.

At local level, ISAGEN signed a two-year voluntary agreement of US$53.500, with the
Special Administrative Unit of the National Natural Park System to support Las
Hermosas Natural Park, and committed to support the implementation of an
environmental education program. See list of activist which will be financed by ISAGEN.



                                                           (USD )            (USD)
 Hardware and software equipments, a printer, a             5,595             5,547
 photocopy machine and a TV set for the
 Environmental Education Training Program of El
 Chaparral and Rio Blanco municipalities.
 Environmental books, learning materials and games          3,916             1,887
 for five educational organizations.
 Environmental education activities/workshops.              3,357             1,206
 Supplies and printing educational materials.               3,357             1,424
 Tour for the exchange of educational experiences           2,797             2,534
 among environmental trainers.
 Fees for the professional in charge of preparing the        8,392             5,595
 environmental history of the Park’s paths in el
 Chaparral.
 Dissemination Program of the National Park and its          2,797             1,286
 activities.
 Park wood signs with environmental messages and             9,511             9,511
 information.
 Printing publications, videos.                              5,595             2,948
 Initial    site     characterization     for      land      7,833             5,595
 planning/management.




The project demonstrates the sustainable use of the natural resources in the area,
illustrating the linkages between protection and sustainable use of the resource water for
power generation and the generation of a stream of revenues. In addition the project will
contribute to global sustainability by reducing GHG emissions from the power sector in
Colombia. Domestically, the project contributes to sustainable development by
promoting diversity in the infrastructure and sources of energy for the power sector and
increasing its security of supply while advancing an alternative mode to the expansion of
the sector.

 Moreover, ISAGEN agreed to invest 20% of the carbon revenues into the
implementation of Environmental and Social Programs which will be agreed with the
community. This program will contribute to improvements in the welfare of the
community in the area project and the protection of the local environment.




Basis for Carbon Finance (CF) project selection. The project was selected based on rules
adopted by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
parties for eligibility to the Kyoto Protocol's Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), and
it meets all of the eligibility criteria of the NCDF which will purchase the CREs. In
addition, the project supports the carbon finance portfolio strategy of achieving diversity
across countries and regions with emphasis on renewable energy.

Several alternatives were considered for the location of the plant and ancillary facilities,
rated capacity and technology. Alternative locations were rejected based on perceived
environmental risks, ease of implementation and hydrological (net hydraulic head)
potential. On the site, seven alternatives were examined for optimal location of the intake
and discharge points. A hydrology analysis has confirmed the generation potential. The
rated capacity was selected to take advantage of the maximum power potential. The
technology (Pelton turbines) was selected on the basis of reliability and documented

                                                                                         11
experience. The Feasibility Study conducted by GU, confirmed the viability of the
project.

Other alternatives considered during design were: conduction of waters either by
superficial channels vs. tunnel, pit sites and rocky deposition sites, location of the power
house.

ISAGEN is the sole owner of the project. ISAGEN's participation ensures a partner that
knows the electricity business in the country and has the financial clout to carry the
project to completion.




The environmental license was granted on December 16, 1999. It included a water
concession of 50 years. The construction permit was authorized on June 27, 2000. The
Environmental review was done and approved by CORTOLIMA. The Bank reviewed the
study. A social assessment serving as the basis for the social program was prepared. A
fraction of the carbon revenues will be used to finance the environmental and social
programs.




ISAGEN has carried out a number of workshops and consultations in the region. The
local community has indicated a strong ownership and support to the project. The social
assessment was the basis for the social program and it was based on an exhaustive
consultation program with the local community.

A result of the consultations and participatory processes carried out by ISAGEN, a plan
was agreed with the local communities to generate social and environmental benefits
(“Concertacion de beneficios con la comunidad del Area de Influencia del PH Amoya?)
which was later published by the company and constitutes a bidding document of the
company with the local stakeholders (which includes the Parque Nacional Las
Hermosas).




 Was the document disclosed                                       Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10/02/03
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  10/02/03
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12/19/03
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

 Was the document disclosed                                     Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                     2/16/2010
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 2/16/2010
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                 11/16/2011

 Was the document disclosed                                     No
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                     Before June 30, 2012
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 Before June 30, 2012
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                  Before June 30, 2012

 Was the document disclosed                                      N/A
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                     N/A
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 N/A
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                  N/A




Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?     Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager      Yes
(SM) review and approve the EA report? June 30, 2003
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the Yes
credit/loan?

Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as           Underway
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Expected before
Manager review the plan?                                                June 30, 2012



                                                                                          13
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been Expected before
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or June 30, 2012
Sector Manager?

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Yes
Manager review the plan?

Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes
Bank's InfoShop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local NGOs?

Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional            Yes
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes the Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?




Task Team Leader:                 Leopoldo Montanez                             04.18.2012
Environmental Specialist:         Ruth Tiffer-Sotomayor                         04.23.2012
Social Development Specialist     Alonso Zarzar                                 05.02.2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):


Sector Manager:                   Todd M. Johnson on behal of Malcom            05.08.2012
                                  Cosgrove-Davies
                                                                                05.04.2012
Regional Safeguards Advisor:    Glenn Morgan
  Comments: This is the new ISDS corresponding to the additional safeguard for resettlement.
