                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/22/2011                                      Report No.: AC6402
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Colombia                            Project ID: P096965
Project Name: La Guajira Water and Sanitation Infrastructure and Service Management
Project
Task Team Leader: Greg J. Browder
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 22,        Estimated Board Date: March 15, 2007
2007
Managing Unit: LCSUW                         Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                             Loan
Sector: Water supply (71%);Sewerage (21%);Sub-national government administration
(8%)
Theme: Urban services and housing for the poor (33%);Rural services and infrastructure
(17%);Other human development (17%);Participation and civic engagement
(17%);Indigenous peoples (16%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            90
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                     50.00
         Municipalities of Borrowing Country                          10.20
         Local Sources of Borrowing Country                            8.00
                                                                      68.20
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The PDO has been slightly modified to include rural areas in its geographic scope as
follows: "to improve the quality of water supply and sanitation services in urban, peri-
urban, and rural areas of the Borrower's territory by: (a) supporting utility institutional
performance through the use of #specialized operators; and (b) delivering the necessary
water and sanitation infrastructure."

3. Project Description
Component 1. Urban Water Supply and Sewerage Infrastructure Component (US$ 129.0
million, including US$ 76 million of Bank financing): Component 1 of the Project would
finance civil works, equipment, and services for water supply and sanitation in the
participating municipalities of the Department of La Guajira. It is expected that at least 8
municipalities of the Department will participate in the urban investment component.

 Component 2. Rural Pilot Component (US$ 7.0 million, including US$ 7.0 million of
Bank financing): Component 2 of the Project will finance small pilot activities to
improve the access of rural, mostly indigenous Wayuu, communities to appropriate water
supply and sanitation services in an efficient and sustainable manner. The Department of
La Guajira has constructed, or in the process of constructing, 11 small reservoirs to serve
rural indigenous communities. This component will finance ancillary infrastructure such
as appropriate water treatment and distribution systems, and work with indigenous
communities to ensure appropriate and sustainable water systems.

  Component 3. Program Management and Analytical Activities (US$ 7.0 million,
including US$ 7.0 million of Bank financing): Component 3 o f the Project would
finance goods and services associated with the management of Project financed activities
and analytical studies in the areas of groundwater resources as well as activities to
improve transparency and accountability through performance management and the
dissemination of information about sector and utility performance.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project will be carried out in the Department of La Guajira located in northeastern
Colombia . The Project will benefit 15 municipalities with an area of 20,848 km2. The
main economic activities in La Guajira are coal mining, oil and gas production,
agriculture, cattle ranching and tourism. La Guajira has a population of approximately
520,000 inhabitants. Approximately 70% of them live in urban centers, particularly in
Maicao and Riohacha. About 42% of La Guajira#s population is comprised of indigenous
communities of the Wayuh, and Kogui.

 Inadequate water supply, sanitation and hygiene are pervasive in L a Guajira. The poor
provision of water and sanitation services in La Guajira causes a variety of environmental
 problems. Unsanitary conditions result from obsolete sewerage systems, leakage, the
spillage of wastewater in urban areas, and untreated surface water, among others. This
analysis draws upon the two largest cities of the Department, Riohacha and Maicao, the
cases of which are similar to many other municipalities. Network failures, illicit
household connections, low coverage and lack of treatment and disposal occur in most
areas. The environmental degradation related to the management and disposal of
wastewater is a problem in most of La Guajira's municipalities.

 Sewerage systems collect wastewater and rainwater. Some municipalities have
oxidation ponds which do not function properly; untreated wastewater spills into and
contaminates bodies of water. Most wastewater is not properly captured and treated, and
instead spills into the ground, posing a high risk o f direct contact with the population. In
places such as Maicao, oxidation ponds were built in places inhabited by vulnerable
communities and thus, pose a high risk of direct contact with the population. Unsanitary
conditions result from lack of or inadequate sewerage systems, leakage, the spillage of
wastewater in urban areas, and untreated surface water, among others.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSSO)
   Ms Clara Hortensia Gomez Hernandez (LCSSO)
   Mr Carlos Vargas Bejarano (LCSEN)
   Mr Robert H. Montgomery (LCSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The restructuring operation will have an environmental category of "B" which is the same
as the original operation.

 Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP/BP 4.10): The Borrower prepared an Indigenous Peoples
Planning Framework in 2007 to meet the Bank?s appraisal requirements. During Project
implementation, three sub-projects have triggered this policy:

 i) Rural reservoir program in Component 2 involving 11 small reservoirs for indigenous
communities with a total beneficiary population of around 7,000 people. The Borrower
has prepared and Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) for the rural reservoir program which has
been approved by the Bank and disclosed in the Infoshop on June 15, 2011 and locally on
August 2, 2011.

 ii) Wastewater treatment lagoons in Riohacha, requiring the resettlement of
approximately 100 indigenous families. The Borrower has also prepared a document
which serves as both an IPP and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the Riohacha
wastewater treatment lagoons which has been approved by the Bank and disclosed in the
Infoshop on August 12, 2011 and locally on August 2, 2011.
 iii) New wastewater treatment lagoons in Maicao, potentially affecting approximately
25 indigenous households. The Borrower is in the process of formulating the IPP for this
subproject. Finalization of the IPP will depend on the results of consultations and
agreement reached between the Ministry of Interior and Justice and the potentially
affected indigenous community. One of the considerations in these consultations will be
the determination of the area of environmental influence of lagoons which the regional
environmental authority, Corpoguajira, is currently studying. The Gerencia is in close
communication with the municipal water operator, the Ministry of Interior, and
Corpoguajira on these issues. The Maicao water operator (Aguas de la Pennisula)
currently operates existing wastewater treatment lagoons within the urban area of
Maicao; the existing lagoons are undersized and generate an environmental nuisance for
the surrounding community. The Operator is under court order to close down the existing
lagoons, and construct new lagoons outside of the existing urban area. The Operator has
purchased a suitable plot in a rural area, and the local indigenous community has
permitted to construction to proceed while consultations are underway. The Gerencia has
initiated the IPP preparation for this subproject and will rapidly finalize the IPP after the
Ministry of Interior completes their consultations. The Loan Amendment shall include a
covenant requiring the IPP to be completed before the Maicao wastewater treatment
lagoons are put into operation.

 Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP/BP 4.12): The Borrower prepared a Resettlement
Policy Framework in 2007 to meet the Bank#s appraisal requirements. During Project
implementation, the wastewater treatment lagoons subproject in Riohacha, involving the
resettlement of approximately 100 indigenous families, activated the policy. The
Borrower has prepared an acceptable RAP for the subproject which has been approved by
the Bank and disclosed in the Infoshop on August 12, 2011 and locally on August 2,
2011.

  Projects on International Water Ways (OP 7.50): Although the Bank task team has
determined with the Gerencia that the Project will not affect the quantity or quality of
waters to other riparian states, OP 7.50 requires that all riparian states be informed of the
planned investments under Bank-financed projects. The municipality of Maicao in La
Guajira lies within the Carraipla-Paraguachon watershed which is shared by Colombia
and Venezuela. During Project preparation, it was envisioned that the Project would
finance small water supply and sanitation works in Maico. In compliance with OP 7.50,
on September 28, 2006 the Government of Colombia, through MADVT, notified the
Government of Government of the proposed Project. There was no response from the
Venezuelan government.

 The Project will finance wastewater collection works in the La Guajira municipality of
Maicao. The collected wastewater will be conveyed to a new wastewater treatment
lagoon system located on the outskirts of the Maicao. The lagoons are expected to
become operational in 2012. The treated effluent from the lagoons, with an average flow
of approximately 0.18 m3/s, will be discharged into a normally dry stream bed which
runs northward in Colombian territory before terminating in the desert still within
Colombia. The dry stream bed is generally parallel to the Venezuelan border which is
approximately 1-2 kilometers to the east. There is not expected to be any measurable
impact on water quality or quantity in Venezuela due to the treated effluent. The
Colombian government, through the Ministiy of Foreign Affairs, notified the Venezuelan
government on February 17, 2011 of the proposed Maicao wastewater treatment lagoons
and offered to provide additional technical information upon request. To-date, the
Venezuelan government has not responded to the notification.

 Safety of Dams (OP4.37): In 2009, the Department and the National Government
developed a #small rural reservoir program# consisting of the construction of
approximately 11 small reservoirs in the municipality of Uribia. The rural reservoir
program is a priority national project to attend to the severe water shortages affecting
indigenous communities in La Guajira. As of November 2011, ten of the eleven small
reservoirs have been constructed and are financed entirely with counterpart-funding.

  The original design for the reservoir dams was prepared by local NGO (CORDES) and
approved by the MADVT. During the first Bank site visit to the two of the reservoirs in
February 2010, it was clear that there were deficiencies in the construction supervision
and design. The reservoir civil works contract was suspended until these issues could be
addressed. In mid-2010, the Gerencia#s contract was modified to include design review
and construction supervision of the rural reservoir program. In order to comply with OP
4.37, the Gerencia has prepared a Dam Safety report which summarizes how the design
and construction issues are being addressed, and provides a general framework for future
dam safety operations and maintenance. The Dam Safety report has been found to be
acceptable by the Bank. In general, no major embankment stability problems have been
identified, however there are deficiencies in the design of the spillways and the water
intake structures which are being corrected. The long-term maintenance of the structures
is a concern due to limited capacity of the communities, and the Loan Amendment
includes a covenant requiring the Borrower to ensure the formulation and implementation
of a Dam Management and Sustainability Plan for the Rural Reservoir Program by no
later than December 31, 2013.

 Environmental Assessment (OP4.01): In 2006 as a condition of Project approval, the
World Bank approved the Project Environmental Assessment Report, which included the
Environmental Management Plan. The Report was disclosed in the Infoshop on January
1, 2007 and locally on June 26, 2007. In addition, the Gerencia has developed an
environmental management system based upon its experience with water and sanitation
projects in Bogota. The main document governing the environmental management
system is the #Guide for Managing Environmental Impacts in Urban and Rural Areas for
the La Guajira PDA.# Construction contracts will include the relevant environmental
management requirements, and a Construction Supervision Manual has been prepared by
the Gerencia which specifies how environmental management actions are to be
monitored and confirmed. As of mid-2011, the Gerencia is still in the process of
incorporating good environmental practices into its construction and supervision
contracts. The Bank is closely monitoring the Projects environmental management
activities and offering technical assistance as required.
  Specific subprojects under the Project require Environmental Assessments under
Colombian law, which must be approved by the relevant environmental authorities. To
date, the Riohacha and Maicao wastewater treatment lagoons have required
environmental license from the regional environmental authority, Corpoguajira. The
Department completed its environmental assessment for the Riohacha wastewater
treatment lagoons and received its environmental license from Corpoguajira in 2004
(Resoluci?n No.049). The environmental license was provided before the Bank-financed
project was even conceptualized. After approval of the Bank project in 2007, the Bank
requested the Department of La Guajira to undertake a study of wastewater treatment
alternatives, including submarine disposal with preliminary treatment. The Riohacha
Wastewater Treatment Study (September 2007) confirmed wastewater treatment lagoons
as the preferred alternative.

  The Maicao wastewater treatment lagoons subproject received its environmental license
from Corporguajira in 2008 (Resoluci?n 1382). During the initial stages of construction,
however, local indigenous communities requested that the discharge point for the treated
effluent be moved to another location. The specialized water operator for Maicao (Aguas
de la Peninsula) is currently investigating other discharge points, which would
necessarily require a modification of the environmental license.

  The rural reservoir program was also subjected to environmental review and is under the
environmental management of the Gerencia. The selection and project preparation for
each of the 11 reservoirs was undertaken by a local NGO (CORDES) in consultation with
the local communities and with the guidance of the regional environmental authority,
Corpoguajira. Due to the relatively small size of the reservoirs, a formal environmental
license was not required. However, for each reservoir CORDES prepared an
environmental management plan which was reviewed and approved by Corproguajira.
The Gerencia is currently supervising the implementation of the environmental
management plan by the contractors constructing the reservoirs. In addition, to managing
the construction environmental impacts, there are also some potential operational
environmental issues, particularly with respect to water quality and salinity, control of
aquatic vegetation, and maintenance of the reservoir embankments. The Gerencia will
continue to monitor the environmental conditions during the operation phase and take
mitigation actions where necessary.

 Natural Habitats (OP4.04). According to the EA and the Gerencia#s #Guide for
Managing Environmental Impacts,# if any natural habitats (as defined by OP 4.04) could
potentially be significantly degraded or converted either directly or indirectly as a result
of the Project, the screening criteria will assess for this possibility, and accompanying
environmental management guidelines ensure that sub-projects would be in compliance
with OP 4.04. To date, no subproject has triggered this policy.

 Cultural Property (OP4.11). In accordance with Bank#s policies, the Project has adapted
and will apply existing good practice guidelines for screening of sub-project locations
and chance find procedures. The procedures are codified in the Gerencia#s #Guide for
Managing Environmental Impacts,# are in compliance with OP4.11. To date, no
subproject has triggered this policy.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No potential indirect or long term impacts due to anticipated future activies are forseen in
the project area.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Since the Project is a collection of small subprojects, most of them small water supply
and sanitation infrastructure activities, the alternative analysis takes places during the
engineering design, and where appropriate in the Environmental Assessment for specific
subprojects, such as the wastewater treatment lagoons in Maicao and Riohacha.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower implements the Project through its Gerencia which includes a social team
of four full-time staff, including an Indigenous Peoples specialist. The Social team is led
by a suitably qualified social specialist from the Bogota Water Company.

 The Gerencia also has a part-time environmental specialist from the Bogota Water
Company which is responsible for overseeing its environmental activities. Social and
environmental considerations are or will be incorporated into construction and
construction supervision documents. Finally, the Gerencia has or will contract specialized
consultants to implement the Indigenous Peoples Plans for the rural reservoir program,
and the wastewater treatment lagoons in Riohacha and Maicao.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Indigenous Communities: As required by Colombian law all subprojects which impact
indigenous communities require prior consultation under the supervision of the Ministry
of Interior and Justice. In addition, per OP 4.10, the preparation and implementation of all
Indigenous Peoples Plans require consultation, monitoring and follow-up with indigenous
communities. These activities are taking place for the rural reservoir program, as well as
the wastewater treatment lagoons in Riohacha and Maicao.

 Urban Populations: The Gerencia has a communication and outreach program informing
urban residents in participating municipalities of the Project. Since the focus of the water
supply investment is to improve service, and at the same time introduce household water
metering and a billing system based on volumetric usage, the Gerencia in collaboration
with the water operators will contract specialized social consultants to work at the
neighborhood and household levels to inform people of both the mutual obligations of the
specialized operator to provide better service and the responsibility of the household to
pay for improved service.
 Municipal Mayors and Councils: The Gerencia is actively interacting with municipal
mayors and councils to explain the Project to local governments, as well as the three
requisites for participating in the Project: i) a Convenio between the Department and
Municipality; ii) the contracting of a specialized Operator; and iii) adjusted water service
performance standards.

 Specialized Water Operators: The Gerencia is actively interacting with specialized
operators in the design and construction of the urban infrastructure, as well as providing
technical assistance to improve their operational and financial performance.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 06/23/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             06/26/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              01/20/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 07/25/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             07/31/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              01/20/2007
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/05/2005
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             01/04/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              01/20/2007
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   No
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                   Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed    N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                            Yes
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts       N/A
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements         N/A
been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                          Yes
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification            N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                         N/A
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                            Name                           Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Greg J. Browder                           11/01/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Robert H. Montgomery                      11/02/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis                       11/02/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan                           11/07/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Guang Zhe Chen                            11/08/2011
  Comments:
