                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC6348


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/09/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Colombia                         Project ID: P120159
Project Name: Barranquilla Urban Flood Management
Task Team Leader: Niels B. Holm-Nielsen
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 23,     Estimated Board Date: April 30, 2013
2013
Managing Unit: LCSUW                      Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                          Loan
Sector: Flood protection (100%)
Theme: Natural disaster management (40%);Climate change (20%);Other urban
development (20%);Land administration and management (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):         150.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                 100.00
                                                                 100.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed objective of the Project is to reduce the risk of urban flooding in target areas of
Barranquilla. The PDO will be measured by tracking: i) percentage of streets in target areas that
have drainage systems with a XX flood design return period (to be determined), ii) population
living and working in risk-prone areas, iii) number of drainage inlets that are impeded due to
solid waste in target areas.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The Project will be limited to the Eastern watershed for which solutions can be implemented
independently of progress on the Western watershed. Barranquilla is currently exploring
support from the Andean Development Corporation (CAF) for a project in the Western
watershed. The Project will be designed and implemented to provide an integrated solution to the
flooding problem at the city level, and intends to focus on the introduction of physical,
institutional, and social measures that will ensure the sustainability of a flood mitigation
framework.
  There are known and tested measures for urban flood risk management, typically classified as
structural or engineered measures, and non-structural, management techniques. A combination of
measures to form an integrated management approach is most likely to be successful in reducing
flood risk in the short and medium terms. Structural solutions can be thought of as engineering
solutions to storm water management used to manage storm water at the point of generation, the
point of discharge, or at any point along the flood path. Structural solutions can serve many
different functions based on their design and include investments in hard infrastructure (large
drainage networks comprised of embankments, pumps, flood gates, etc.) and routine operations
and maintenance. Non-structural issues are more complex due to social variability, but can
include responses such as improved land use and site planning, regulatory reforms, behavior
change, institutional coordination and engagement with the greater civil community. It also
includes social resettlement plans and environmental mitigation measures.

 Project Components

 Component 1: Flood Risk Identification and Awareness

  A.    Stormwater Drainage Master Planning: The outputs of the feasibility study of technical
solutions will contribute to the definition of a Stormwater Drainage Master Plan with strong
linkages to urban and transport planning that will guide the sequencing and nature of physical
interventions required across the city.

 B.    Flood Risk Knowledge: This involves studies for completing flood hazard identification,
vulnerability and risk assessments (for example, probability of loss of life and property if the
vulnerability is not addressed).

 C.     Education and Information Campaigns: The importance of risk mitigation and disaster
preparedness will be introduced at various levels of the educational system and will involve the
development and implementation of a multifaceted public information campaign improving
public awareness of urban flooding and of roles and responsibilities of individual households and
communities.




 Component 2: Flood Risk Reduction

 A.    Based on the Stormwater Drainage Master Plan and flood risk mapping undertaken in
Component 1, this component would initiate the first phase of physical interventions with
investments in selected micro-basins.

  B.    Structural Solutions: Current best management practice for high-impact and cost-
effective solutions for flood mitigation is to retard peak flows in upstream/midstream areas by
focusing on retention and detention. Such measures are high-impact as they slow the transfer
time by capturing large volumes of water and utilize areas of infiltration. This component would
therefore include detailed diagnostics of each #arroyo# with the objective of defining the
appropriate portfolio of response measures to promote hydraulic capacity and reduce run-off
levels following rain events by increasing water capture, making use of above- and below-
ground storage, and promoting infiltration rates. Investments would be focused on identification
and assessment of potential infrastructure and complementary alternatives. Investments would be
focused on potential infrastructure alternatives and involve construction of selected options to
promote hydraulic capacity and reduce run-off levels following rain events, including but not
limited to canalization, pipes, culverts, pedestrian bridges, or use of Low-Impact Development
(LID) solutions (i.e., pervious pavement).

 C.      Non-Structural Solutions: Some of the contributing causes to the urban flooding in
Barranquilla include blocking of the flood path as a result of litter and sediment deposition, and
private properties (e.g., residential, commercial, industrial) draining run-off directly onto city
streets. Similarly, flood risk is increased by the presence of homes, businesses, and infrastructure
in high-risk zones adjacent to the arroyos. This component would therefore focus on
environmental mitigation measures such as assessing potential use of green infrastructure,
improving solid waste collection/management practices, and evaluating potential application of
incentive mechanisms (i.e., property tax credits/subsidies) for implementation of run-off
reducing measures (e.g., rainwater capture, green roofs, pervious driveways). This subcomponent
should be strongly articulated within the public awareness strategy (Component 1).


 Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Preparedness

 Given the long time horizon that is projected for the full execution of physical works that would
be required, institutional capacity within city government and public service providers would
require strengthening to appropriately prepare for and respond to the residual flood risk. This
component would include the following subcomponents:

 A.     Project Administration: This includes the provision of consulting services, office
equipment, and supplies, and covers operating expenses for the coordinating unit of the proposed
project. The subcomponent would also finance the training of participating agencies# staff in
safeguard, fiduciary, and technical aspects of the project.

 B.      Capacity Building: Within the context of defining a disaster prevention strategy for the
city, this component would include a review of roles and responsibilities for flood risk
management in Barranquilla. Based on this analysis, and taking into account the structural
solutions that would be put in place, an assessment would be undertaken of required technical
capacity for day to day operations and maintenance of drainage systems and associated resource
allocation. The objective of these measures would be to streamline operations and maintenance
and flood risk management in the city#s political and policy framework, operational water and
sewer management, and DRM strategies and tools.

 C.     Early Warning System: The provision of early warning system to a forthcoming event is
increasingly being recognized as an important approach to reducing loses due to floods. To be
effective, such warning should not only be reliable but also timely enough to provide city
residents sufficient lead time to respond. This subcomponent would focus on the development of
an end-to-end flood forecast, warning and response system for those events which supersede the
installed hydraulic capacity of Barranquilla#s urban drainage system (Component 2). The system
would support Barranquilla#s Government in establishing an important non-structural response
to urban flooding and encompass data collection (quality and analytic capacity for monitoring
and risk mapping), communication, forecasting, decision support, notification, coordination, and
preparatory actions.

D. Project location (if known)
The Metropolitan Area of Barranquilla (AMBQ in Spanish) is Colombia#s fourth largest
conurbation with approximately 1.9 million inhabitants. The Metropolitan Area is bounded on
the east by the Magdalena River and north by the Caribbean Sea and is one of the most important
sea and river ports in Colombia. The AMBQ is comprised of the municipalities of Barranquilla,
Soledad, Malambo, Galapa, and Puerto Colombia. As the capital of the Department of Atlántico
and core of the Metropolitan Area, Barranquilla was constituted as a Special Industrial and Port
District in 1993. The District has become the most populous city on the Colombian Caribbean
Coast (1,148,506 inhabitants) and the fourth in the nation. Approximately 57% of the city#s total
population is classified as #poor# and is found in socioeconomic strata 1-2, which are the lowest
two of a six-strata system used in categorizing income distribution in the country.
Barranquilla#s hydrology is comprised of two principal basins that divide the city#s western and
eastern areas.

 The Project is located in the eastern watershed/basin area of Barranquilla (a portion of the
Magdalena River Basin) and consists of approximately 4,200 ha which is approximately 70% of
Barranquilla#s surface area. The Project area includes the oldest part of the city and a low flood
plain that extends along the Magdalena River. Most of the Project area consists of impervious
areas urban areas (e.g., residential, commercial, industrial), such as roads, roofs and paved areas.
The basin has relatively steep slopes of up to a few percent. Within the Project area there are 18
principal sub-basins that vary in size from 20 to 705 ha.

 The drainage system of Barranquilla was developed by using the streets as drains. A study
commissioned by the FONADE (Fondo Financiero de Proyectos de Desarrollo - Financial Fund
for Development Projects) in 1997 found that 20% of GDP in Barranquilla was affected each
year by the flooding. During periods of heavy rainfall, significant volumes of water flow at high
velocities through the city streets, transforming affected areas into high-risk zones. The
consequences of these events are reflected in damage to urban infrastructure and service
networks, and paralysis or disruption of vehicular and pedestrian traffic that affect not only the
general economic activity of the city, but also residents who suffer occasional destruction of their
homes and loss of life.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Project implementation arrangements are to be defined in collaboration with the national
government. A number of options need to be assessed including: City of Barranquilla, Secretary
of Planning of Barranquilla, and national government (e.g. Ministry of Environment and
Sustainable Development or Ministry of Cities, Housing and Territorial Development). The
Barranquilla Secretary of Planning is currently proposed to be the institution responsible for the
overall implementation and coordination of the Project. The Technical Environmental
Department of Barranquilla is responsible for environmental matters within the city, and will
provide technical support to the Project related to environment matters. The Corporación
Autonoma Regional del Atlántico (CAR) is the regulatory entity responsible for environmental
matters in the Atlantico Region, and in particular for water management, control and
authorization of related works. Both the city and CAR have responsibilities for issuing
environmental authorizations of proposed works based upon the type and location of work.
Triple A S.A. E.S.P. is the company which operates the water supply and sanitation system and
provides waste management services to Barranquilla.
 There are previous experiences of involuntary resettlement in the city of Barranquilla. The most
recent focus primarily on the relocation of street vendors arising from projects managed and
operated by the Urban Development Corporation of Barranquilla (EDUBAR), and Transmetro
SA, which is leading the implementation of the proposed Comprehensive Transportation System
mass passenger (a project with funding from the World Bank (P082466)).

  The ability of the Barranquilla Planning Authority to fully and properly implement a Project of
this size, and more specifically related to environmental and social management, is presently
limited. As part of the feasibility study being developed during Project preparation (see
Component 1.1), institutional responsibility and strengthening options for the construction and
operation of the proposed Project works will be assessed. The Project will include specific
actions (Component 3) to improve institutional capacity within city government and public
service providers, including training related to environmental and social management taking in
account the Bank#s safeguards policies and requirements.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto (LCSSO)
   Mr Robert H. Montgomery (LCSEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                               X
    The Environmental Assessment safeguard policy is triggered. The Project Team presently
proposes the Project be classified as Category A based upon the potential for significant
environmental or social impacts that could be sensitive and diverse. Since the actual Project
works are not yet defined, the actual potential impacts may be significantly less.

     Given that the Project will involve multiple works implemented over time, all of which will
not be fully and completely design prior to completion of Project Preparation, the Project Team
proposes that a framework approach be implemented.Thus, during Project preparation an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) (including an Involuntary
Resettlement Framework and Physical Cultural Resources Management Framework) will be
developed. The draft ESMF will be disclosed to the public and public consultation performed
prior to Project appraisal.In addition, if the Feasibility Study (see paragraph below for details)
defines some specific works that are proposed to be implemented in the short-term, an
environmental analysis of those specific sub-project related potential environmental and social
impacts will be completed per Bank requirements.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No          TBD
      A Feasibility Study for the Integrated Development of the Drainage System for the Eastern
Slopes of the City of Barranquilla is presently in process of being contracted by the City of
Barranquilla with funds provided through the Spanish Fund for Latin America and the Caribbean
(SFLAC), and will be completed during Project preparation. The Feasibility Study includes the
evaluation of potential alternative solutions including in terms of environmental and social
impacts. For the selected alternative, which will include various potential works and actions, an
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) will be developed based upon Colombian
environmental regulatory requirements and World Bank safeguard policies, and will include
potential cumulative impacts of the proposed interventions at the city level and in surrounding
areas as relevant. The EIA will also include an Environmental and Social Management Plan. If
the Feasibility Study defines some specific works that are proposed to be implemented in the
short-term, the EIA will include a more specific assessment of those sub-project related potential
environmental and social impacts. The Feasibility Study will also include preparation of a Land
Acquisition Plan to identify and quantify the land that will be used for the implementation of the
Project, a Catchment Management Plan to help ensure sustainability of the proposed works (e.g.,
as it relates to erosion and sedimentation, etc.), and an Operation and Maintenance Plan. The
Feasibility Study will also assess institutional strengthening options for the unit to be responsible
for the construction and operation of the proposed Project works. The results of these various
studies will be used to develop the Project ESMF.

     The Feasibility Study will provide inputs to the development of the Master Stormwater
Drainage Plan which is part of Project Component 1. The development of this master plan will
consider environmental and social factors during the plan#s evaluation of alternatives.

    The Project preparation also contemplates an outreach strategy to help sensitize the city#s
population on the proposed Project.

     The Project will result in significant positive social and environmental benefits, including
reduction of human causalities, house and building damage, traffic and pedestrian obstruction
due to flooding. It should also result in improved living and working conditions by providing a
clean, healthy and environmentally sound drainage system. It should also help improve the
downstream receiving water and wetlands by reducing that amount of sedimentation and
contamination entering these areas. The Project will also provide employment opportunities and
economic development by the purchase of local goods and services.

      The Project will involve significant civil works in an urban environment. The principal
potential negative impacts associated with Project include: issues related to land acquisition,
including involuntary resettlement, land speculation, and legal claims; environmental impacts
due to construction of civil work impacts, such as impacts on air quality (e.g. dust), increased
noise, sedimentation of surface water bodies due to erosion and storm water runoff, and changes
in land use and topography; social impacts due to construction of civil works, such as nuisances
to nearby residents and business, impacts on access to commercial establishments, and
interferences with public services (e.g., water supply, public transport); and environmental and
social impacts during operation of civil works, such as change in land values, change in land use,
changes in receiving water and wetlands, and possible increased in water related vectors (e.g.,
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                           Yes          No         TBD
due to upstream water retention basins).
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                           X
    Since the Project location is Barranquilla which is a small part of the lower portion of the
Magdalena River Basin consisting of approximately 4,200 ha of mostly impervious areas urban
areas, it is presently not anticipated that the Project will directly cause any significant conversion
or degradation to natural habitats. However, the Barranquilla City Territorial Land Management
Plan defines certain areas (e.g., downstream western portions of river) on the perimeter of the
city as either fragile ecosystems or wetlands which are protected land and natural reserves. The
Project may cause direct or indirect impacts to these areas.Thus the Natural Habitats safeguard
policy will be triggered and during Project preparation the potential impacts will be assessed and,
as necessary, appropriate prevention and mitigation measures proposed.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                 X
    Given the Project location in Barranquilla consisting of approximately 4,200 ha of mainly
impervious areas urban areas (e.g., residential, commercial, industrial), there are no forested
areas that may be adversely affected by the project. In addition, the project has no components
which will introduce changes to existing forest management practices in the upper part of the
catchment and such investments are not contemplated at this time. Thus it is not anticipated that
the Forest safeguard policy will be triggered. However this will be confirmed during Project
preparation.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                            X
    The Project as presently envisioned does not involve the use of pest management practices.
Thus the Pest Management safeguard policy will not be triggered. However this will be
confirmed during Project preparation, including for example the potential use of chemicals to
control vectors in water storage basins and/or channels.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                X
    The Project will occur in densely populated urban areas of Barranquilla, some of which have
identified physical cultural resources, such as in parts of the neighborhoods of El Prado, Altos
del Prado, Bellavista, La Concepción, Abajo, Centro, Rosario, and San Roque. Since the Project
will involve significant civil works in these urban areas, there is a potential that some cultural
resources may be affected. Thus the Physical Cultural Resources safeguard policy will be
triggered and during Project preparation the potential impacts will be assessed and, as necessary,
appropriate prevention and mitigation measures proposed.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                      X
    Since the Project location is the Magdalena River Basin and there are no designated
Indigenous communities within this basin, it is presently not anticipated that the Project will
affect indigenous peoples and thus the Indigenous Peoples safeguard policy will not be triggered.
However this will be confirmed during Project preparation.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                   X
    Since the Project will involve significant civil works in densely populated areas (e.g., old
portion of the city), it is anticipated that some involuntary resettlement will be required. Thus the
Involuntary Resettlement safeguard policy will be triggered and the extent of potential Project-
related resettlement will be confirmed during Project preparation.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                      X
    The Project as presently envisioned does not contemplate the construction of water storage
reservoirs with a dam height of 15 m, but will likely include small temporary stormwater storage
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes         No           TBD
basins. In addition, it is not expected that any proposed flood control works will rely on the
operation of existing dams, but this will be evaluated as works are proposed. Thus the Safety of
Dams safeguard policy will likely not be triggered but this will be determined during Project
preparation.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                         X


Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 10/29/2012

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. December
   12, 2012

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Niels B. Holm-Nielsen                                       09/08/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Glenn S. Morgan                                             09/08/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Oscar E. Alvarado                                           09/08/2011
      Comments: (Acting)




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
