                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC4458

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Colombia                      Project ID:     P145782
                            Project Name:        Third Student Loan Support Project SOP Phase II (P145782)
                            Task Team            Marcelo Becerra
                            Leader:
                            Estimated            30-Sep-2013                   Estimated       17-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:       LCSHE                         Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Tertiary education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Improving labor markets (10%), Education for the knowledge economy (90%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       1812.00             Total Bank Financing:       200.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                            Financing Gap:                 0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                  1612.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      200.00
                              Total                                                                     1812.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a            Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase coverage, graduation and equity
                           in the higher education system, prioritizing quality higher education institutions.
                           C. Project Description
                           Concept Description

                           At the request of ICETEX, the proposed lending instrument is Investment Project Financing to
                         ensure ICETEX has sufficient cash, at a favorable interest rate and maturity provided through the
                         Bank loan, to finance student loans provided through the ACCES program. The total Project amount
                         of US$1,812 million is composed of US$200 million from the Bank and US$1,612 million in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         counterpart funds from the Government and ICETEX. It is the second phase of a two phase Series of
                         Projects (SOP) Loan: Phase 1 was carried out between March 2008 and June 2013 and close
                         satisfactorily. The Program objective of the SOP is the same as the PDO. The Project would achieve
                         its development objective through implementation of two components; the team would explore with
                         the Government results based financing for Component 1.

                         Component 1. Increasing Coverage, Graduation and Equity of the Higher Education System,
                         prioritizing quality higher education institutions. (Total: US$ 1,805 million; Bank: US$200 million;
                         Government: US$1,605 million estimated – to be confirmed). The objective of this component is to
                         increase the coverage and graduation from HEIs, including for students from socio-economic
                         disadvantaged background. It would finance loans through ICETEX’s ACCES Program for students
                         to pursue tertiary studies based on the revised allocation method which improves targeting on
                         students from families from the lowest two levels of SISBEN III and places greater weight on
                         accredited HEIs, and once the criteria are developed, on HEIs on a path to accreditation.

                         Component 2: Institutional Strengthening. (Total: US$7 million; Bank: US$0 million; Government:
                         US$7 million estimated – to be confirmed). The objective of this component would be to further
                         strengthen capacity in ICETEX to manage the ACCES program sustainably and to improve the
                         quality of HEIs and programs.

                         It would finance technical assistance to strengthen ICETEX’s risk management, loan and portfolio
                         administration and collection, information and management systems, and to carry out an impact
                         evaluation of the Project.

                         It would also finance the development of quality standards which could put non-accredited HEIs on a
                         path to accreditation, with clearly designed incentives and targets, and a monitoring and support
Public Disclosure Copy




                         program for non-accredited HEIs striving to meet these standards that would be jointly managed by
                         MEN and ICETEX. An agreement will be reached between MEN and ICETEX to institutionalize the
                         coordination and division of responsibilities. It would also continue to support the alliances with
                         HEIs, which encourage increased support and services for low-income students that were forged
                         under Phase 1. They would be revised or amended to explicitly include additional efficiency and
                         quality criteria.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Colombia is a large and diverse country, home to many ethnic and indigenous groups. According to
                         the latest report by DANE (National Statistics Department), there were 87 indigenous groups in
                         Colombia as of 2005, comprising 3.3% of the total Colombian population. Afro-Colombians make
                         up around 10.3% of the population. The average age for the indigenous and afro-Colombian
                         population is lower than the national average; the distribution is especially skewed towards the
                         bottom of the pyramid, thus making the indigenous and afro-Colombian school and college-aged
                         cohorts larger relative to the rest of the age groups. The school attendance levels for these two groups
                         are much lower than the national average: In 2005, whereas nationwide school attendance for 2-17
                         year olds was 77.8%, the figure was 8.8% and 7.1% for indigenous peoples and afro-Colombians
                         respectively. Attendance is equally dismal for 18-24 year olds, with only 7% of the indigenous
                           population and 3.8% of afro-Colombians currently attending school or higher education institutions,
                           compared to 27.1% nationwide.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ICETEX successfully implemented the Colombia - Scaling up Student Loans to Promote Equitable
                           Access Project: Indigenous Peoples Plan (Política y Estrategias para la Atención de la Población
                           Indígena y Afrodescendientes) from 2008 to 2013 under the Second Student Loan Support Project
                           APL Phase I (P105164). It thus has proven capacity for Safeguards Policy.

                           ICETEX administers a series of Fondos Nación (National Funds). Two of these, the Fondo Álvaro
                           Ulcué Chucué and the Fondo Especial de Créditos Educativos de Comunidades Negras (Special
                           Education Loan Fund for Black Communities) target the indigenous and afro-Colombian
                           communities, respectively. Both funds have differentiated selection criteria for beneficiaries that set
                           them apart from the rest of ICETEX credit lines. They also feature special debt forgiveness and
                           subsidy programs, aiming to tailor to the needs of the indigenous and afro-Colombian students. The
                           two funds are under the management and supervision of the Billing and Payments Vice-Presidency,
                           which also administers the rest of the ICETEX portfolio.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto (LCSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No               This policy is not triggered as the nature and
                           BP 4.01                                               scope of the Project activities are not expected
                                                                                 to generate adverse environmental impacts.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               This policy is not triggered since no impact is
                                                                                 expected on natural habitats.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No               This policy is not triggered given that the
                                                                                 Project will not finance activities that affect
                                                                                 forests.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No               This policy is not triggered because the Project
                                                                                 will not finance the purchase or use of
                                                                                 pesticides.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No               The policy is not triggered because there are no
                           BP 4.11                                               Project activities that will impact the quality or
                                                                                 management of physical cultural resources as
                                                                                 defined under the policy.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        Yes              The policy is triggered because indigenous
                                                                                 peoples (and afro-Colombians) are present in
                                                                                 the Project area and could benefit from
                                                                                 improved targeting systems for higher education
                                                                                 financing. The current social assessment and its
                                                                                 recommendations will be updated to identify
                                                                                 whether they are being effective and to
                                                                                 incorporate lessons learned from Phase I, in
                                                               order to ensure that the benefits of the Project
                                                               reach the indigenous and afro-Colombian
                                                               populations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               The social assessment will analyze the
                                                               performance of the existing IPP and the
                                                               program in reaching indigenous peoples and
                                                               afro-Colombians and will identify measures to
                                                               improve access and outcomes for indigenous
                                                               peoples and afro-Colombians.

                                                               The social assessment will additionally include
                                                               a section on gender issues, focusing on the
                                                               differences in (i) barriers to access, retention
                                                               and completion and (ii) life paths after
                                                               graduation or dropping out.

                                                               Based on the social assessment, an IPP will be
                                                               prepared, which will focus on further
                                                               strengthening the borrower’s capacity where it
                                                               is necessary and laying out the measures and
                                                               policies that should be expanded or
                                                               discontinued, ensuring that the ICETEX
                                                               programs successfully tailor to the needs of
                                                               indigenous and afro-Colombian students. Given
                                                               the successful increase in access to ICETEX
                                                               loans for indigenous and afro-Colombian
                                                               students in Phase I (their numbers increased
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               from 1.9% of the loans in 2008 to 9.7% in
                                                               2012), the IPP will pay particular attention to
                                                               the life paths of students after receiving the
                                                               loan, specifically the ability of student loan
                                                               recipients to get jobs and their possibly
                                                               increased vulnerability due to the debt burden.

                                                               The IPP will be consulted with relevant national
                                                               indigenous and afro-Colombian organizations
                                                               and will incorporate their feedback and
                                                               recommendations accordingly and in line with
                                                               the Project’s scope. The IPP will be disclosed
                                                               prior to appraisal.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No   This policy is not triggered because the Project
                         4.12                                  activities will not require the involuntary taking
                                                               of land that would result in the impacts covered
                                                               under OP 4.12.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No   The policy is not triggered because the Project
                                                               will not support the construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of dams nor will it support
                                                                                                                                 investments which rely on the operation of
                                                                                                                                 existing dams.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International                                         No                            The policy is not triggered since the Project will
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            not affect any international waterways as
                                                                                                                                 defined under the policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The policy is not triggered because the Project
                                 7.60                                                                                            will not affect disputed areas as defined under
                                                                                                                                 the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 27-Sep-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The IPP Colombia - Scaling up Student Loans to Promote Equitable Access Project: Indigenous
                                      Peoples Plan: Política y Estrategias para la Atención de la Población Indígena y Afrodescendientes
                                      will be updated between now and September 27, 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Marcelo Becerra

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Raja Bentaouet Kattan (SM)                                                                                           Date: 08-Aug-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
