                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                           Report No.: AC6455


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/09/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Colombia                             Project ID: P126540
Project Name: Small-holder Market Access
Task Team Leader: Marie-Helene Collion
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 15,        Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: LCSAR                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%);Agro-industry, marketing,
and trade (40%)
Theme: Rural markets (40%);Rural policies and institutions (40%);Export development
and competitiveness (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           150.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                        50.00
                                                                        50.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The project is expected to contribute to the country#s long term goals to increase small-holder
agriculture competitiveness, incomes and employment. The proposed project development
objective is to improve the access of organized small holders (associations, cooperatives) to
higher value markets. Higher value markets are defined as markets which offer higher unit prices
and/or which can absorb higher volumes and provide more marketing stability than traditional
markets. Specific objectives are:
 (i) To enhance the competitive position of organized smallholders in their supply chains
through
 (a) The establishment of productive partnerships between producer organizations and the
commercial sector (agribusiness, exporters, wholesalers, large retailers, institutional buyers);
 (b) Within these partnerships, the adoption of more advanced production technologies by the
producers and the upgrading of the entrepreneurship and marketing skills of their organization;
 (c) The implementation of sanitary and phytosanitary standards (SPS) and traceability in
partnerships and selected supply chains where the challenges for small producers are most
critical;
 (ii) To improve the operational capacity of selected national and regional supply chain councils
(consejos de cadenas) - in which small producer organizations have a strong presence- through
support to implement their supply chain competitiveness agreements (acuerdos de
competitividad) and annual action plans;
 (iii) To establish mechanisms and instruments for the prevention and management of risks that
small-holders face in higher value markets.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
To reach the above objectives the project will co-finance with POs, commercial partners and
other institutions, partnerships between producer organizations and agri-businesses (or
commercial partner). The partnerships which aim at providing POs access to higher-value
markets will require productivity and production up-grading on the part of the small-holders, as
well as improved entrepreneurial skills on the part of the POs, which the project will finance.
The project will also finance the costs related to promotion, preparation, selection and
monitoring of the partnerships. It will finance cross-cutting activities to promote the adoption of
sanitary and phyto-sanitary measures and traceability when not included in the support to
partnerships as well as support to Supply Chain Councils so that they improve their services to
small-holders. Finally the Project will finance the development of mechanisms and instruments
to manage financial and weather risks and facilitate their access to small-holders.
  Project Components
  The project components are: (i) Preparation and strengthening of the Productive Partnerships;
(ii) Implementation of the Productive Partnerships; (iii) Agricultural risk management; and (iv)
Project management, monitoring and evaluation.
  Component 1. Preparation and strengthening the Productive Partnerships (US$10 million;
US$5million IBRD)
  Sub-component 1.1. Promotion and preparation of Productive Partnerships. The project will
co-finance consulting services, seminars, workshops and operational costs to promote, prepare,
select Productive Partnerships and monitor their implementation. Activities include:
  a.    The promotion of Productive Partnerships, such as information and promotional
campaigns, the organization of business round tables with the private sector and POs for type A
partnerships;
  b.    Consulting services for the generation of business ideas and business profiles and for the
structuring of type B partnerships;
  c.    The calls for proposals for regional supply chains to submit cross-cutting proposals;
  d.    The evaluation and ranking of partnership profiles, the preparation of pre-investment
studies, business plans, the preparation of legal documentation, the approval process of the
Modular Incentive (subsidy) and the establishment of the partnerships operational plans;
  e.    The rapprochement with other institutional programs offered by the Government and
private sector to increase project accessibility for persons displaced by the war and for excluded
groups (landless, indigenous, Afro-Colombians);
  Sub-component 1.2. Strengthening the enabling environment. The Project will co-finance
cross-cutting programs that facilitate small-holders# higher value market access, in particular:
  f.     SPS and traceability. Where applicable, all partnerships will have a technological
improvement and a SPS (Good Agricultural Practices and Integrated Pest Management) and
traceability element according to the requirements of the commercial partner and its market.
However, there may be activities related to SPS and traceability that cannot be integrated within
the partnership agreements, though they would mostly benefit the Productive Partnerships, for
example consumer campaigns in favor of safer products or other promotional and sensitization
activities that could be financed through producer federations.
  g.     Strengthening the supply-chain approach. To strengthen the operational capacity of the
national and regional supply chain councils, the project will co-finance technical assistance,
training, consulting services, equipment for information systems, coordination events,
distribution of information about production and marketing norms, regulations and other policy
instruments related to the supply chain as well as domestic and export market intelligence. The
supply chain councils will propose cross-cutting subprojects that are part of their competitiveness
agreement and yearly action plans and that aim to a large extent at increasing access to higher
value markets for small producers and their associations. Examples of such subprojects include:
market and produce information systems, produce certification programs, introduction of new
production technologies required by markets, promotion of domestic consumption and similar
programs.
  Component 2. Partnership Implementation (US$93 million; US$60 million IBRD)
  The project will co-finance the costs associated with the implementation of the Productive
Partnerships through grants to POs that cover investments (equipment, inputs and small
infrastructure), technical assistance and training, and additional operating costs to allow
adaptation to competitive conditions in higher-value domestic and international markets. In
addition to technical assistance to improve production and post-harvest, capacity-building will be
provided to improve the entrepreneurship of POs. This strengthening will address the managers,
the Board of Directors and members of the POs and will cover issues such as: organization,
business management (accounting/financial statements) and marketing (looking for value added).
Two types of partnerships will be co-financed:
  (i)    Type A productive partnerships between producer organizations and commercial
partners. This is mainly a continuation of the ongoing Productive Partnerships project
enhancing the efficiency of the processes based on lessons learnt. Type I subprojects emanate
mainly from the producer associations and follow a competitive selection process.
  (ii) Type B productive partnerships are clusters, larger in scale, and proposed by:
  #      Commercial partners within the framework of the development of clusters with. an
agribusiness being the nucleus and multiple POs to generate the volume and quality necessary to
expand existing or access new markets (i.e. cocoa production of a specific variety and quality;
fruit for export; production for institutional buyers such as school systems, hospitals, prisons) or
  #      National or regional producer federations within the framework of the national or
regional competitive agreements (acuerdos de competitividad). These subprojects aim at
increasing the production, post-harvest and initial processing capacities of small holders and
their organizations (such as produce classification, packing and selection) as well as enhancing
their domestic and export market intelligence.
  The difference between type A and type B partnerships is that type B partnerships include
several small producer associations around one or two agribusiness initiatives; they originate
with the agribusiness, exporters or producer federations and will require other criteria and
procedures for their selection and appraisal than type A sub-projects.
  As far as credit is concerned, there is wide recognition that it is very difficult for small
producers to access credit. The Productive Partnerships II project provided support for the
establishment of revolving funds. Good management of the revolving fund should help the
banks to respond positively to a credit request by the producer organizations. In addition, the
project will provide technical assistance to POs to prepare them for submitting credit requests
when needed.
  Component 3: Agricultural Risk Management (US$8 million; US$6 million IBRD)
  To establish mechanisms and instruments for agricultural and livestock risk prevention and
management the project will finance technical assistance, training, consulting services and
equipment for (i) the creation of a national Directorate for Agricultural Risk Management within
the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development; (ii) information systems; (iii)
meteorological stations; (iv) early warning systems; and (v) studies for risk management
financial instruments. Risk prevention and reduction will benefit all agricultural sectors, but the
main beneficiary will be the coffee sector where small holder associations dominate the trade as
members of the National Coffee Producer Federation.
  Component 4: Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$12 million; US$10 million
IBRD)
  This component includes the cost of the management of the project such as salaries, fees, costs
of monitoring and evaluation, studies, audits and operational costs.

D. Project location (if known)
All Departments in the Republic of Colombia.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Borrower has an environmental Specialist and a Social Specialist with several years of
experience in their assignment as specialists for the ongoing project.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Adriana Soto Carreno (LCSEN)
   Mr Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto (LCSSO)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes         No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
    The proposed environmental rating is Category B. The project is classified in the B category
requiring an Environmental Analysis (EA) but not a full-scale environmental assessment.
Neither large scale nor cumulated impacts are expected given the limited, locally-based and
differing nature of project activities.
     On average the project is expected to have positive impact from an environmental
standpoint since it will promote the implementation of environmentally safe productive practices,
particularly in terms of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Standards and Integrated Pest Management.
Since the types of partnerships to be eventually selected will not be known at the time of project
appraisal, the EA and attendant Environmental Management Plans (EMP) at the project level
take the form of an environmental framework presenting the steps, processes and procedures to
be followed for environmental management by each partnership (types I and II).
     The general prescriptions for environmental mitigation as part of the EMP are already in
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes          No          TBD
place in the ongoing project and are included in the Operational Manual. During project
implementation, the framework translates into specific measures ensuring that environmentally
safe procedures are part of the implementation of the Environmental Management Plan required
for each partnership. The implementation of these measures will be duly monitored through the
project monitoring system. A list of activities that are not eligible for financing under the
subprojects (negative list) because of environmental reasons will be included in the
Environemental Management Framework and in the Operation Manual.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                           X
    Natural habitats may be encountered near the area of the productive partnerships or in their
area of influence. These habitats could be possibly negatively impacted at a very local level.
Since the sub-projects are on a demand basis, such a possiblity can only be identified when
preparing the productive partnership feasibility studies. The environmental management plan of
the productive partnership will determine the measures to be followed by the POs.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                    X
    It is not envisioned that the sub-projects include activities related to agroforestry or non-
timber forest products. However, as for natural habitats, the areas of development of productive
partnerships may be close to or include patches of natural forests. This would be identified
during the preparation of the feasibility studies of the productive partnerships and the appropriate
mitigation mesures would be described in the environmental management plan of the sub-
project.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                               X
    A Pest Management Framework will be part of the environmental assessment. Pest
management plans will be developed under subprojects when the use or increase in the use of
insecticides or pesticides will be contemplated. The Pest Management Framework will indicate
which products cannot be used, and for those which can be used, how they have to be used and
the general mitigation measures that should be considered when developing individual sub-
project pest management plans.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                        X
    Sub-projects may include the construction of a storage facility or packing house on the land
of the producer organizations which may require excavations or the movement of earth. Whether
or not there is a potential that the proposed works under the sub-projects to impact physical
cultural resources will be determined during project preparation. Chance finds procedures will
be included in the environmental management framework.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                         X
    An Indigenous and Afrocolombian Development Framework will be prepared. The project
will put in place mechanisms, seeking synergies with other programs (Opportunidades Rurales,
Accion Social and Paz y Desarollo), to facilitate access to the project for disadvantaged
populations (indigenous, Afro-Colombians and displaced populations). The on-going project is
quite successful in that aspect, with indicators of involvement surpassing the targets. # The
project will attract partnership proposals of indigenous groups through promotional activities.
The project will also organize special consultative sessions with representatives of the
indigenous and Afro-Colombian organizations to explain the project and the methodology to
present profiles as well as perform various other tasks that will be specified in the PAD and
Indigenous Peoples Framework. These consultative sessions will be carried out to confirm
broad-community support for the project.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No         TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                             X
    This safeguard is not triggered since the only infrastructure that is contemplated under this
project is small infrastructure such as a storage and packing facility for a producer organization,
which will only be constructed on the land that belongs to the organization.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                  X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 07/28/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The launching of the safeguard-related studies will take place during project preparation
   scheduled to begin the first week of October 2011.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Ms Marie-Helene Collion                                        08/09/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Glenn S. Morgan                                             08/09/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Ms Ethel Sennhauser                                            08/09/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
