                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                 CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                Report No.: AC6355


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/28/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Congo, Republic of                   Project ID: P124085
Project Name: Forestry and Economic Diversification Project
Task Team Leader: Simon A. P. Rietbergen
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 27,         Estimated Board Date: March 6, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: AFTEN                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Forestry (60%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%)
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (30%);Rural policies and institutions
(30%);Land administration and management (20%);Biodiversity (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):           20.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                20.00
                                                                          20.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
PROPOSED PDO

 The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase the capacity of the government to
fulfill its statutory functions in the forestry sector and to reduce barriers to investment in selected
sub-sectors (plantations, ecotourism, ecosystem services).

 This PDO is directly aligned with one of the key goals of the Bank#s Country Partnership
Strategy for Congo, which is to diversify the country#s economic base away from the oil sector
and to create employment in an environmentally, socially, and economically sustainable manner.



 KEY RESULTS
 Progress towards achievement of the Project Development Objective will be assessed through
the following outcome indicators:
 1.     Capacity of the MDDEFE to fulfill its core regulatory functions: attribution and
supervision of forest concessions and the implementation of their management plans and social
responsibility clauses; application of new legislation on environmental assessment; and capacity
to do results-based planning, budgeting, and monitoring and evaluation..
 2.     Change in identified barriers to private sector investment in plantations, ecotourism and
environmental services.
 3.     Direct project beneficiaries (number of people), of which female (percentage).
 4.     Environmental and social benefits accruing from Project#s investment in Environmental
Services pilots (including investment related to protected areas).

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed Project will support the government of the Republic of Congo in its efforts to
strengthen its forestry policy and institutions and establish the forestry sector as a central pillar of
its economy and a central tool of its sustainable development and growth.
  The Project has three substantive components and a management one:
  (i) Component 1 - Capacity building for implementation of institutional and policy reforms
(approximate IDA allocation US$ 8 million) :
  The first component will support the institutional capacity strengthening efforts needed to
successfully implement the forest policy and institutional reforms adopted under the Highly
Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) program and the National Afforestation and Reforestation Plan
(PNAR). In so doing, this component will also help the government to comply with actions
agreed under the FLEGT Voluntary Partnership Agreement with the European Union. Activities
under this component will include sstrengthening the overall capacity of MDDEFE and
associated structures to deliver on its large mandate, including strengthened capacity to plan,
execute and monitor budgets and activities at national level and in a few selected pilot
departments. The Congolese government has only recently adopted results-based budgeting and
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework and MDDEFE, like many other sectoral ministries, will
need significant capacity strengthening to enable it to derive the full benefits from these new
financial management tools. The project will thus make a major investment in MDDEFE#s
fiduciary management capacity. The analysis and recommendations contained in a thorough
review of the structure and functioning of forest and environment sector institutions carried out
by the Bank in 2007 in preparation for the Highly Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative in
Congo are still largely valid. An update of the review will be funded by the Project Preparation
Advance that will be requested as soon as the PCN is approved.
  MDDEFE will also need to strengthen its Environment Directorate to implement the legislation
adopted recently regarding assessment and monitoring of social and environmental impacts of
development activities, including infrastructure, mining, agriculture and forestry. Special
emphasis will be placed on strengthening the government#s capacity to conform with and uphold
international safeguard standards in forestry investments, including overseeing environmental
and social impact evaluations and the development of mitigation plans. Another legislative
innovation, the establishment of an Inter-ministerial Committee for dealing with conflicting and
overlapping land-uses in forest areas still needs to be operationalized. This is of particular
importance given the increase in prospective mining projects in forest areas.
  New procedures for the gazettement and degazettement of forest reserves and protected areas
adopted as part of the HIPC initiative will require a significant increase in the capacity of
MDDEFE to organize consultation processes with local communities and indigenous peoples
directly affected by such changes. A number of forest fiscal measures that were recently
introduced still have to be carried through, because of capacity limitations in MDDEFE to
operationalize them. Having recently broadened its scope to cover sustainable development, the
project will support the MDDEFE in better defining the mandate and work program for this
Directorate, including its role in the climate change agenda (mitigation and adaptation). The
project will also support development of the capacity needed for the oversight of environmental
services and wildlife tourism investments. Strengthening of these same capacities is also
essential to the implementation of key elements of the Readiness Plan for REDD+ (Reduced
Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation, including the role of conservation, sustainable
management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks), in particular the creation of a
legal and institutional framework for REDD+ and environmental services.

  (ii) Component 2 - Promoting Private sector and smallholder investment in afforestation and
reforestation (preliminary IDA allocation US$ 6 million, dependent on confirmation of economic
viability of afforestation and reforestation by studies to be carried out under project preparation
advance):
  The second component will support the operationalization and initial stage of implementation
of the government#s National Afforestation and Reforestation Program (PNAR). It will focus
mainly on promoting environmentally and socially sustainable private sector and smallholder
farmer investment in afforestation and reforestation in the savannah regions of the country,
which have low population density and limited suitability for farming as the soils are sandy and
poor in nutrients, but have good potential for commercial tree growing and are close to the major
urban centers. The first few years of the Bank-financed project would constitute the pilot phase
for the implementation of the PNAR, and the mid-term review would draw lessons from
experience and inform revision of the PNAR as needed. The longer-term national target of
planting a total of 1 million hectares may be too high in terms of what domestic and export
markets for forest products would be able to absorb, but this target will be thoroughly analyzed
in the project preparation studies, and can be modified accordingly. In ecological terms, planting
a million hectares, mainly in savannah areas, seems reasonable given the existence of over 10
million hectares of savannahs, most of which have limited suitability for arable farming and are
biologically impoverished. This means that with careful selection of plantation sites to avoid
negative environmental and social impacts, and with adoption of standard environmental
management practices and local community consultation procedures, negative impacts can be
minimized and socioeconomic and environmental benefits optimized.
  Provided that it is not subject to high taxes and that the government facilitates access to land
and medium term financing to the private sector, wood coming out of efficiently and sustainably
managed plantations would be competitive against illegally cut wood for the following reasons:
  -      The wood will be processed using high yield productive techniques # illegal loggers use
time and fuel consuming chainsaws.
  -      The costs of transporting forest products to market will be much lower as these
plantations will be close to the main urban centers and/or ports # transportation costs for illegal
loggers (already representing up to 50% of their costs) keep going up as they go further and
further away from urban centers to access receding forests. Transportation costs will be further
lowered in the case of sustainably managed plantations which will also dry and pre-cut their
wood before sending it to the wood markets in the cities (saving another 50% in transportation
costs).
 -      The wood products would be of higher quality # e.g. high energy content charcoal and
dry wood pre-cut following standard norms.

  The two main constraints for such plantations to be developed by private investors are access to
land and access to medium term financing # constraints that the project, in collaboration with
other Bank-financed activities such as the Economic Diversification Support Project (PADE)
would help the government to address, whether directly (access to land) or indirectly (access to
medium-term financing).
  Facilitating access to land for plantation investors. Competitive sustainably managed
plantations of fast-growing species (acacia, pine, eucalypts) require large land areas of around
10,000 hectares minimum harvested on a five to fifteen year rotation. An attractive economic
model consists in small plantation holders selling their wood to a large-scale industrial plantation
estate managed by the private sector (the forestry equivalent of the nucleus farm). The large-
scale industrial plantation will provide access to the markets, access to technology and access to
financing to the small plantation holders. The process for the nucleus plantation investor to
obtain long term use rights over a large area from traditional chiefs on customary land exists but
it is long, costly and risky (e.g. pending conflicts between the traditional chiefs and their
constituencies who may not have been fairly treated by them). One recent investor had to spend
three years and $3 million dollars to acquire 10,000 hectares.
  The government can facilitate access to land in several ways, for example:
  -      Facilitating the creation of land cooperatives among traditional communities and
negotiations with potential industrial partners
  -      Facilitating reforestation on degraded land within forestry and mining concessions # such
concessions often include several hundreds of hectares of degraded land. Such reforestation
programs, which have already been piloted in the forestry concessions in the North (#UPARA#)
would also contribute to strengthen the links between the concessionaires and the local
communities and reduce the incentives and temptation for illegal logging by local residents
within these concessions.
  -      Auctioning land on which the government has clear undisputable rights (making sure it
takes due care of any current users of this land) and which is above a thousand hectares and
could thus become the nucleus plantation.

  Facilitating access to finance for plantation investors. Even after the land has been secured, a
2,000 hectare plantation project requires about $3 million financing over a five year period.
Such financing is simply not available from commercial banks in Congo. Having solid land use
rights would help but is far from being enough because of the many other risks facing
commercial operators. It should be noted that deep pocket foreign investors (e.g. mining
companies, large agribusiness and forestry firms) may have access to such sources of funds.
  Given the government#s insistence on investing state funds in reforestation and the poor track
record of governments as on-lending institutions, the project preparation advance would fund a
review to assess the various (combinations of) instruments that the government might use to
facilitate access to plantation finance: long term credit lines in banks with subsidized interest
rates; partial credit guarantees, performance-based matching grants (cf the Uganda Sawlog
Production Grant scheme); support to microfinance institutions (for small plantation holders);
venture capital funds; and possibly others. Assistance on this topic will also be sought from IFC.
  The exact division of labor between the Project and other business climate related initiatives of
the Bank in addressing the above-mentioned constraints will also be decided during Project
preparation.
  The Project will use several tools to assist the government in operationalizing the PNAR:
  a.    Research and analysis -
  i.    The Project will assess the conditions necessary to attract and encourage such private
investment, and will support the government in creating / improving the enabling environment,
including exploration of different models of reforestation, targeted at different markets, planting
systems (species, silviculture methods, etc.), and economic models.
  ii.   Key forest product markets will be assessed for their accessibility to different types of
growers, beginning during project preparation and continuing during project implementation as
necessary. Products to be assessed include, but are not limited to: charcoal, chips for pulp and/or
biofuels, essential oils, carbon sequestration and more traditional markets such as solid and
reconstituted wood products for building. Such assessments will be refined and extended in
scope during project implementation.
  b.    An in-depth cost-benefit analysis (CBA) will be conducted, taking care to incorporate
environmental costs and benefits, with the aim of translating the Congo National Reforestation
and Afforestation Plan (which is actually more a high-level policy statement) into an operational
plan, providing clear arguments for what the government should and should not undertake (or
leave to other actors in the market) regarding reforestation. At least the first phase of this CBA
will be conducted as part of project preparation.
  c.    This CBA would be in addition to financial analysis of the different reforestation models
from the point of view of the different types of planters (large industries, small private planters
up to 100 ha, smallholder farmer woodlots and agroforestry), also to be conducted as part of
project preparation, through an FAO technical assistance grant.
  d.    Potential for South-South cooperation and knowledge-transfer will also be explored,
possibly through the Africa-Brazil Innovation Marketplace. In this regard, the Brazilian model of
Forest Replacement Associations for the sustainable production of commercial fuelwood will be
assessed for its suitability in the Congolese context.
  e.    Possible financial mechanisms to support plantation investors will be assessed during
project preparation (see above).The financial mechanisms will be designed to stimulate
sustainable (and self-sustaining) investment in reforestation activities. Grant mechanisms to
smallholders will be considered only for activities that after an initial development phase will
become economically viable.
  f.    The Project may also assist the government in setting up a mechanism for facilitating
private sector access to land for plantations, based on the research and analysis mentioned above,
and may support the government in piloting this mechanism.
  g.    The environmental and social safeguard studies that will be carried out during the
preparation phase will concentrate mainly on reducing and mitigating any negative impacts
(which are expected to be small) of large-scale tree planting in savannah areas.

 (iii) Component 3 # Promoting Environmental Services initiatives (approximate IDA allocation
US$ 4 million, possible additional funding from the Global Environment Facility (GEF)):
  The third component will focus on promoting Environmental Services initiatives and
approaches related to forests. It will entail support to various activities with a potential to
generate Ecosystem Services that can be marketed, including carbon, biodiversity, ecotourism,
and potentially hydrological services. The component will contribute to the Project#s aim to
diversify the country#s economic base and to promote sustainable forest management.
  Specific investments will be identified through the studies funded by the Project Preparation
Advance, and during project implementation. The component will finance the design and
implementation of activities to be executed by various stakeholders, including the government,
civil society and private sector. Detailed criteria and process for the selection of activities will be
defined during project preparation. The activities to be supported by the component should
promote marketable environmental services, and aim to monetize these services in existing
voluntary and regulated markets. As the country has demonstrated a strong interest in promoting
REDD+ activities, this project would fund a limited number of pilot REDD+ projects, identified
as part of the REDD Readiness process. In addition, the component could also support
reforestation / afforestation activities aimed at the Voluntary Carbon Market, and possibly linked
to the PNAR. Other initiatives include the promotion of ecotourism in protected areas with
strong potential, and other innovative niches, such as bio-prospection, biodiversity offsets and
hydrological services.
  Activities to be supported under this component are:
  a.     Design and Implementation of Environmental Services initiatives.
  The project will support a few environmental services initiatives dealing with carbon (REDD+,
Afforestation/Reforestation (A/R)), biodiversity (biodiversity offsets, bio-prospection) and
possibly hydrological services. A few REDD+ pilot projects dealing with different circumstances
(tenure situation, stakeholders involved, forest and land use involved, etc.) will be supported, and
should generate important information for the REDD+ Strategy under preparation. Carbon offset
activities, mainly through reforestation and afforestation under the umbrella of the PNAR, would
also be supported in view of their access to carbon payments. The project will pay particular
attention to creating opportunities for smallholders to access markets for ecosystem services.
  b.     Analysis of the potential for development of domestic markets for environmental services
and national capacity development to promote these markets
  The project will support an analytical piece to assess the potential of creating domestic markets
in the Republic of Congo for different ecosystem services, and the conditions necessary for these
markets to flourish. The oil sector in the country, for instance, has expressed interest in seeking
carbon offsets from activities in the Republic of Congo. The various new infrastructure and
mining projects expected in the coming years are also likely to require various forms of offsets,
including carbon and biodiversity. This sub-component would support the country in assessing
this potential and identifying the conditions for realizing the potential.
  c.     Support eco-tourism development in key protected areas.
  This sub-component will support few selected protected areas with strong potential for
attracting ecotourism. Support from the project will include strengthening park management,
establishment of visitor infrastructure and promotion of community well-being through the
development of alternative income-generating activities for local communities. Examples of
protected areas being considered for such support are the Conkouati-Douli National Park near
Pointe-Noire and the Lefini Reserve near Brazzaville, which both have proven ecotourism
potential (enhanced by their relative proximity to major cities), in addition to harboring
important biodiversity in rich and diverse ecosystems.
  (iv) Component 4 - Project management (approximate IDA allocation US$ 2 million):
  This component will ensure implementation of management activities, including: preparation of
annual work programs and reports, monitoring and evaluation, procurement, and financial
management of project resources. It will also focus on environmental and social safeguards
implementation and supervision, as well as compliance monitoring and enforcement.
  Activities will include: (i) ongoing operation of the Project Management Unit, (ii) developing
and supervising annual and quarterly work plans and budgets, (iii) overseeing procurement and
financial management and conducting annual audits, and (iv) establishing baselines, and
developing planning, monitoring and evaluation systems for any interventions on the ground.

D. Project location (if known)
The majority of this Project#s components do not entail activities on the ground. Rather, the
Project is focused on providing technical assistance to the government for the development of
technical and institutional capacities for effective management of the forest sector, for refining
its afforestation and reforestation strategy, and for stimulating the economy and private sector
investment. Nevertheless, since the Project will help refine the design of the government of the
Republic of Congo#s national afforestation and reforestation program (the PNAR), which will
eventually have impact on the ground, as well as supporting its initial implementation phase and
encouraging private sector investment, location is a relevant factor.
  The Project#s support to the PNAR will focus mainly on the savannah regions of the country,
which have limited suitability for farming as the soils are sandy and poor in nutrients. The bulk
of afforestation and reforestation activities will take place in species-poor, non-erosion prone
savannas, and are expected to be restricted to less than 10 percent of the surface area of this
ecosystem. These areas are found in the central and southern parts of the country, including the
following departments: Plateaux, Pool, Bouenza, Niari, Kouilou, Lékoumou, Cuvette, and
Cuvette-Ouest.
  In-depth biophysical, social and economic studies of the two departments targeted by the
government for the largest plantation operations (comprising together nearly half of the planned
plantation area) # Pool and Plateaux # will be carried out during project preparation. These
studies will include the participative drafting of an indicative land-use plan, taking into account
the various industrial and subsistence land uses in the area, as well as its natural resources and
environment protection areas. The studies will be conducted by the National Center for Forest
Resources Inventory and Planning (CNIAF), which is well qualified both in cartography and in
participative land demarcation. It will, in addition, be supported by experts in land planning,
including forestry and social experts.
  In-depth studies of the remaining departments will be carried out during the initial stage of
Project implementation.
  Assessments of the soil and of the environmental impact of increased water consumption by
fast-growing plantations are also planned as part of the project preparation studies, in order to
ensure planted species are suitable to the area#s biophysical characteristics and to minimise
adverse environmental and social impacts.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Ministry of Sustainable Development, Forest Economy and the Environment (MDDEFE)
will act as the implementing agency for this Project and will in this capacity oversee the
preparation of the safeguards work and associated documents and monitor the implementation of
the recommended mitigation measures during project implementation.
 National institutional capacity for the monitoring and implementation of safeguards is very
weak, at all levels (national, provincial and local) and across Ministries. Though the
government#s capacity to design, implement and monitor safeguard policies has improved
somewhat through its work on other recent World Bank projects, such as the Support to
Economic Diversification Project, MDDEFE itself has no experience with World Bank funded
projects, and limited experience with managing donor-funded projects overall. This lack of
experience translates into lack of capacity with regards to safeguard policies. Special emphasis
will therefore be placed on strengthening the government#s (and specifically MDDEFE#s)
capacity to conform with and uphold international safeguards standards in forestry projects,
including conducting environmental and social impact evaluations. This will require
development of procedures and regulations, which will subsequently be applicable to projects in
other sectors as well, and is of particular importance given the increase in prospective mining
projects in forest areas.
 During the preparation phase of the Project, consultants will be hired to support and strengthen
the capacity of the Project Management Unit, inter alia in regards to safeguard procedures and
requirements. Consultants will also be hired to support MDDEFE in conducting the necessary
safeguards studies during project preparation.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN)
   Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                           Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                   X
     The ESMF developed under the Project will ensure that implementation of activities based
on the PNAR or other forest sector reforms, as well as any pilot projects initiated within the
framework of this Project, adhere to the requirements of World Bank safeguard policies.
      The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) to be carried out will serve to
identify, avoid, and mitigate the potential negative environmental and social impacts associated
with future activities to be supported by the final PNAR or future forest sector reforms by
providing guidance and key elements for the finalisation of an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) and other key safeguard instruments. The SESA will also
influence the final PNAR design, by ensuring that social and environmental risks are factors in
its preparation.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                           X
     The application of this policy seeks to ensure that all options proposed in the PNAR or other
forest sector reforms, and all Project activities on the ground, take into account the conservation
of biodiversity, as well as the numerous environmental services and products that natural habitats
provide to human society.
      Overall, afforestation / reforestation activities are expected to have positive impacts on
natural habitats as degraded land is reforested, new habitats are created on afforested land,
pressure on natural forests is reduced, and natural landscapes are protected as an offset for
commercial plantation activities. Any potential negative impacts on natural ecosystems as a
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes           No         TBD
result of afforestation are expected to be minimal as the bulk of afforestation and reforestation
activities will take place in species-poor, non-erosion prone savannas, and are expected to be
restricted to less than 10 percent of the surface area of this ecosystem.
      The ESMF and the SESA will address issues related to natural habitats and potential
impacts of the PNAR.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                   X
    Overall, Project activities are expected to have positive impacts on forest, in that the main
goal of the Project is to support a program aiming to a/reforest significant areas of the country,
while contributing to the well-being of rural communities and thus reducing pressure on natural
forests. Potential impacts of Project activities on the ground on natural forests will be considered
in the ESMF and larger scale impacts of the PNAR and other forest reforms on natural forests
will be further assessed through the SESA.
      The ESMF and the SESA will reflect the requirements of the Bank#s Operational Policy
regarding forest management, in particular as these relate to the establishment of plantations.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                         X
    Afforestation/reforestation and agroforestry pilot activities could trigger this policy,
depending on the methods employed by concrete activities on the ground to manage pests and
the policy will likely be relevant to some future activities based on the PNAR or forest reforms.
      The necessity and likelihood of use of pesticides by plantations developed under the PNAR
will be assessed during the project preparation studies to be funded by a PPA, and a Pest
Management Plan will be developed if necessary.
      The ESMF and the SESA will also address critical issues related to pest management, as
necessary.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                               X
    This policy will be triggered since pilot activities on the ground could promote actions in
areas containing sites deemed physical cultural resources by local populations (e.g. holy/secret
sites such as sacred groves, sacred forests, etc.). Therefore, though it is not anticipated that the
Project will have negative impacts on any such sites, the ESMF will include provisions for
mitigative action if the need arises.
      The possible existence of any such sites throughout the areas targeted by the PNAR and
other forest reforms, and the corresponding need to trigger this policy, will also be thoroughly
explored in the SESA.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                        X
    It is possible that some of the pilot activities undertaken by the Project will take place in
areas inhabited by indigenous peoples, and it is very likely that activities implemented as part of
the PNAR or affected by forest reforms will take place in areas inhabited by indigenous peoples.
To ensure due diligence is exercised, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will be
developed, setting out principles and procedures for timely and effective mitigation of
indigenous communities# concerns. This will require the government to identify indigenous
peoples, consult with them properly, and ensure that they participate in, and benefit from the
PNAR and other forest sector reforms. The IPPF will subsequently be refined through the SESA
process.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                  X
    This policy aims to avoid involuntary resettlement to the extent feasible, and to minimize and
mitigate its adverse social and economic impacts in cases where resettlement or other
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                           Yes          No          TBD
involuntary restrictions cannot be avoided. Though there is only a slight possibility that the
Project would involve land acquisition/involuntary resettlement, Project activities are more likely
to trigger this safeguard policy in situations involving involuntary restrictions of access forest
management / reforestation areas and the natural resources within. A Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) and comprehensive Process Framework (PF) will therefore be prepared,
establishing the frame of reference for sustainable use of said natural resources. The preparation
of the RPF and PF will be inclusive and participatory, promoting community ownership and
fostering social accountability, thereby contributing to sustainable management of the relevant
natural resources.
      In addition, all issues related to land acquisition, involuntary resettlement, and restriction of
access in the forest sector will also be identified through the SESA process.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                          X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                     X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                              X


Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 08/22/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Due to the technical assistance nature of a large part of this Project (see above), the Strategic
   Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) has been identified as the most appropriate
   instrument to ensure proper consideration of social and environmental dimensions in the
   strategy development and forest sector reform process, in line with international best
   practices (including World Bank policies).
     The government of the Republic of Congo will carry out a Strategic Environmental and
   Social Assessment as part of the preparation of a National REDD+ Strategy, which is a
   central part of the country#s REDD+ Readiness Process. The Project will collaborate with
   the government to ensure the SESA is conducted in a way that covers any issues required by
   this Project. The SESA will be led by MDEFFE and carried out through inclusive and
   participatory consultations, and in close coordination with other analytical studies. The
   exercise will be directly supervised by an Overseeing Committee, made up of representatives
   from government, civil society, and the private sector. This Committee will be in charge of


1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
overseeing the preparation of the SESA and of ensuring it feeds into the final design of the
government#s National Afforestation and Reforestation Program (PNAR) and into policy,
institutional, and legal forest sector reforms, as well as into the REDD+ Strategy preparation.

 In regard to this Project, conducting the SESA should:
 i) Help identify any potential negative consequences from the implementation of the PNAR
and ensure these risks are taken into consideration in the final PNAR;
 ii) Help assess the capacity needs required for the government to be capable of monitoring
and implementing the safeguards related to the PNAR (as well as other forest sector projects)
and make recommendations for institutional strengthening;
 iii)       Ensure the sustainability of the Project#s support and continued adherence to
international safeguard standards through integration of social and environmental
considerations into the final PNAR design, as well as their mainstreaming into the forest
sector institutions and policies developed through the Project#s capacity strengthening
support;
 iv)        Ensure a participatory process for finalizing the preparation of the PNAR as well
as for decisions on forest sector reforms, including stakeholder participation in identifying
and prioritizing key issues, assessment of policy, institutional and capacity gaps to manage
these priorities and recommendations, and disclosure of findings in public progress reports;


 In addition to the SESA, the Project will take the required measures to ensure that future
implementation of activities based on the PNAR or other forest sector reforms, as well as any
pilot projects initiated within the framework of this Project, adhere to the requirements of
World Bank safeguard policies. To that end, and in order to support the country in managing
environmental and social risks and in mitigating potential adverse impacts resulting from the
implementation of the PNAR or forest sector reforms, the Project will support the
government in:
 (i) developing an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which will
include application of the requirements of the Bank#s policies on Natural Habitats (OP 4.04),
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Forests (OP 4.36);
 (ii)       preparing an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF);
 (iii)      preparing a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF); and
 (iv)       preparing a Process Framework (PF).

 For specific works, Environmental and Social Impact Assessments and/or Environmental
and Social Management Plans will be prepared as and when necessary. If Indigenous Peoples
are directly involved or affected by project activities, an Indigenous Peoples Plan will be
prepared.
 The Project may involve land acquisition, involuntary resettlement and restrictions of access
to resources, though the sites of project activities are not yet known. A Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) and Process Framework (PF) are thus being prepared before appraisal.
Resettlement Action Plans will be prepared during implementation as and when necessary.
 The safeguards instruments will take account of the finalization of the PNAR document and
the SESA. The impacts and mitigation measures will be included in the Project
Implementation Manual.
  Furthermore, the Project strategy to implement environmental and social safeguard
measures where on the ground pilot activities are concerned is threefold: (a) integrating key
safeguard measures into activity design; (b) identifying and funding implementation of
residual measures through social and environmental management plans as mandated by the
suite of safeguard-documents including the ESMF, the IPPF, the PF, and the RPF; and (c)
setting aside an unallocated amount of financial resources for implementing the activities in
line with the Project#s suite of safeguard documentation described above. These safeguard
framework requirements will be complemented as appropriate by specific safeguard
instruments as deemed necessary by the World Bank and the government of the Republic of
Congo.

 The Project will support the country in putting in place the framework to manage social and
environmental risks of any future operations within the PNAR and the forest sector in
general, but the responsibility for the implementation of this framework lies with the
government and with those financing each operation. The Bank will take responsibility only
for activities specifically funded under the present Project. Social and environmental
measures related to initiatives funded by other donors will be integrated into, financed, and
supervised as part of their respective due diligence efforts.

  The Project#s Environmental Assessment category is Category A, as the Project is
financing key preparation for the eventual establishment of large-scale industrial timber
plantations, which could lead to large-scale conversion of natural habitats, the creation of
domestic markets for environmental services, and eco-tourism.


 The Project will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), an
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF),
and a Process Framework (PF). All safeguard documents will be prepared by the government
of the Republic of Congo in an inclusive and participatory manner and reviewed and cleared
by the government, the Project safeguards team, and the World Bank Regional Safeguards
Advisor. All documents will be drafted and publicly disclosed prior to project appraisal.
Disclosure will take place both at the Bank#s InfoShop and in the Republic of Congo, at
publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.

  The Project will contribute to and use the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
(SESA) that will be carried out by the government of the Republic of Congo as part of the
preparation of a National REDD+ Strategy within the framework of the country#s REDD+
Readiness Process. It is expected that Terms of Reference for the SESA will be agreed on
with the government and members of the civil society by August 2011, and that the SESA
exercise could be launched in October 2011, once the consultancy team has been hired. The
first phase of the SESA should run from October 2011 to February 2011, under the close
supervision of the Overseeing Committee, composed of representatives from the government,
civil society, and the private sector. The timing should coincide with the preparation and
initial phase of the Project.
    These abovementioned safeguards instruments (ESMF, IPPF, RPF, and PF) will incorporate
   the findings and conclusions of the SESA and final PNAR document. ESIAs/ESMPs, RAPs,
   and an IPP will be prepared as and when necessary during implementation.

IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Mr Simon A. P. Rietbergen                06/06/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                 06/28/2011
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Ms Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough           06/23/2011
   Comments:
