                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                 CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                Report No.: AC6012


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/23/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Congo, Democratic Republic of        Project ID: P125509
Project Name: Strengthening the DRC statistical system
Task Team Leader: Christophe Rockmore
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 15,       Estimated Board Date: October 31, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: AFTDE                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: General public administration sector (76%);Vocational training (11%);Tertiary
education (8%);Central government administration (3%);Sub-national government
administration (2%)
Theme: Managing for development results (81%);Administrative and civil service reform
(17%);Decentralization (2%)
SPF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                         0.00
        Statistics for Results Trust Fund                               11.80
                                                                        11.80


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
To initiate the strengthening of the Congolese national statistical system, by improving human
and institutional capacity (particularly within the national institute of statistics) and supporting
the adoption of up-to-date statistical methods.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
Component 1: Improving skills within the National statistical system (NSS). The objective is to
retrain existing staff and develop a continuous supply of new qualified staff. The project will
support re-qualification training for NSS staff to bring them up to standard competencies. To
address the important need for statistical staff at national and decentralized levels, the project
may support the creation of a statistical school using the framework of existing sub-regional
schools.
 Component 2: National institute of statistics (INS) institutional restructuring. The objective of
this component is to increase INS’ resource utilization efficiency. This will be done primarily
through management and fiduciary training. The project may finance the retirement bonuses for
staff that are eligible for retirement. This activity will be determined through discussions with
government after planned studies are undertaken. This support is only for the bonus and would
neither cover contribution arrears nor pensions.

 Component 3: Rehabilitation of INS offices at Limete. INS has two sites in Kinshasa and eight
provincial offices; these offices offer poor working conditions. The Limete (Kinshasa) site
houses the majority of INS. The project will support the rehabilitation of one or more existing
office building at the INS compound in Limete (estimated at 125m by 100m) that has a walled
enclosure. This activity depends upon the presentation of the legal title for the land and an
architectural evaluation to be undertaken with project funds. Once these conditions are met, an
environmental screening will be undertaken to determine the need for an environmental and
social management framework. If additional funding from other donors and government is made
available, possible alternatives will be considered, but within the context of the World Bank’s
safeguards regime. The project will not finance (i) land acquisition, (ii) involuntary resettlement,
or (iii) restriction of access to resources or livelihoods and will provide no financing for any
activity that would result in (i) land acquisition, (ii) involuntary resettlement, or (iii) restriction of
access to resources or livelihoods. The planned works will be done within an enclosed site for
which government will present a legal title to show that the site is owned by government with no
claims or encroachments on the land.

 Component 4: Statistical methods and coordination. The objective of this component is to
introduce improved statistical methods and to increase NSS coordination through activities that
have positive spillovers. Planned activities will support (i) the GIS census mapping for the
planned population and housing census, (ii) work to update the firm master sample frame, (iii)
data archiving tools and training, and (iv) pilot support to a few sectors on statistical yearbooks.

D. Project location (if known)
The project will primarily be undertaken in Kinshasa, but some training activities will happen in
provincial capitals. One proposed component present safeguards risks: a civil works component
is for the renovation of the INS’ building in Limete. This is addressed above in component 3.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The capacity of the Ministry of Planning to address safeguards issues is not relevant, since
safeguards issues are the exclusive domain of the Ministry of Environment. Accordingly,
compliance with project safeguards requirements, if any, will be ensured by staff from the
Ministry of Environment, through the Groupe d’Etudes Environementales du Congo (GEEC).
Potential needs for supervision, if any, will be ensured by short term consultants, the project is
not expected to induce any major environmental impacts that would trigger a full environmental
impact assessment (EIA), beyond a screening.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN)
   Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes                                  No             TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
    Screening required due to proposed rehabilitation activities.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                               X
    The project does not incorporate activities that would trigger this policy.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                                        X
    There are no activities related to forests in the project.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                                   X
    There are no pest management activities planned in the project.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                                    X
    The project does not incorporate activities that would trigger this policy.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                                             X
    Indigenous peoples are not affected by the project.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                                       X
    The project does not incorporate activities that would trigger this policy.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                 X
    There are no dam-related activities in the project.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                            X
    There are no activities related to international waters in the project.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                     X
    There are no activities in disputed areas.


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 06/02/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The environmental management plan (EMP) checklist is scheduled to be completed in June.
   Thereafter, any required safeguards activities will be undertaken using project funds during
   implementation as no activities will be carried out during preparation. Once the EMP
   checklist has been completed it will be disclosed both in the country and at the World Bank
   InfoShop in July.

1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Mr Christophe Rockmore     05/20/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   05/20/2011
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Ms Preeti S. Ahuja         05/20/2011
   Comments:
