                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/19/2012                                    Report No.: AC6662
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P092537                 Original Project Name: DRC Multi-modal
                                             Transport
Country: Congo, Democratic Republic of       Project ID: P129594
Project Name: DRC-Multi-Modal Transp Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Jean-Charles Crochet
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 12, 2012 Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2012
Managing Unit: AFTTR                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Railways (80%);Ports, waterways and shipping (5%);Aviation (5%);Public
administration- Transportation (5%);Public administration- Industry and trade (5%)
Theme: State-owned enterprise restructuring and privatization (50%);Export
development and competitiveness (20%);Infrastructure services for private sector
development (10%);Corporate governance (10%);Administrative and civil service reform
(10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            180
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
                                                                         0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []            Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Multimodal Transport Project’s original development objectives are to: (i) to
improve transport connectivity in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) so as to
support national economic integration, (ii) to restore Société Nationale des Chemins de
Fer du Congo (National Railway Company of DRC - SNCC) financial and operational
viability, and (iii) to implement a sector wide governance plan and strengthen transport
state-owned enterprises (SOEs) operational performance. These objectives will not
change with the additional financing.

3. Project Description
The project objectives will be achieved through the following components (including the
Additional Financing):
 •       Component 1 – SNCC recovery plan:
 This component promotes the reform of SNCC management and operations through:
 (i) track and rolling stock rehabilitation and upgrade; (ii) operational support and
institutional development including especially the funding of SNCC eligible operational
expenses (mainly fuel, electricity and water bills), a management contract with a private
operator, and the training of key new and existing personnel; and (iii) work force
reduction through the payments of voluntary retirees’ departing indemnities and social
security pension contributions (social plan).

  •     Component 2 – Operational performance strengthening and improved governance
of the sector:
  This component includes: (i) the acquisition of urgently needed equipment for selected
transport SOEs such as the National Marine Ways Management Agency (Congolaise des
Voies Maritimes (CVM), former RVM), the National Airways Management Agency
(Régie des Voies Aériennes (RVA)), the National Transport and Ports Company (Société
Congolaise des Transports et des Ports (SCTP), former ONATRA) and the National
Waterways Management Agency (Régie des Voies Fluviale (RVF)) in order to improve
their overall performance; (ii) a reduction of RVF’s workforce through the funding of
retirement indemnities; (iii) an internal diagnostic of the Ministry of Transport (MoT) so
as to identify possible reorganizational scenarios, (iv) the training of MoT’s agents and
provision of equipmen for MoT; (v) carrying out annual audits of SOEs procurement and
financial activities; (vi) the development of a sector wide governance plan to be tailored
for adoption by each individual SOE; and (vii) the improvement of the regulatory
capability of MoT and its related agencies in the river and air transport sub-sectors.

  •     Component 3 – International trade procedures:
  To prepare for the implementation of international trade agreements and in light of the
ongoing study on the facilitation of international trade, the MTP will support the MoT to
define a strategy and develop an action plan, including materials, equipment and
infrastructure investments, to facilitate the flow of goods at borders along DRC's main
transport corridors.

 •     Component 4 – Project management:
 This component provides project management through full funding of the Project
Management Entity located within the MoT (Cellule d’Exécution du Projet de Transport
Multimodal (CEPTM).

 Based on the Government of DRC (GDRC) request and the team’s evaluation, it is
proposed that the Additional Financing (AF) will be allocated as follows:

 a) Component 1 - SNCC recovery plan:

 The AF contribution to Component 1 is US$160 million and supports the following
activities:
 •      US$95 million to finance about one half of the investments which were to be
funded by the government through the Chinese line of credit. A list of priority items is
being prepared, with a focus on mining traffic, linkages with “landlocked? provinces of
DRC, and connection to and from agriculture producing areas. The objective of these
priority investments would be to sustain traffic above the financial breakeven point. It is
expected that the remainder of the investments anticipated in the SNCC recovery plan
(US$105 million) will be funded by private mining companies.

 •     US$25 million to replace: (i) the US$14 million shortfall of the PSDCP to the
SNCC social plan; and (ii) US$11 million originall to be provided by GDRC and /or
SNCC to pay the pension rights of the cohorts of employees eligible for retirement from
2010 to 2012.

 •      US$40 million in support of SNCC’s operations to partially replace the US$44
million that GDRC committed to under the existing grant agreement but cannot provide
due to deteriorating fiscal and budgetary situation.

 b) Component 2 - Operational performance strengthening and improved governance of
the sector:

 The AF contribution to Component 2 is US$15 million and supports the following
activities:

 •      River transportation: U$5 million would complement a planned Euro 60 million
investments by the European Union (EU) and would expand the rehabilitation of river
navigational aids on the upper stretches of the Congo River (in complement of the SNCC
rail network) and two neglected tributaries (the Lua and Mongala rivers) with relatively
high surrounding population, increasing the capacity of river transportation which has
recently gained importance, particularly within the growth poles development strategy of
the GDRC.

  •      Directorate of Maritime Waterways (Direction Maritime des Voies Navigables,
(DVMN)): US$5 million for capacity building of the DVMN to oversee and license the
river transportation operators via: (i) the recruitment of new inspectors; and (ii) the
temporary support to DVMN operational costs until an independent and sustainable
financing scheme is in place; and

 •      Agency for Civil Aviation (Agence de l’Aviation Civile (AAC)): US$5 million to
implement (i) an action plan for DRC’s civil aviation, including external services for the
twinning of the AAC with a foreign civil aviation, (ii) a five-year technical capacity
strengthening plan for AAC, and (iii) a recertification of DRC passenger airlines crews
and aircrafts. This amount would complement other funds provided by other donors for
the renewal of the AAC.

 c) Component 3 - International trade procedures simplification:
 No supplemental AF funds are provided to Component 3 activities.

 d) Component 4 - Project management:

 The AF contribution to Component 4 is US$5 million and supports the following
activities:

 US$5 million would be allocated to the project management entity (CEPTM) to fully
fund its revised operating costs until the new closing date.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project’s footprint is linked with Component 1, specifically the track rehabilitation
works. This will cover the SNCC railway line sections from Kolwezi to Sakania, from
Kamina to Kabongo and from Kamina to Mwene Ditu. In addition, rail depots located in
Lubumbashi and Likasi will be the subject of limited rehabilitation works. Components 2
and 3 mainly include the provision of equipment and services and have no direct
environmental and social impacts.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN)
   Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Strengthening capacity in the transport sector, rather than building infrastructure is the
focus of the project. Component 1, however, includes the rehabilitation of 700 km of the
railway network in Eastern DRC. Component 2 involves the rehabilitation of navigational
aids alonger certain rivers. As the physical works are limited to the rehabilitation of
existing infrastructure and do not involve any work outside the right of way, no large
scale, significant or irreversible impacts are anticipated. The project therefore, has been
assigned environmental category B, and the same EA category applies to the AF. The
impacts identified in the safeguards instruments are minor. They will be site specific to
civil works, e.g., run off, soil erosion, noise and dust and air quality. Adverse social
impacts are also not salient and are site specific. However, the railway rehabilitation
work in Lubumbashi will likely have a partial temporary impact on an informal market
known as the "Railway Market" since part of the market activities are carried out on the
rails and in the right of way of the railway.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Rehabilitation of the rail network in Katanga province will support growth in the mining
sector. The indirect long term impacts associated with this growth are being addressed
through a separate operation that addresses environmental and social management in the
mining sector.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Rehabilitation of the rail network is essential to economic growth in DRC, so no
alternative to this basic objective can be considered.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Since the Recipient did not have existing institutional capacity to implement the
safeguard policies triggered by the Project, SNCC was requested to create and support an
Environmental Unit. This was done recently. The unit is responsible for environmental
and social management, as well as occupational safety. More specifically, it is expected
to: (i) take responsibility for implementation of the safeguards measures and (ii)
modernize oversight of the safety and environmental management of SNCC operations.

  While the railway sections that may be rehabilitated by the project generally do not
traverse areas where there are large concentrations of Pygmy populations, certain sections
traverse through areas that may include Pygmy communities. The Recipient has prepared
an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF). Once the sites of the rail
rehabilitation to be financed under the project have been determined, an Indigenous
Peoples Plan (IPP) will be prepared as necessary, per the requirements of OP 4.10.

 A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared to address potential social
safeguards issues related to infrastructure investments. To address the project impact, if
any, on the informal "Railway Market" in Lubumbashi, a social impact assessment will
be carried out and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared on the basis of the
RPF once the exact sections of the railways track to be rehabilitated have been identified
and agreed with the government.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
 The Government of DRC, the SNCC, the workers and staff of SNCC and the provincial
government of Katanga, are the key stakeholders of the project. A consultation workshop
on the Safeguard Documentation was conducted in Kinshasa, on July 10-11, 2008. In
Lubumbashi, consultations were held (March 27, 2010) with the municipality and the
SNCC regarding the "Railway Market".



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/31/2009
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/31/2009
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              03/16/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/31/2009
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/31/2009
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              03/16/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/31/2009
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/31/2009
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              03/16/2012
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  N/A
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        N/A
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Jean-Charles Crochet    02/15/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Paul Jonathan Martin    03/12/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr Antoine V. Lema         03/12/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   02/27/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Supee Teravaninthorn    03/12/2012
  Comments:
