                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 10/26/2011                                  Report No.: AC6573
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P088751                 Original Project Name: DRC Health
                                             Sector Rehabilitation Support Project
Country: Congo, Democratic Republic of       Project ID: P126088
Project Name: DRC Additional Financing Primary Health Care
Task Team Leader: Jean-Jacques Frere
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 27,        Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: AFTHE                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Health (100%)
Theme: Child health (40%);Population and reproductive health (40%);Health system
performance (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             75.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                        0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to ensure that the target population in
Project Health Zones has access to, and uses a well defined package of quality essential
health services (EHS). The original project supports 83 health zones in the Provinces of
Bandundu, Equateur, Kinshasa, Katanga, and Maniema encompassing a total population
of 9.4 million. After experiencing start-up and implementation delays, the project was
restructured in April 2010. At this time, the closing date was also extended by 18 months
from June 30, 2010 to December 31, 2011. Project performance has improved, and the
project has been rated Moderately Satisfactory (MS) on Development Objective (DO)
since December 2009 and Satisfactory (S) on Implementation Performance since June
2011. It is expected that the DO will be upgraded to S during the next supervision
mission as major improvements have taken place in regards to M&E and that the External
Evaluation Agency#s performance has improved greatly.
 The PDO will remain unchanged from the original project. The end-project target will
be revised to take into account the additional grant. It is intended that baseline and
follow-on household/ health facility surveys be carried out in the target zones.

3. Project Description
The project including the AFs for Malaria & Polio has four components:

  1.     Expand Access and Utilization of a Proven Package of EHS to Selected Districts
and Health Zones (US$131 million) which includes (i) the integrated management of
childhood diseases; (ii) maternal health interventions including emergency obstetrical
assistance and family planning services; and (iii) interventions to address HIV/AIDS,
tuberculosis , malaria, and other priority diseases, such as onchocerciasis in endemic
areas, as well as support to the National Immunization Program to interrupt the
transmission of wild polio virus (WPV). The project also provides support to
implementation of MOH package of essential primary health care services with
international Non Governmental Organizations (NGOs) as Implementing Partners (IPs)
through performance-based contracting.

  2.     Boost Malaria Control Interventions (US$103.3 million): Interventions include:
(i) Intermittent Preventive Treatment (IPTs) for pregnant women; (ii) Artemisinin
Combination Therapy (ACTs) for first-line treatment for malaria; (iii) scaling up
coverage of Long- lasting insecticidal nets (LLINs); and (iv) technical assistance and
operational research.

 3.     Strengthen capacity for oversight and evidence-based management of the health
system (US$19.2 million): This component focuses on: (i) building capacity for
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) through contracting a firm as an External Evaluation
Agency (EEA); and (ii) strengthening institutional capacity of provincial and district
health administrations through technical assistance provided by an international NGO.

 4.     Project Coordination (US$6.5million): This supports the HSRSP-PCUas well as
the costs for an annual Project Review Forum. Initially, the Bureau Central de
Coordination (BCECO) in the Ministry of Finance (MoF) was responsible for fiduciary
management of the project but this responsibility has been subsequently transferred to the
PCU in order to improve ownership and accountability of the MOH.

 Additional Financing:

 Activities supported by this third Additional Financing (AF) for Primary Health Care
(PHC) will fall under Components 1, 3, and 4. The activities will comprise: (i) provision
of basic essential health services with a focus on Reproductive Health (RH)/ Family
Planning (FP), HIV/AIDS, immunization, and nutrition activities; (ii) building capacity at
regional level in order to gradually shift responsibility of project implementation from
the current implementing partners (i.e. NGOs) to local health authorities and at a central
Ministry of Health (MOH), in particular the capacity of the Cellule d#Appui et de
Gestion (CAG), the management support unit of the MOH, which should gradually
become responsible for the management of all donor projects in the future; and (iii)
support the project operational costs through the Project Coordination Unit (PCU).

 The Additional Financing does not require a further extension of the project which is
now set for June 30, 2013.

 Institutional arrangements will remain unchanged with HSRSP-PCU responsible for
overall implementation including fiduciary management. Procurement and disbursement
arrangements will also follow the same arrangements as the original project.

 The Additional Financing will not affect the project's environmental category. As was
the case with the original project, the Additional Financing will not finance insecticides
and/or larvicides. The Indigenous Peoples safeguard policy (OP 4.10) is triggered in
recognition of the fact that indigenous pygmy communities are located within the health
zones supported by the project and the Additional Financing. An Indigenous Peoples
Planning Framework prepared for the Malaria & Polio Additional Financing will be
updated to take into account the PHC Additional Financing and implemented to ensure
that these groups share in project benefits and are adequately protected from risks
associated with medical waste.

 The proposed additional grant of US$75 million would bring the total project amount to
US$335 million. Below is the financing allocation by component of the project including
the proposed additional financing.

 1.    Expand Access and utilization of EHS (195.0)
 2.    Malaria Control and Interventions (103.2)
 3.    Capacity Strengthening for Health System Management (29.3)
 4.    Project Coordination (7.5)
 Total (335.0).

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The original project supported 83 health zones in 10 districts in the provinces of
Bandundu, Equator, Kinshasa, Katanga and Maniema encompassing a population of 9.4
million. The project was restructured in April 2010, and the geographic scope was
expanded to an additional 70 health zones previously supported under an IDA-financed
Emergency Multisectoral Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Project (EMRRP) which
closed on December 31, 2009, increasing the beneficiary population from 9.4 to 18.9
million. Activities to be supported under the Additional Financing will include: i)
provision of basic essential health services with a focus on Reproductive Health (RH)/
Family Planning (FP), HIV/AIDS, immunization, and nutrition activities; (ii) building
capacity at regional level in order to gradually shift responsibility of project
implementation from the current implementing partners (i.e. NGOs) to local health
authorities and at a central Ministry of Health (MOH), in particular the capacity of the
Cellule d#Appui et de Gestion (CAG), the management support unit of the MOH, which
should gradually become responsible for the management of all donor projects in the
future; and (iii) support the project operational costs through the Project Coordination
Unit (PCU).

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN)
   Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Additional Financing will not finance any civil works and does not involve medical
waste. The OPV vials will be environmentally managed according to WHO and national
guidelines.

  To better address the need to ensure that indigenous pygmy communities share in
project benefits, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) was prepared and
disclosed in September 2011. The IPPF takes into account the Strategic Framework for
the Preparation of a Pygmy Development Program, prepared by the Government of DRC
in December, 2009, with Bank input and support. The IPPF sets out: (a) the types of
programs and subprojects likely to be proposed for financing under the project; (b) the
potential positive and adverse effects of such programs or subprojects on Indigenous
Peoples; (c) a plan for carrying out the social assessment for such programs or
subprojects;(d) a framework for ensuring free, prior, and informed consultation with the
affected Indigenous Peoples' communities at each stage of project preparation and
implementation (see paragraph 10 of this policy); (e) institutional arrangements
(including capacity building where necessary) for screening project-supported activities,
evaluating their effects on Indigenous Peoples, preparing IPPs, and addressing any
grievances; (f) monitoring and reporting arrangements, including mechanisms and
benchmarks appropriate to the project; (g) disclosure arrangements.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The project activities, including those planned under the additional financing will not
generate any indirect or long-term environmental impacts. The PHC Additional
Financing will not generate any increase in the volume of medical waste.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Government has prepared a number of IPPFs for projects all over the country. This
Framework is aimed at ensuring Indigenous Peoples are informed and consulted about
the polio program so that they can benefit from treatments.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
All stakeholders including municipal authorities, Parliament, Health Facility authorities,
both at national and provincial levels, private health practitioners, civil society
associations and NGOs were consulted during the MAP preparation in 2003.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     05/11/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 10/18/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  10/19/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     09/14/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 09/21/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  09/23/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Jean-Jacques Frere      10/22/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Paul Jonathan Martin    10/22/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Antoine V. Lema         10/22/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   10/22/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Jean J. De St Antoine   10/22/2011
  Comments:
