                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                               RESTRUCTURING STAGE

Date updated: May 10, 2012
                                                                           73649
I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data                             Restructuring
Country: Costa Rica                               Project ID: P076421
                                                  Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: PCF Umbrella Project for Renewable Energy Sources (New project name as per
the restructuring: Costa Rica- Cote Hydroelectric Project)
Task Team Leader: Roberto Aiello
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 3, 2002            Estimated Board Date: n/a
Managing Unit: LCSEG                              Lending Instrument: PCF
Sector: Energy
Theme
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.): 0.602
ERPA Amount (US$m.): 0.602
Other financing amounts by source:
Environmental Category:
Is this a transferred project                     Yes [ ]                   No [ X]
Simplified Processing                             Simple [ ]                Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises          Yes [ ]       No [X ]
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:

The objective of the Project is to support the National Power and Light Company
(Compania Nacional de Fuerza y Luz, CNFL) in developing initial experience with the
Clean Development Mechanism of the Kyoto Protocol by supporting the development of
a 6.95 MW capacity hydro project in Costa Rica.

3. Project Description:

The original Umbrella Project proposed an ERPA to support emission reductions and
allowed the PCF to provide funding for renewable energy subprojects. Three projects
were included in the Costa Rica Umbrella Project, the (i) Cote Hydroelectric Project, (ii)
Chorotega Wind Power Subproject, and the (iii) Vara Blanca Wind Power Subproject.
However, only the Cote Hydroelectric Project successfully signed an ERPA and is under
Bank supervision.


                                                                                        1
The following paragraphs contain a short description of the Cote Hydroelectric
subproject.

Cote Hydroelectric Subproject

The Cote Hydroelectric Subproject (CHS) increased CNFL’s generation capacity by 6.95 MW
using water from the Cote Lake. CHS was developed as part of an overall development plan of
CNFL to increase its installed generation capacity to a total of 140 MW over 10 years. CHS was
constructed for CNFL by a group of private firms, grouped in the Consorcio HidroCote, under a
supervised turn-key contract. Consorcio HidroCote is a consortium of the Colombian firm,
Gomez Cajiao y Asociados S.A. (design), and by the Brazilian firms Toshiba Do Brasil S.A.
(electrical-mechanical equipment) and Termotécnica Coindustrial S.A. (construction).

The CHS takes advantage of the infrastructure already installed to divert water from Cote Lake to
the ICE Arenal Reservoir. In 1982, ICE constructed a dam on the Cote River (the natural outlet
from the Cote lake) converting the lake into a regulation reservoir. The existing water intake
structure, tunnel and dam were incorporated in the CHS, although some modifications were
undertaken. New structures include a new dam (4.6 m in height x 24 m) which replaced the old
dam (3.0 m in height x 19 m in length), an additional tunnel, a low pressure conduction pipeline,
a pressure pipe, a forebay, a powerhouse containing a 6.95 MW Francis turbine, a substation
located next to the powerhouse and sluice leading to the Rugama Stream. The powerhouse and
substation occupy an area of 18.5 ha. on land already influenced by the Arenal Hydroelectric
project. Water from the power house is returned to the Rugama Stream (at about 50 m) for its
ultimate discharge into the Arenal Reservoir.


4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis:

The PH Cote infrastructure is located in the district of Nuevo Arenal (e.g. powerhouse) of the
Guanacaste Province and the district Cote (e.g. dam, water intake, tunnels) of the Alajuela
Province. The approximate coordinates of the dam are 10o35’17.86? N y 84o54’14.83? W. The
Cote lake is part of a protected area named ?Zona Protectora Volcan Tenorio? to the north and to
the south with the Biological Corridor Volcan Tenorio-Arenal, both are part of the Arenal
Tempisque Conservation Area (ACA-T).

Environmental Permits: CNFL obtained the approval of the EIA in 1997 and a second
approval was given in 2000.

Cote Dam: The Cote Lake was a the largest natural lake in the country. In the 1980´s a
dam (3.5 m height x 19 m long) was built by ICE, which blocked the natural outflow of
the Cote lake, making this lake a regulated body of water. The water of the Cote Lake
was collected by an intake which conducted the water by a tunnel and a channel, to the
Rugama Stream which was then used as a conduction channel to the Arenal Lake, its
natural discharge area. This scheme operated for about 20 years and increased the natural
flow of the Rugama stream by about 100 times, therefore causing significant impacts to
the stream ecosystems.


                                                                                               2
Hydrology. The average rainfall for the area is 4,500 mm/year. Many tributaries feed
into the Cote lake, the most important being the Pierna de la Laguna river (average
annual: 1.97 m3/s, ranging from 0.4 m3/s in April to 3.13 m3/s in August). The Rugama
has an average annual flow of 0.21 m3/s, ranging from 0.04 m3/s in April to 0.34 m3/s in
August. Maximum flow in the Rugama was calculated through Gumbel distribution,
assuming a design flow with a return period of 500 years, the flood flow can reach 39.0
m3/s.

Natural Disasters. The natural disaster risks in this area include flooding, landslides,
seismic and volcanic activity. The latter two risks were both considered in the design of
the project, again based on a return period of 1 in 500 years. Landslides are a common
problem in the region. During the construction period, a landslide affected the
powerhouse site and during operation recurrent landslides have occurred along the
conduction track.

Land Use. The Cote watershed (15.3 km2) is mostly forested in the upper basin where
the Cote Project is located. These forests are important for the protection of the flora and
fauna, aquifer recharge, genetic reserves and for the conservation of evergreen
landscapes.     Economic activities in the region are tourism (upper watershed) and
agriculture (lower watershed). In the Ruguma watershed (1.8 km2), the main land uses are
forest cover and agriculture.

Terrestrial Flora and Fauna

About 50 percent of the Cote Lake, is surrounded by humid montane forests and the rest
by pasture and agricultural land. These forests contain plant species typical of primary
forests such as Virola koschnyi, Euterpe precatoria, Carapa guinanesis, Inga
thibaudiana, among others. These forests are also a habitat of important protected species
such as tapir (Tapirus bairdii), puma (Puma concolor), monkeys (Aloutta palliata),
Tepezcuintle (Agouti paca), ocelot (Leopardus pardalis), etc.

The water intake is surrounded by pine and secondary growth vegetation. At the end of
the first tunnel, a low pressure conduction pipe (underground) crosses high quality forest
(some primary). The antechamber and the beginning of the pressure pipe have patches of
primary forests. In this area landslides are common and an operation issue. Finally, the
power house and the tailrace canal are located in the middle of the riparian banks of the
Rugama Stream and another stream with no name. Protected fauna species have been
reported along the conduction and around the power house such as river otters (Lutra
longicaudus), white-nose Coati (Nasua narica), white face monkeys (Cebus capucinus),
slots (Bradypus variegatus), among others which is a good indicator of the recovery of
the project areas.

Aquatic Flora and Fauna. The aquatic environment affected by the project include the
Cote Lake, the Ruguma Stream and the Cote river. With the construction of this project,
however the Ruguma Stream returned to its natural flow regime. The Cote river will
remain at its current, diverted state because no environmental flow was prevented during

                                                                                          3
the project design. The aquatic fauna of the Rugama stream is slowly recovering and a
more stable macroinvertebrate fauna can be found today.

Lake: The Cote lake is classified as a mesotrofic lake with phosphorus limitations. It is
about 23 m deep and light penetration (Secchi reading) is between 1-3 m. The lake
contains currently a very diverse aquatic fauna formed by zooplankton (24 species),
macroinvertebrates (95 genera) and fish (13 species). Among the fish species are:
Atherinella hubbsii, Astyanax aeneus, Brycon guatemalensis, Parachromis dovii, among
others. After the completion of the Cote Project, the littoral vegetation of the lake was
affected by the increase in water levels, a lot of this vegetation died.

Local Communities. Two communities are located in the project area of influence, the
village of Arenal de Tilarán and the village San Rafael de Guatuso. San Rafael has a
population of 6,694 (data from 2001), whose main economic activities include grain,
vegetable, fruit and dairy production. Arenal has a population of 2,180 (data from 2001),
whose main economic activity is tourism. A social assessment was completed during
project preparation, and these communities were targeted during project public
consultation. However, these communities were not negatively affected by the project
and benefited from the employment and purchase of goods during the construction
period.

Physical Cultural Resources. Based on information from the National Museum of Costa
Rica (in 2001), the EIA did not reported any known archeological sites in the project
area.


Triggering of two new policies


OP/BP 4.37 Safety of dams

In 2001, the project contractors reviewed the conditions of the existing Cote dam and
proposed that it was better to build a new dam behind the original existing small dam.
The engineers of CNFL and ICE reviewed the proposal and approved the construction of
a new dam (4.6 m height x 24 m long). The Cote project was built between 2001 and
2002 and entered operation in March 2003. The World Bank is now proposing to trigger
OP4.37 Safety of Dams for the case of small dams to ensure adequate dam safety
measures are in place.

The Cote dam was built in the Cote River which is the natural outlet of the Cote Lake.
The Cote River is dry approximately several hundred meters below the dam but with the
flow of tributaries, it slowly recovers a permanent flow. The Cote dam is a small dam
(wier) which holds the natural outflow of the Cote Lake (a reservoir) with a volume of
3.000.000 m3. The Cote Lake and the dam is surrounded by forest and pasture land, no
communities are found within a 2km radius.



                                                                                       4
In October, 2011, a dam safety inspection was performed and found that (i) the dam was
designed, constructed and supervised by local and international civil engineers which
complies with the safeguard policy for small dams; (ii) CNFL should provide the Bank
with an inspection and maintenance plan designed by qualified engineers; (iii) CNFL
could develop and implement this plan itself or contract out the work if it lacks the
internal capacity. In response to a request by the sponsor, the Bank team has secured
funds to support a capacity building activity relating to managing dam safety and an
Action Plan has been agreed with the client to implement the dam safety measures
recommended by the dam safety specialist which has been cleared by the Regional
Safeguards Advisory Team (SAT)


OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement

Three private land owners were affected by the project due to the increased water level
around the Cote Lake. The effect of the increase water level caused the affixation of the
littoral vegetation (forest and pasture) land in about 57 ha. The owners placed claims to
the CNFL in the judiciary court system of Costa Rica. Over the years, CNFL has reached
agreements with all of them except for one private landowner that has substantial
holdings along the banks of the Cote Lake. This one pending case is awaiting resolution
through Costa Rica’s national judicial system. Due to this case, the OP 4.12 was
triggered. Detailed information of the resettlement actions performed by CNFL for the
CHS is available in the project’s Abbreviated Resettlement Plan.

Disclosure:

The client will update its environmental instruments (Sistemas Integrado de Gestión
Ambiental and Environmental Management Plan) to include provisions for the triggering
of the two new safeguards policies. The sponsor will send the revised EMP to the Bank
for review/approval and disclosure at the Bank’s Infoshop. The sponsor will also disclose
the updated EMP locally.


5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Ruth Tiffer-Sotomayor (Senior Environmental Specialist)
Alonso Zarzar (Senior Social Specialist)




                                                                                       5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)            Yes           No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                            x
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                    x
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                          x
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                     x
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                      x
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                               x
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                            x
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                      x
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                              x
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                       x
Country Systems OP/BP 4.00                                                    x

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible
impacts:

The construction of the Cote project caused environmental impacts common to any small
hydropower development: soil and subsurface excavations (low pressure pipeline and
tunnels), cutting of vegetation (for road access and civil works), sedimentation of the
Rugama tributaries, increase damming of the lake outflow, inundation of the lake littoral
vegetation, affectation of private land around the lake, among others.             The main
irreversible impact associated with the project is the permanent inundation of some parts
of the littoral vegetation of the Cote lake which caused the affixation of the trees.

The PH Cote prepared an EIA with an EMP which was approved in 1998 for SETENA.
During construction, all required permits were obtained. Also an environmental
specialist (Regente Ambiental) had a permanent role guiding the implementation of the
EMP. Mitigation measures recommended by the Bank team were also incorporated.
The biological monitoring program was one of the main recommendations given to the
project in order to develop a monitoring tool for the environmental impacts on the Cote
Lake’s critical habitat. Also, compensatory measures for about 900 ha of forest land
around the lake are under the PES program of FONAFIFO. Currently, the CNFL has
prepared an updated EMP with a full range of activities to conform with the requirements
of the National Environmental Agency (SETENA), the national environmental
certification procedure, the company’s current social and environmental policies and the
Bank safeguards policies.

Currently, SETENA has improved significantly its environmental evaluation procedures
and is more committed to the supervision of the Cote Project. In fact, it has requested
CNFL to update their Cote EMP and perform environmental evaluations of the acquired
land as compensation around the Cote Lake. CNFL has concluded these evaluations very
satisfactory.

                                                                                         6
The EMP was last updated in November 2010, and was found satisfactory to the Bank.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated
future activities in the project area:

The project raised the Cote Lake’s water level by about 1m and caused a permanent
inundation of littoral land composed of forests and pastures. Compensation and
mitigation measures have been implemented by the project to the affected landholders.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or
minimize adverse impacts:
N/A

4. For those safeguards to be addressed through OP/BP 4.00, characterize in general
terms the extent to which borrower systems are equivalent to the Objectives and
Operational Principles of OP 4.00, Table A1. For those safeguards to be addressed
through conventional OP/BPs, identify the reason for the decision to not apply OP
4.00 (e.g. absence of equivalence and/or acceptability report). This item is not in the
ISDS for restructuring.
Not Applicable.

5. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues to
identify any significant gap-filling measures necessary to fulfill the conditions for
application of OP 4.00. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and
implement the measures described:

Not Applicable.

6. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, including the Safeguard Diagnostic Review (SDR)
with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

During project preparation the Bank Team discussed the overall project with key
stakeholders such as CNFL, the government (MINAE, ICE) as well as NGOs (Center for
Tropical Studies, Grupo Yiski) and local stakeholder groups in each project area. The
stakeholder consultations for each subproject are described in the EIA summaries.

Before project construction began, members of the Power Generation Department from
CNFL organized several consultation events with the Nuevo Arenal and Cabanga
communities. Important agreements were reached during these consultations regarding
the process of selecting locals to work on the project during the construction period.

Currently, CNFL have increased contact with local stakeholders, schools, associations
and the Environmental Regional Authority (Area de Conservación Arenal-Tenorio).
Consultation and cooperation activities are performed periodically in the project area and
through the CHS workers who are also members of the local communities increasing the

                                                                                        7
communication channels with CNFL. The project has disclosed in its website their
environmental instruments.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Safeguard Diagnostic Review (Equivalence and Acceptability Report):
  Dates of "in-country" consultation and disclosure                          5/15/02
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                             08/6/02
  For category A projects, date of distributing the PID to the
  Executive Directors
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including       Yes [ x ]       No [ ]        N/A [ ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Yes
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP          NA
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.00 – Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address Environmental and Social
Safeguard Issues in Bank-Supported Projects
Did the Quality Assurance and Compliance Unit              Yes [ ]       No [ ]         N/A [ x ]
(QACU) and the ESSD and International Law Practice
Group (LEGEN) review and approve the Safeguard
Diagnostic Review report?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or Yes [ x ]        No [ ]        N/A [ ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or   The project caused degradation of
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does natural habitats but it included
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the mitigation measures that were
Bank?                                                      approved by the Bank.
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management         Yes [ ]       No [ ]         N/A [ x ]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                Yes [ ]       No [ ]         N/A [ x ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 – Physical Cultural Resources


                                                                                          8
Does the EA include adequate measures related to           Yes [ ]      No [ ]       N/A [ x ]
physical cultural resources?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning            Yes [ ]      No [ ]       N/A [ x ]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy            Yes [ x ]     No [ ]       N/A [ ]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for         Yes.
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional   Yes [ ]      No [ ]       N/A [ x ]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                       Yes [ ]        No [ ]     N/A [ ]
                                                           Under preparation by the client
Have the TORs as well as composition for the               NA. this is a small dam
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been              Under preparation by the client
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?     Yes [ ]      No [ ]       N/A [ x ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?


                                                                                       9
     OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
     Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the      Yes [ ]     No [ ]     N/A [ x ]
     international aspects of the project, including the
     procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
     dealing with the issue, been prepared
     Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
     referred to in the OP?
     The World Bank Policy on Access to Information
     Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [ x ]    No []     N/A [ ]
     the World Bank's Infoshop?
     Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       Yes.
     public place in a form and language that are
     understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
     and local NGOs?
     All Safeguard Policies
     Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [ x ]    No [ ]     N/A [ ]
     responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
     measures related to safeguard policies?
     Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes.
     included in the project cost?
     Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the             Yes.
     project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
     measures related to safeguard policies?
     Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes.
     agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
     reflected in the project legal documents?


     D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                           Name                             Date
Task Team Leader:                Roberto Aiello                                 March 13, 2012
Environmental Specialist:        Ruth Tiffer Sotomayor                          March 2, 2012
Social Development               Alonso Zarzar                                  March 6, 2012
Specialist:
Additional Environmental
and/or Social Development
Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards              Glenn Morgan                                   April 25, 2012
Coordinator:
  Comments:
Sector Manager:
  Comments:


                                                                                          10
