                                                                                 72559



                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET

                                  Costa Rica
                      FCPF READINESS PREPARATION GRANT
                               CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.:
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: January 1, 2012


I. BASIC INFORMATION
FCPF Readiness activities relate to strategic planning and preparation for REDD+.
Specifically, countries prepare for REDD+ by:
      i.   assessing the country’s situation with respect to deforestation, forest degradation,
           conservation and sustainable management of forests and relevant governance
           issues;
     ii.   identifying REDD+ strategy options;
    iii.   assessing key social and environmental risks and potential impacts associated
           with REDD+, and developing a management framework to mitigate these risks
           and potential impacts;
    iv.    working out a reference level of historic forest cover change and greenhouse gas
           emissions and uptake from deforestation and/or forest degradation and REDD+
           activities, and potentially forward-looking projections of emissions; and
     v.    designing a monitoring system to measure, report and verify the effect of the
           REDD+ strategy on greenhouse gas emissions and other multiple benefits, and to
           monitor the drivers of deforestation and forest degradation, as well as other
           variables relevant to the implementation of REDD+.
The FCPF Readiness Preparation grant will finance some of the preparatory work described
above. It will not finance any physical investments or pilot projects on the ground.

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Costa Rica                            Project ID: P123702
                                               Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: FCPF Readiness Preparation
Task Team Leader: Erick C.M. Fernandes
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 2013 Estimated Board Date: To Be Determined
Managing Unit: LCSAR                       Lending Instrument: TF Grant
Sector: Forestry (AT)
Theme: Climate Change (81)
FCPF Readiness Fund Amount (US$m.): US$3.6 million
Other financing amounts by source: GIZ US$1,708,500, National Government
US$155,000, Association of Agricultural Engineers US$40,000 and Ecomarkets
US$120,000
Environmental Category: B

                                                                                              1
Simplified Processing                       Simple [X]                     Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project               Yes [ ]                        No [X]

Note: This document was updated for publication on August 2012 to reflect changes in
personnel, schedule and budget only.

B. Objectives [from section 2 of R-PP Assessment Note]:

The overall, long-term objectives of the proposed World Bank/FCPF engagement in Costa
Rica are: to help Costa Rica reduce carbon emissions from deforestation and forest
degradation; sustainably manage forests; and conserve and enhance forest carbon stocks
(REDD+) in a socially and environmentally sound manner, while accessing international
financial incentives for local forest users, thereby helping to mitigate climate change at a
global level.

C. Description [from section 3 of R-PP Assessment Note]:

The Payment for Environmental Services (PES) program will likely serve as a cornerstone
of Costa Rica’s REDD strategy, with potential design change improvements to be defined
during the preparation phase to address issues within the REDD context. Other activities
would complement PES. Costa Rica has outlined several potential actions to address the
drivers of deforestation and forest degradation, and to enhance and conserve forest carbon
stocks. These options, to be further analyzed and developed through analytical studies and
consultations with relevant key stakeholders in the preparation phase, can be seen as falling
into five main categories: (i) increasing coverage, financing, and consolidation of the
existing PES program; (ii) opening the PES program to areas under active management for
forest resources; (iii) improving monitoring and control systems for illegal logging; (iv)
supporting cadastre and land regularization programs; and (v) improving control of forest
fires.1

The specific REDD readiness preparation activities Costa Rica intends to carry out in
developing its Readiness Package are described in the R-PP and include: stakeholder
consultations, analytical work, capacity-building of governmental as well as non-
governmental entities including Indigenous Peoples and campesinos, and a strategic
assessment of environmental and social impacts and risks. These activities would be funded
by an FCPF Readiness Preparation Grant of $3.6 million and a $ 1,708,500grant from GIZ,
in addition to the national government.2




1
  See Annex 4 for the major drivers of deforestation and forest degradation as identified in the R-PP and the
potential REDD strategies currently being considered.
2
  The total budget for Readiness Preparation is $7,139,500, of which $3.6 million will come from the FCPF
grant and $ 1,708,500from GIZ. A further $155,000 will come from the national government, $120,000 from
the Ecomarkets project, and $40,000 from the Association of Agricultural Engineers

                                                                                                                2
D. Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known):
The FCPF Readiness Preparation Grant does not entail physical investments or pilot projects
on the ground. Instead, the grant will finance a number of analytical and diagnostic studies
as well as a series of consultation meetings and workshops with relevant stakeholders.
While Readiness Preparation is conceived as mostly strategic planning at this stage, key
policy and regulatory precedents are being set at the readiness phase that will have
downstream impact at the national level once the national REDD+ strategy is ready to be
implemented.


E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

The Readiness Preparation Grant will be implemented by FONAFIFO which has a
successful track record of implementing a PES Program that has many of the same elements
as those proposed under the potential REDD+ strategy. Payments for forest services are
highly innovative, and Costa Rica has accumulated invaluable experience in this area. In
particular, FONAFIFO has developed capacity to contract landholders, make payments, and
monitor compliance. This track record suggests that FONAFIFO has the critical capacity
and commitment to effectively engage in a REDD+ program. FONAFIFO also has
experience in implementing World Bank-financed projects, i.e. the Ecomarkets I and
Ecomarkets II projects, and it has demonstrated its capacity to implement environmental and
social safeguards. However, given the cross-sector and national coverage of REDD,
safeguards policies for FCPF activities will apply at more strategic level than the previous
Bank projects undertaken by FONAFIFO. In that regard, the Bank Team has been assisting
FONAFIFO to design a methodology for the Strategic Environmental and Social
Assessment (SESA) process. Given the complexity of the multi-sectoral and multi-
stakeholder nature of the REDD+ design process at various levels, it is important for
FONAFIFO to strengthen its institutional capacity by recruiting additional human resources
(in particular social science expertise) that will help coordinate these various platforms at
the institutional and manage the process with the various stakeholder groups.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
Mihyun Miriam Bae (Social Scientist, LCSSO)
Glenn Morgan (Regional Safeguards Adviser)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES
The FCPF Readiness Preparation grant must comply with World Bank safeguard policies
addressing the management of environmental and social impacts and risks. This grant will,
in part, support the country’s activities to identify the potential risks associated with REDD+
and mitigation options. In order to do this, the FCPF Preparation Grant will carry out a
Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) in order to integrate key
environmental and social considerations into REDD+ Readiness by combining analytical
and participatory approaches. The SESA will allow: (i) social and environmental
considerations to be integrated into the REDD+ Readiness process, in particular in the
                                                                                             3
REDD strategy; (ii) participation of relevant key stakeholder in the identification and
prioritizing of key issues, in assessment of policies, in determining institutional and capacity
gaps to manage these priorities and recommendations; (iii) key stakeholders to contribute to
the design of the national REDD+ strategy with specific recommendations. .As part of the
SESA process, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be
formulated to manage environmental and social impacts and risks and to mitigate potential
adverse impacts for specific investments on the ground during the implementation of the
national REDD+ strategy. It is envisioned that the safeguards policies mentioned below may
be triggered in the REDD+ Readiness process.

                                                                 Yes           No          TBD
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                             X
A Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will be conducted to address the
potential benefits and risks of the priority strategic options and activities identified in the R-
PP. The SESA will also evaluate key contextual opportunities and constraints which could
influence the ability of the eventual REDD+ strategy to achieve its expected outcomes and
results. The SESA will be carried out in a manner consistent with the applicable World
Bank operational and safeguards policies. Since the explicit goal of the REDD+ strategy is
to promote the reduction in rates of deforestation and degradation by rewarding measures to
protect and conserve forests, the environmental impacts of the strategy are expected to be
mostly positive.

As forest cover improves so too will the associated benefits associated with forests. Not
only as a sink for carbon but also for the many environmental services forests provide such
as watershed protection, provision of important habitats, sustainable source of NTFP and
other forest based livelihoods. The REDD+ strategy itself will not finance the harvesting or
conversion of forests so there is little to no direct adverse impact associated with activities
planned as part of the strategic options. The principal risk from REDD+ would arise in the
event that the strategies fail to achieve their objectives thereby creating unexpected indirect
adverse impacts through the unintended creation of incentives to clear forests for other
purposes. This could occur, for example, if PES schemes failed to provide sufficient
monetary incentive to retain areas under forest cover. Similar risks could occur for example
if lack of land tenure security were to undermine commitment to maintain land under forest
cover for long time periods.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                      X
Given that the REDD+ strategy will likely work both within existing protected areas as well
as other forest habitats of varying significance, OP 4.04 will apply. If the REDD+ strategies
are successful, the impacts on critical forest habitats are expected to be positive,
nevertheless SESA will evaluate the possible risks associated with strategic options on
forest habitats within PA as well as other sensitive forest habitats under private or
communal control. During the formulation of the REDD+ strategy and throughout its
implementation consultations will be carried out with key stakeholders to identify potential
issues of concern. During the implementation phase monitoring activities will be
established to ensure that critical natural habitats are not adversely affected. It is expected
that the ESMF will include provisions to assess possible impacts prior to any actions being

                                                                                                4
                                                               Yes         No         TBD
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)
undertaken on the ground
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                            X
Due to the obvious importance of REDD+ as part of Costa Rica’s long term forest and
environmental management programs and due to the importance forests play in the
livelihoods of many communities, this policy will apply. The REDD+ Strategy itself will
build largely on the experience of FONAFIFO with the Payment for Environmental Services
program. During the preparation phase, these and other forestry and rural development
initiatives will be evaluated in order to ensure lessons are incorporated early in the design
and key social and environmental risks and potential impacts associated with REDD+ are
considered in the ESMF.

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                   X
     At present it is not envisioned that the REDD+ strategy would finance or lead to an
increased use of pesticides or other agricultural chemicals. However, it is conceivable that
some forest management practices used at plantations could utilize silvi-cultural practices
involving pesticides. The SESA will evaluate the potential for such use of chemicals in
forest management and, if necessary, appropriate guidelines and analytical approaches
would be defined in the ESMF. For the tie being the policy is indicated as To be
Determined (TBD) until further information is gathered during the preparation phase.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                    X
     Given the uncertainty regarding the exact locations of activities to be carried out under
the REDD+ Strategy the applicability of this policy is still to be determined. The most
likely way this policy would be triggered is the REDD+ activities are implemented in forest
areas which would be considered as PCR under the policy definition. This could occur for
example, where forests or landscapes would be considered to have historical or cultural
significance such as spirit forests, sacred valleys or other features of the natural landscape.
It is expected that the ESMF would include specific provisions to assess the possibility of
such impacts prior to any activities being undertaken on the ground
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                    X
An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared to comply with the
Indigenous Peoples policy (OP 4.10) for addressing issues arising from specific investments
during the implementation of the national REDD+ strategy. The IPPF will be part of a
separate, specific chapter of the Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF). Under this policy, Indigenous Peoples communities affected by REDD+ Strategy
must be consulted in a culturally appropriate manner and must provide their “Broad
Community Support.? Costa Rica also committed to comply with its obligations under ILO
Convention 169 on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                              X
In order to comply with the Involuntary Resettlement policy (OP 4.12), a Process
Framework (PF) will be prepared (and included as a separate specific chapter of the ESMF)
for managing the potential restriction of access of local communities to natural resources.
Additionally, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will also be prepared (as an
additional specific chapter of the ESMF) to address potential resettlement of private land
owners that are currently living in the protected areas and the possible resettling and

                                                                                              5
                                                                 Yes           No     TBD
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)
compensation of these private land owners from indigenous peoples territories.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                    X
    The REDD+ will not finance the construction or rehabilitation of dams nor will any
REDD initiatives rely the on the performance or existing dams so the policy is not triggered.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                               X
    The REDD+ strategy is not likely to undertake activities which will affect the quantity
or quality of international waterways so the policy is not triggered at this time.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                        X
    The REDD+ strategy will not finance activities in disputed areas as defined under the
policy and therefore the policy is not triggered at this time.
Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address                                 X
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for review meeting of REDD Country’s mid-term progress report, at
   which time the ISDS may be updated as needed: [XXX]

B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may
   be needed. The specific studies and their timing3 should be specified in the initial
   ISDS and/or updated ISDS: N/A




              he SESA aims to integrate key environmental and social considerations into
REDD+ Readiness by combining analytical and participatory approaches. An
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared to manage
environmental and social risks and to mitigate potential adverse impacts for specific
investments on the ground when the national REDD+ strategy is being implemented. The
ESMF, will be part of the Readiness Package, which is the final product of the readiness
preparation process under the FCPF.

FONAFIFO organized the first National SESA Workshop (May 4-5, 2011) with relevant
key stakeholder groups nationally in order to (i) inform stakeholders about Costa Rica’s
revised proposal for designing a national REDD+ strategy; and (ii) provide the initial
platform for relevant key stakeholders to raise their issues and concerns regarding the
proposal. During SESA workshop, an issue scoping exercise was carried out based on the

3   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at
the InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to
potentially affected persons.


                                                                                                                            6
strategic REDD+ options being considered for the design of the national REDD+ strategy.
Discussions focused on identifying the risks and benefits of each proposed strategic REDD+
option from the specific perspective of each of the relevant key stakeholder group and in
distilling the particular issues and concerns. Stakeholder groups that participated in the
SESA workshop included: (i) government agencies; (ii) indigenous peoples; (iii) donors;
(iv) civil society and NGOs; (v) campesino organizations and small producers; (vi) private
sector; and (vii) academia and research institutes. Each stakeholder group held their own
deliberation meeting and carried out their issue scoping exercise based on the proposed
REDD+ strategic options. This workshop provided the first opportunity both for
FONAFIFO and the relevant key stakeholder groups to interact formally and to work
towards building a more systematic participatory process in designing the national REDD+
strategy.

A Workshop Proceedings was prepared by FONAFIFO and disseminated broadly on June 7,
2011, reflecting the inputs and feedback received from the key stakeholder groups during
the national SESA workshop. The Workshop Proceedings was accompanied by a set of
response from FONAFIFO addressing the issues and concerns raised by each stakeholder
group, including a separate response matrix for indigenous peoples. The Workshop
Proceedings and its response matrix is available on FONAFIFO’s website.

Based on the stakeholders’ inputs, FONAFIFO is drafting a SESA Workplan that outlines
the steps of the SESA process throughout the readiness phase indicating specific timeline,
milestones, analytical studies, etc. Prior to the finalization, this draft SESA Workplan will
be disseminated to the stakeholders and will serve as a live document subject to revision as
the design of the national REDD+ strategy evolves. A parallel communications strategy will
support the information dissemination on the specifics of the strategic options, risks and
benefits, to strengthen participatory platforms and process, and also to raise awareness about
the overall national REDD strategy. The SESA Workplan will be finalized as a self-standing
document that will contain activities, the linkages with the overall national REDD+ strategy
design and specific components of the R-PP, the specific issues and studies to be carried
out, budget, institutional arrangements and timeline.

During the readiness phase, FONAFIFO will carry out the analytical and diagnostic studies
in regards to the social, environmental, legal and policy impacts, risks and benefits in a
participatory manner based on the SESA Workplan agreed with the relevant key
stakeholders. The data and findings of these analytical and diagnostic studies will be
summarized in a self-standing SESA Report that will include the following key elements: (i)
the consultation process with respect to the analytical and diagnostic studies; (ii) the risks
and benefits of the proposed options for the national REDD strategy; and (iii) the contextual
challenges that could weaken and/or enhance the long-term sustainability of the national
REDD strategy.




                                                                                             7
IV. APPROVALS

     Signed and submitted by:
     Environmental Specialist           Glenn Morgan
     Social Specialist                  Mi Hyun Bae
     Task Team Leader:                  Erick C.M. Fernandes
     Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Francis Fragano (acting)
     Sector Manager:                    Laurent Mselatti




                                                                   8
