                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC6448


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/03/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Costa Rica                       Project ID: P123146
Project Name: Costa Rica Higher Education
Task Team Leader: Marcelo Becerra
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 17,     Estimated Board Date: March 22, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: LCSHE                      Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                          Loan
Sector: Tertiary education (100%)
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):          200.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                   50.00
                                                                   50.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
1.      The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase equitable access and
improve the quality and relevance of the public higher education system by: (i) focusing
resources in key priority disciplines relevant to Costa Rica development, and (ii) strengthening
public tertiary education institutions management capacity and accountability.

 Key Results

 2.    Progress towards meeting these development objectives would be measured by a number
of process, output and impact indicators, which would be further identified during Project
preparation. Expected impact indicators are shown below:

  PDO: Equitable access----- Key Results: i) Increased access and retention of students from
disadvantaged backgrounds.
  PDO: Quality and Relevance---- Key Results: i) Increased enrollment in key disciplines,
especially science and technology; ii) Improved faculty qualifications (at Master and PhD
levels); iii) Increased number of accredited programs in key disciplines.
C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
3.      The proposed lending instrument is a Specific Investment Loan with a total Project
amount of US$250 million composed of US$200 million from the Bank and US$50 million in
counterpart funds from the Government and the four established public universities that would
be supported by the Project. The duration of the Project is expected to be 5 years from
effectiveness. The Project would achieve its development objective through implementation of
two components:

 4.      Component 1. Institutional Improvement Agreements (Total: US$230 million; Bank:
US$200 million; Universities: US$30 million estimated to be confirmed). The objective of this
component would be to: (a) help public universities focus resources on key priority disciplines,
by enabling them to undertake strategic investments in areas of high national priority that are
critical to respond to the challenge of increasing country competitiveness; and (b) strengthen
public universities management capacity and accountability, by enabling them to develop a
culture (i) of strategic long-term planning, including the formulation of an institutional mission,
vision and strategy; and (ii) of measurement, target setting, accountability, monitoring and
evaluation that would lead to permanent performance-based financing innovations.

 5.     An Institutional Improvement Agreement (IIA) would be entered into between the
Government and each of the four established public universities. Each IIA would be established
for 5 years and be co-financed by the Bank and university counterpart, with the Bank financing
split equally among the four public universities (US$50 million each), consistent with the 2010-
15 FEES. The IIAs for each university would be divided in two stages. First, an IIA for $30
million would be signed with each university, while the remaining $20 million would be
maintained on hold. Second, after an in-depth mid-term evaluation, each university will gain
access to the remaining $20 million or part thereof, depending on their performance/achievement
of the results in the first 3 years. The IIAs would include specific indicators and targets, and be
signed by the Ministers of Education, Science and Technology, Finance and Planning and the
Rector of each of the four public universities. Budgets would be further detailed in an Annual
Investment Plan to be approved yearly by the Bank and the Liaison Committee. Before the end
of the third year, an in-depth mid-term review would be carried out to assess progress and carry
out specific budget reassignments, as needed. This mechanism has been tested in other countries
by the Bank (i.e. through the MECESUP project in Chile) and is seen as adequate in a context
where the Government is willing to pilot a new financing approach based on results.

  6.     The IIA would be based on an Institutional Improvement Plan (IIP) that will cover the
totality of the investments to be realized by each university for five years, including activities,
indicators, annual targets and budgets. IPPs for each of the four public universities supported by
the Project would be organized around three strategic orientations: (i) increasing equitable access
and student graduation; (ii) improving the quality and relevance of training programs and human
resources and strengthening innovation and scientific and technological development; and (iii)
improving institutional management and efficiency. Eligible expenditures to be financed would
include: (i) consultant services (i.e. technical assistance for program reform, etc); (ii) goods (i.e.
laboratory and computer equipment, furniture); (iii) scholarships and internships (i.e. for
enrolling faculty in postgraduate programs); (iv) visiting professors and other faculty and student
mobility programs; and (v) infrastructure (i.e. new buildings, laboratories, etc).

 7.     The IIAs would follow a clear cycle, starting with the preparation of the IIP by a
Technical Team, which would be followed by the negotiation of the IIA between the
Government (represented by a negotiating team composed of Government representatives, and
an international expert) and the universities. Once signed, an ex-post review of the IIA, including
monitoring and evaluation, would be carried out by a Supervisory Committee reporting to the
Liaison Commission.

 8.    Component 2. Enhancing the higher education system (Total: US$20 million;
Government: US$20 million). The objective of this component would be to promote the
development of strategic activities with a system-wide scope to improve quality in HEIs,
including: (i) the development of an information system comprising a Labor Observatory and
M&E system for the entire higher education system; (ii) improvements in the system of
horizontal and vertical academic and institutional coordination, including recognition of credits
among institutions; and (iii) enhancements to SINAES financial and technical capacity to
improve and implement its development plan, including evaluation and accreditation of
programs and universities.

D. Project location (if known)
9.      The implement agencies, Ministry of Education, the National Council of Rectors
(CONARE) are located in San Jose. However, Project activities to be implemented by the four
public universities, would be executed throughout the entire Costa Rica territory, since benefited
higher education institutions are spread in urban areas all around the country.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
10.    Multilateral banks such as the Inter-American Development Bank and Banco
Centroamericano de Integración Económica (BCIE) have had a long tradition of supporting the
Costa Rican higher education sector through loans to specific institutions. Although further
assessments are needed, the Bank team preliminary view is that most of the public universities
have reasonably good institutional capacities. Finally, universities are well aware of national
environmental policies regulated by the Secretaria Tecnica Nacional Ambiental (SETENA).

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes        No           TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                               X
    An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) will be developed to guide the site
selection, assessment of construction related environmental impacts, and development of specific
environmental management plans for civil works and infrastructure investments. The EMF will
include appropriate protocols, training, and standards for the management and disposal of
dangerous or hazardous materials which may be used in laboratories. In addition, it will ensured
that the EMF includes screening criteria to exclude any subprojects with potential adverse
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes           No          TBD
impacts on physical cultural resources and that all civil works contracts should include
appropriate provisions for addressing chance-finds during construction. The EMF will be
disclosed prior to Appraisal.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                         X
    Since the works are currently unknown, the Natural Habitats policy is triggered and any
impacts on natural habitats will be screened for and mitigated through the Project EMF and each
subprojects specific EMPs.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                               X
    The Forest policy is not triggered as no forest management activities will be financed by this
operation. The EMF will include screening criteria to exclude any subprojects with potential
adverse impacts on forested areas.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                          X
    This policy is not triggered since the project will not procure pesticides or lead to their
increased use.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                           X
    The Physical Cultural Resources policy is not triggered as no significant excavations will
take place and no physical cultural resources will be impacted during works. The EMF will
include screening criteria to exclude any subprojects with potential adverse impacts on physical
cultural resources. All civil works contracts will include appropriate provisions for addressing
potential chance-finds during construction.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                       X
    Given the presence of Indigenous Peoples and Afro-Costa Rican populations in Costa Rica,
the Project national scope, and the opportunity for Indigenous and Afro students to benefit from
this Project, the Indigenous Peoples Policy is triggered and an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP)
will be developed. This IPP will be critical in supporting the achievement of the Project proposed
outcome to improve access for less-advantaged populations in higher level education. The IPP
will set out guidelines that should be adopted by each Institutional Improvement Plan to
promote, track and support Indigenous peoples access and completion in higher learning. A
Social Assessment will be carried out to: (a) identify and assess existing barriers to access, for
Indigenous, afro and other disadvantaged populations, (b) identify priorities for Indigenous and
Afro peoples in higher education, (c) identify and consult key Indigenous and Afro
representatives and stakeholders to develop the IPP, and (d) propose recommendations for
proactive measures, including one set for the larger population of disadvantaged students, and a
different set, as relevant, for Indigenous peoples and the Afro-Costa Rican population. The
recommendations will serve as the draft IPP, which will be presented, together with the Social
Assessment, at a national level meeting of Indigenous and Afro education stakeholders.
Recommendations for the broader disadvantaged population will be incorporated into the Project
Environmental and Social Management Framework that will also serve to guide the Institutional
Improvement Plans. Upon inclusion of the feedback received at this national consultation with
Indigenous and Afro stakeholders, a final IPP will be disclosed and disseminated through
national Indigenous and Afro organizations and in Indigenous territories as well as in the Bank
Infoshop.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                              X
    Specific screening criteria will be included in the EMF to exclude any sites or sub-projects
that could potentially cause resettlement impacts covered under OP. 4.12, including screening
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                              Yes              No             TBD
out any potential economic displacement.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                     X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 11/15/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   TBD

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                   Mr Marcelo Becerra                                                        08/03/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Francis V. Fragano                                                     08/03/2011
      Comments: Acting on behalf of Glenn Morgan
    Sector Manager:                     Ms Sajitha Bashir                                                         08/03/2011
      Comments: Acting SM--on behalf of Chingboon Lee




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
