                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/23/2012                                Report No.: ISDSA739
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Cote d'Ivoire                       Project ID: P124715
Project Name: Cote d'Ivoire - Emergency Infrastructure Renewal Project
Task Team Leader: Ibou Diouf
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 16,        Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: AFTTR                         Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery
                                             Loan
Sector: Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (30%);Urban Transport
(30%);General transportation sector (20%);General water, sanitation and flood protection
sector (15%);Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (5%)
Theme: City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (50%);Rural services and
infrastructure (30%);Other urban development (10%);Urban planning and housing policy
(5%);Trade facilitation and market access (5%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            100
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                           100.00
                                                                      100.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []            Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [X]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to improve access to basic infrastructures in
targeted urban and rural areas.

3. Project Description
The proposed project, in the total amount of US$200, will support the government's rapid
response to the priority infrastructure reconstruction needs in major cities, from 2012-
2015. The proposed project has three components: (a) Component A - Urban
Infrastructure Rehabilitation (US$147.0 million, of which IDA finances US$78.4
million), (b) Component B - Rural Infrastructure Rehabilitation (US$34.0 million, of
which IDA finances US$11.0 million), and (c) Project Management and Coordination
(US$19.0 million, of which IDA finances US$10.6 million). What follows is a
description of the proposed project components.
 Component A - Urban Infrastructure Rehabilitation. This component will support the
following four (4) sub-components: (i) Urban Roads Rehabilitation; (ii) Urban Water
Supply; (iii) Sanitation, Drainage and Flood Prevention; and (iv) Electricity and Public
Lighting.

 Component B - Rural Infrastructure Rehabilitation. This component will support the
following three (3) sub-components: (i) Rural Roads, (ii) Construction of Bassawa Bridge
and (iii) Rehabilitation of Economic and basic social infrastructures.

  Component C - Project Management and Coordination. This component will finance the
project management and coordination costs and will include consultant services,
technical assistance, training and operating costs.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The proposed emergency operation will be nation-wide covering selected urban and rural
areas. However, at this stage of project preparation, the exact locations are tentatively
known.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN)
   Ms Ioana Monica Dorhoi (IEGDG)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed project is classified as environmental Category A, as a result of the
addition of the Bassawa Bridge. However, most of the activities funded under the project
are not expected to have significant negative environmental or social impacts. The
proposed project triggers three safeguards policies: OP/BP 4.01 on environmental
assessment, OP/BP 4.12 on involuntary resettlement, and OP/BP 4.11 on physical
cultural resources. In accordance with OP 8.00 and to guide the environmental
assessment and mitigation process, an Environmental and Social Screening and
Assessment Framework (ESSAF) has been prepared and disclosed to the public.
Furthermore, for better understanding of the extent and magnitude of anticipated
environmental and social impacts, an Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared, not later than
three months after project effectiveness.

  Since the location of most of the investments is known, Environmental Impact
Assessments (EIAs) / Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) as well as a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) and/or
Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) will be prepared, depending on the
findings of the preliminary technical studies and the screening checklist of the ESSAF,
the ESMF and the RPF. All documents will need to be disclosed in-country and at the
World Bank Infoshop prior to any civil works being initiated.

 The ESSAF provides guidance on the approach to be taken during project
implementation for the screening and design of sub-projects and planning of mitigation
measures. The activities under the proposed project that will generate any adverse
environmental or social effects will try to be avoided and if not possible, mitigation plans
will be developed. The one exception is the construction of the Bassawa Bridge, which
will have major, irreversible environmental and social impacts. The project is expected to
have positive impacts towards sustainable improvement and development of urban and
rural infrastructures, including trade facilitation and market access.

 The project’s social impact might refer to land acquisition or other assets that might be
affected resulting in potential loss of assets or access to assets or potential loss of income
sources or other means of livelihoods. A RPF will be prepared along with RAPs and/or
ARAPs for subprojects as needed. The RAPs and ARAPs will have to include: detailed
information on the types of impacts, the socio-economic surveys identifying the affected
people and lands, establish land tenure and right of access issues, grievance redress
mechanisms, as well as valuation and compensation for losses and acquisition of land at
market price values. In addition, the proposed operations will support a number of
feasibility and detailed design studies for future infrastructure investments for which
World Bank safeguard policies relating to consultation and disclosure will apply. In
particular, the implementing agency will consult project-affected groups and local
nongovernmental organizations on the project's environmental and social aspects, and
will take their views into account. The implementing agency will initiate these
consultations as early as possible, and for meaningful consultations, will provide relevant
material in a timely manner prior to consultation, in a form and language(s) that are
understandable and accessible to the groups being consulted.

 The project activities include: Drilling and equipment of boreholes in Abidjan;
Extension and upgrading of the potable water network in Abidjan; Rehabilitation of water
production installations in Bingerville; Upgrade of water production capacity of the Kan
water plant in Bouake; Upgrade and extension of water distribution network in Bouake;
Upgrade and extension of water distribution network in Korhogo; Rehabilitation of water
production installations in Yamoussoukro; Replacement of water mains and upgrade and
extension of water distribution network in Yamoussoukro; Remediation works of the
drainage system of Gourou and bay of Cocody catchment areas (l’Indenié
crossroad/junction); Remediation works of the drainage system of Bonoumin and
catchment areas; Remediation works of the drainage system of Abobo catchment areas
(Bokabo, Akekoi, and Clouetcha) which drain the District of Abidjan; Rehabilitation of
sewer and storm water networks in Treichville; and Replacement of storm water/sewer
catch basin covers on the main roads of Abidjan. The construction of Bessawa bridge will
be funded entirely by Government funding but then the project team will ensure that a
detailed Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and if necessary a RAP is
prepared and disclosed prior to initiation of civil works.

 The following policies will not be triggered: OP/BP 4.04; OP/BP 4.36; OP 4.09; OP/BP
4.10; 0P/BP 4.37; 0P/BP 7.50; 0P/BP 7.60.

 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04: The project will not convert, degrade or restore any
natural habitats or critical natural habitats.

 Forests OP/BP 4.36: The project will not finance activities that would involve
significant conversion or degradation of critical forest areas or related critical natural
habitats as defined under the policy.

 Pest Management OP 4.09: The project will not procure any pesticides nor fund any
project that will result in the use of pesticides.

 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10: There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area
and so the policy is not triggered.

 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37: The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation
of any dams as defined under this policy.

 Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50: The policy is not triggered.

 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60: The policy is not triggered.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be small-scale and site
specific, thus easily remediable. The resettlement issues and any potential land disputes
will need to be addressed as described in the Resettlement Policy Framework as well as
under the subsequent RAPs and/or ARAPs which will be prepared, as necessary, before
any civil works are initiated. No long term or cumulative impacts are foreseen during
project implementation. Instead, the proposed project will contribute to improved socio-
economic condition of people living in the project impact areas through: (a) increased
revenue through direct and indirect jobs created by the project activities; (b) improved
accessibility in rural areas by opening up areas of production and its impact on poverty
reduction; (c) improvement of health services by the rehabilitation of health centers; (d)
improved access and quality of water services and electricity to disadvantaged segments
of the population, especially in the peri-urban areas of Yamoussoukro and Korhogo; (e)
improved quality of life through improved sewer system; (f) improved road safety and
overall public safety through a better lighting of targeted urban centers; and (g)
strengthened capacity of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) and implementing
agencies.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not Applicable.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The PCU and key executing agencies such as the Ivorian Electricity Company
(Compagnie Ivoirienne d’Electricité, CIE) and the Road Agency (Agence de Gestion des
Routes, AGEROUTE) have experience in implementing Bank projects. The PCU is
staffed with an environmental and social specialist who will be responsible for
coordinating all safeguards concerns. Furthermore, the PCU will ensure that all
implementing agencies and supervising consultants have environment and social focal
points, which will be responsible for applying the safeguard screening and mitigation
requirements to each subproject.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders still remain the following:
  - Ministry of Economic Infrastructure
  - Other stakeholders [Ministries, Non-governmental Organizations, private sector,
communities, development partners, etc.] and executing agencies such as AGEROUTE,
the Water Supply Agency (Office National de l’Eau Potable, ONEP), General Directorate
of Construction, Urbanism and Architecture (Direction Générale de la Construction, de
l’Urbanisme et de l’Architecture, DGCUA), Sanitation and Drainage Directorate
(Direction de l’Assainissement et du Drainage, DAD), and CIE are being consulted
regularly. Th proposed project will continue the dialogue with key stakeholders and the
project will rely on the ESMF, the RPF, the RAPs and/or ARAPs, the EIAs and the
EMPs, as appropriate, to ensure that the appropriate mitigation measures are taken into
account in accordance with Cote d’Ivoire and the Bank's safeguards policies in
consultation with key stakeholders. This participatory approac will be carried on
throughout implementation, maintenance, supervision and evaluation of the project
activities.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     01/14/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 01/16/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  01/18/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     01/14/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 01/16/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  01/18/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
Due to the emergency nature of this project, and in compliance with OP/BP 8.00, the
completion and disclosure of the environmental and social instruments were not required
as a condition for appraisal of the project. An ESSAF has been prepared and disclosed at
Infoshop, and an ESMF and a RPF will be prepared within three months of project
effectiveness and before the commencement of civil works. However, the safeguards
instruments: EIAs/EMPs as well as an RPF and RAPs and/or ARAPs will be prepared at
subproject level depending on the findings of the preliminary technical studies and the
screening checklist of the ESSAF, the ESMF and the RPF. All documents will need to be
disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop prior to any civil works being initiated.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?             Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)         No
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the         No
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
  Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
  Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
  adverse impacts on cultural property?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              No
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        No
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Ibou Diouf                                05/22/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba                    05/22/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Ioana Monica Dorhoi                       05/22/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                     05/23/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Supee Teravaninthorn                      05/23/2012
  Comments:
