                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 01/12/2012                                     Report No.: AC6485
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Cote d'Ivoire                           Project ID: P119328
Project Name: Emergency Basic Education Support Project - EFA-FTI Grant
Task Team Leader: Hamoud Abdel Wedoud Kamil
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 25, 2011          Estimated Board Date: February 17, 2012
Managing Unit: AFTED                             Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery
                                                 Loan
Sector: Primary education (80%);Secondary education (10%);General education sector
(10%)
Theme: Education for all (70%);Nutrition and food security (10%);Gender
(10%);Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (10%)
SPF Amount (US$m):                0
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                          0.00
         Education for All - Fast Track Initiative                       41.40
                                                                         41.40
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                     Yes [X]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objectives of the Project are: (i) restoring and increasing access to basic education,
with a particular focus on conflict-affected areas; (ii) rehabilitating and improving the
conditions for teaching and learning; and (iii) restoring and strengthening institutional
capacity to deliver quality basic education.

3. Project Description
Component 1: Restoring and increasing access to basic education services includes: (i)
the construction and equipment of classrooms, mostly through participatory, community-
based approaches; (ii) the rehabilitation/replacement of classrooms and other important
school infrastructure (i.e. latrines, water points etc.); (iii) the provision and replacement
of student desks (table-bancs), (iv) incentive schemes to promote girls’ education, such as
information and sensitization campaigns and special ceremonies for graduating girls
similar to successful programs run in Mauritania or the establishment of small lower-
secondary schools (collèges de proximités) in remote rural areas; and (v) restoration of
administrative services.
  Component 2: Rehabilitating and improving the conditions for teaching and learning
would support (i) pre- and in-service training, including the rehabilitation and equipment
of the teacher training institutes (CAFOP) and the construction of two new satellite
institutes; (ii) the re-launching of school feeding and nutritional programs, and
acquisition and distribution of micro-nutrients and de-worming tablets; (iii) the
acquisition of pedagogical inputs such as textbooks, teacher’s guides, reading books; (iv)
training of head masters/school directors and inspectors to enhance the quality of school-
level pedagogic support and (v) establishing a student learning assessment system and
conducting learning assessments including EGRA.

 Component 3: Restoring and strengthening the administrative, technical, pedagogical,
and monitoring capacity of the education system supports the rebuilding of institutional
capacity of the sector, and subsequently its strengthening by (i) reinforcing key
departments at the central level in terms of planning and monitoring of the Education
Sector Plan (ESP), in which the project is included; (ii) clarifying roles and
responsibilities for all levels of the national education system; (iii) developing capacities
at the regional level to manage deconcentrated responsibilities by clarifying the
respective mandates at both the central and regional levels, and (iv) at the local level,
clarifying and strengthening the role and responsibility of the school-based management
committees, COGES.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project activities will be nation-wide, covering the all regions of Côte d'Ivoire.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Salamata Bal (AFTCS)
   Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is classified as Environmental Category B as potential adverse environmental
and social impacts associated with construction and rehabilitation of schools (including
sanitary infrastructure like latrines) and teacher training institutes, and the construction of
two new satellite institutes, are generally less adverse, small-scale and site specific; thus,
manageable to an accepted level. The project triggers two safeguards policies: OP/BP
4.01 on Environmental Assessment and OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. In the
original project (before it was changed to an emergency one), an Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
had been prepared, reviewed, approved and disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop.
These instruments will still apply to this present project since no significant changes have
been made in terms of activities to be financed under the present emergency status.

 In accordance with OP 8.00 and to guide the environmental assessment and mitigation
process, an Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF)
has been developed. The ESSAF provides guidance on the approach to be taken during
project implementation for the screening and design of sub-projects and planning of
mitigation measures.

 The general environmental management clauses for civil works will be inserted into the
bidding documents and contracts. Detailed environmental assessments or Environmental
Management Plans and/or Resettlement Action Plans, if necessary, would be carried out
for all project activities that will trigger them and disclosed in-country and at the Bank's
InfoShop before specific new or rehabilitation civil works could start.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be small-scale and site
specific, thus easily remediable. No indirect or long term adverse impacts are expected
during project implementation.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not Applicable

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower has the necessary government structures in place, which are functioning
well and adequate legislative texts in place to address both environmental as well as
social safeguards issues. The "Agence Nationale de l'Environnement" (ANDE) is the
national environmental protection agency and has been following up safeguards aspects
for other Bank-financed projects and will do same for this emergency operation.
 The approach to safeguards will be to apply the existing Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to cover
all activities to be financed under the project. An environmental consultant will be
engaged to manage and oversee the environmental and social management process; and
in particular apply the screening checklists to various sub-projects.

 During implementation, Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs),
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and/or Resettlement Action Plans
(RAPs) or Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) will be prepared (and
reviewed, approved and disclosed in-country and the InfoShop prior to civil works) as
and when necessary, following the results of the environmental and social screening
checklist.

 To assist in capacity-building, and to provide subsequent guidance and review of the
ESSAF's application, the World Bank environmental and social safeguard specialists in
the project task team will provide guidance to the PIU. During supervision of these
operations, the World Bank will assess the implementation of the ESSAF, and
recommend additional strengthening, if required.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include:
 Ministry of Education; UNICEF; and WFP

 The implementing agency will consult project-affected groups and local
nongovernmental organizations on the project's environmental and social aspects, and
will take their views into account. The implementing agency will initiate these
consultations as early as possible, and for meaningful consultations, will provide relevant
material in a timely manner prior to consultation, in a form and language(s) that are
understandable and accessible to the groups being consulted.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09/01/2010
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  09/17/2010
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07/02/2011
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09/01/2010
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  09/17/2010
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07/02/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
Due to the emergency nature of this project, and in conformance with OP 8.00, the
completion and disclosure of the environmental and social instruments were not required
as a condition for appraisal of the project. However, these instruments, the ESMF and
RPF, had already been prepared, reviewed, approved and disclosed in-country and at the
Infoshop before the normal project was changed to an emergency one. The change to an
emergency operation did not trigger additional safeguards policies as same activities are
being financed. The only change pertained to the processing instrument.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                            Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Hamoud Abdel Wedoud Kamil                  08/15/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba                     08/15/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Salamata Bal                               08/15/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                      09/26/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                    Mr Peter Nicolas Materu                       01/12/2012
  Comments: RSC clearance of the ISDS and ESSAF has been received on Sept. 26, 2011 via e-mail.
