                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/24/2011                                    Report No.: AC6477
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Cote d'Ivoire                       Project ID: P122546
Project Name: Emergency Youth Employment and Skills Development Project
Task Team Leader: Hamoud Abdel Wedoud Kamil
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 23, 2011 Estimated Board Date: September 15, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTED                         Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery
                                             Loan
Sector: Other social services (40%);Vocational training (30%);Adult literacy/non-formal
education (30%)
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             50.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
                                                                         0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [X]        No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve access to temporary
employment and skills development opportunities for young men and women.

3. Project Description
1.       The project in the amount of US$50 million project will support the
government#s rapid response to the present economic and social emergency, from 2012-
2014. While this emergency operation will not be able to address deep-seated structural
issues of unemployment nor be able to reach all of the four million unemployed, it
intends to send a strong signal of hope to young people that the government is responsive
to their problems and provides tangible opportunities for them. The project will serve as
a first step in launching measures with immediate impact on employment and livelihoods,
building partnerships and launching innovative pilot activities and learning from these
experiences for future initiatives. To ensure quick results, it will build on existing
successful programs, but will also support innovative pilot activities for job creation and
skills development for eventual scale up. The sub-sectors targeted in this project have
been selected based on their growth and job creation potential in the short to medium
term and are based on a rich body of analytical work , e.g. rehabilitation/construction,
electricity, agriculture (e.g. rubber and cashew nuts) and utilities (e.g. electricity and
water). The target group is vulnerable youth, defined as being 18-30 years of age, not
enrolled in any form of education and training, whether formal or informal (see annex 1
for details on targeting mechanism).

 2.    The project consists of the following three components:

 Component 1 - Temporary Employment Opportunities (US$20 million):

 3.     The component will support transitory employment opportunities through labor
intensive public works (LIPW) accessible to unskilled/low skilled youth, in urban, peri-
urban and rural areas. Building on the successful ongoing project, the focus of the works
will be on road rehabilitation and maintenance. In addition, other public works may be
performed such as drainage and sanitation or the rehabilitation or maintenance of existing
local economic infrastructure (e.g. rehabilitation of local markets). The project will also
explore innovative LIPW not yet undertaken as part of other projects, e.g. school crossing
guards, early childhood development programs, and promoting community awareness on
environmental, and hygiene, nutrition and health issues (such as HIV/Aids, family
planning, bed nets).

  4.    The target group is youth, defined as 18-30 years of age, not enrolled in any form
of education, whether formal or informal (see annex 1 for targeting mechanism). Over
the project implementation period, 12,500 young men and women will benefit directly
from an increased temporary income for the duration of six months. The project will
promote the participation of women by reserving a percentage of LIPW jobs.

 5.     LIPW beneficiaries will also have the option to participate in a voluntary savings
program. A share of their wages would be deposited directly into a savings account to
enable them to accumulate startup capital for potential self-employment after the
completion of the LIPW. Under the Post-Conflict Project, approximately 30 percent of
public works participants opted to become micro entrepreneurs with the savings
accumulated during the LIPW, without incentives or assistance from the Post-Conflict
Assistance Project.

  6.     A basic life skills and entrepreneurship training module will be introduced as an
innovation. It will be offered to LIPW participants on a voluntary basis to improve their
future employability and earning opportunities. One day of training would be added
during each work week; paid at the same wage as a working day. The training will be
linked to beneficiaries# work experience. Upon training completion, trainees will receive
a certificate. This basic life skills and entrepreneurship training will be included under the
skills development activities of project component 2.

 7.    The implementation of the works will be the responsibility of AGEROUTE (the
national roads agency) under a delegated management contract. AGEROUTE has proven
very capable of implementing similar programs either alone or in collaboration with local
government, and as part of ongoing Bank operations such as the Post-Conflict Assistance
Project and the Urban Infrastructure Project. Under this convention, the project will
finance the following: beneficiary wages and accident insurance, tools and small
equipment, consultants, and administrative costs of AGEROUTE for program
coordination. Component 1 will also include communications campaigns, the cost of
which will be covered under component 3 (project management).

 8.   In addition, an impact evaluation and regular beneficiary surveys will be
conducted for the activities of component 1.

 Component 2 - Skills Development and Employment Support (US$25 million):

 9.      This component aims to improve employability by providing youth with different
skills levels with a first work experience and/or training in skills relevant to labor market
demands. This skills development and employment support will be provided through: (a)
apprenticeships in the formal and informal sector; and (b) internships for high skilled
graduates in their respective profession in in the formal sector; (c) professional training
programs of short duration in key economic growth sectors and labor-market relevant
professions/professional branches; (d) entrepreneurship training and follow up business
development support for high skilled graduates, e.g. in the form of business plan
competitions; and (e)basic life skills and entrepreneurship training for LIPW participants.
The above programs aim to reach a total of about 15,000 beneficiaries over the three year
implementation phase. Trainees will receive certificates upon completion of the different
programs.

  10. The training and work experience offered to beneficiaries are closely linked to
labor market needs. The skills development activities will focus on key economic growth
sectors with high job creation potential (e.g. public works, electricity grid, construction;
rubber, cashew nuts; telecommunications). For example, the short term professional
training programs will be piloted in the rubber and electricity sectors. The apprenticeship
program will be focused on select professions for which there is an active market
demand, e.g. auto mechanics, construction workers etc.; and not include professional
branches which are already well represented and for which there is potential saturation
(e.g. tailors). All activities have been designed and will be implemented directly or in
close cooperation with the private sector (formal and informal), whose representative
organizations will be members of the Technical Steering Committee for the Project (see
annex 7, implementation arrangements).

 11. The skills development and employment activities will concentrate on a number
of geographic clusters, selected either for their job creation potential (e.g. major urban
areas such as Abidjan, Bouké or Korhogo and rural areas appropriate for specific
agricultural activities) or their potential for social unrest, or possibly both.

 12. Several of the programs are already being implemented successfully by private
sector organizations, governmental agencies and NGOs . Notably, the apprenticeship and
internship programs are already in place, executed by AGEFOP (national training
agency) and AGEPE (national employment agency) and their regional structures.
Regarding the short term professional training programs, rubber and electricity, the
choice of sectors for the first phase was motivated not only by the sectors# growth
potential, but also the implementation readiness of these programs, since both sub-sectors
have well functioning existing training programs developed by private sector associations
or individual companies on which the project builds on. As to the entrepreneurship and
business development support for high skilled youth, business plan competitions, mostly
in urban areas, are already undertaken very successfully as part of the SPF-financed
Young Entrepreneurs and Urban Job Creation Project. This activity will be implemented
by competitively selected service providers with a proven track record in
entrepreneurship training which already carry out similar activities. For all activities
sunder component 2 performance contracts will be established between the PIU and the
service providers executing the activities.

  13. Under component 2 the implementation of the apprenticeship and internship
programs will be delegated to AGEFOP and AGEPE respectively under a delegated
management contract. Under these conventions, the project will finance the following:
stipend for beneficiaries, accident insurance, tools and equipment, consultants, and
administrative costs of AGEFOP and AGEPE for program coordination. For the other
activities under component 2, i.e. professional training programs, entrepreneurship
training and business development support and basic life skills for LIPW participants,
service providers will be selected on a competitive basis. Component 2 will also include
communications campaigns, the cost of which will be covered under component 3
(project management). In addition, an impact evaluation and regular beneficiary surveys
will be conducted for the activities of component 2.

 Component 3 - Strengthening Institutional Capacity (US$5 million)

 14. The purpose of this component is to (i) strengthen the capacity of private and
public sector institutions to engage in an informed policy dialogue on skills and
employment on a regular basis, e.g. through technical capacity strengthening and the
creation of a mechanism for consultations and collaboration; and to (ii) improve the
knowledge base on employment and youth. In order to achieve these objectives, the
component will fund the following activities:

 (i)   capacity strengthening activities (e.g. training, study visits, South-South
exchanges) for select public and private sector organizations (e.g. training institutions,
Chamber of Commerce, private sector associations) for policy dialogue, planning,
execution and evaluation of job creation and skills development programs; based on a
capacity assessment of the respective organizations; and selective studies.

 (ii) communications activities to increase awareness of the Project activities amongst
youth and other key stakeholders;

 (iii) support to policy development on youth, employment and skills through selective
analytical work and support to the re-launch of the presidential council on employment;
and
 (iv)   financing of the project management unit.

 15. Component 3 will finance studies, goods, consultants, training and workshops for
public and private sector entities and the project implementation unit.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project interventions will concentrate on several geographic clusters with the most
potential for employment, e.g. Abidjan, Bouaké, Korogho and other urban and peri-urban
hubs in the interior, as well as rural areas which are clusters for specific agricultural
activities and where vulnerable youth are located.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Salamata Bal (AFTCS)
   Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is classified as Environmental Category B as the potential environmental and
social impacts will not be adverse; as they are likely to be small-scale, site-specific and
thus easily manageable. The LIPWs to be financed under this emergency operation
consist of primarily (a) road rehabilitation and maintenance of municipal roads; and
potentially (b) sanitation and drainage maintenance and rehabilitation; and (c) potential
other activities to be determined benefitting vulnerable communities, such as social
services (e.g. school crossing guards, health and hygiene sensitization campaigns) and
social and economic infrastructure (such as rehabilitation of existing markets). With
regards to road rehabilitation and maintenance, the specific activities undertaken would
consist of: clearing and pruning of bush/tree branches hanging onto roads, filling of
potholes, cleaning of existing drainage pipes/canals and culverts; clearing sand of
roadways and road shoulders, road cleaning; and creation and maintenance of public
green spaces.

 Initial reviews indicate that the project can generate positive social, economic, and
environmental impacts. In spite of these potential positive impacts, there is the also the
recognition of potential negative impacts, which calls for appropriate mitigation measures
and institutional arrangements for their implementation. The project triggers two
safeguards policies: OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment and OP/BP 4.12 on
Involuntary Resettlement. An Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared, reviewed,
approved and disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop. This will be done within six
months of project effectiveness and before commencement of the civil works.

 In accordance with OP 8.00 and to guide the environmental assessment and mitigation
process, an Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF)
was developed. The ESSAF provides guidance on the approach to be taken during project
implementation for the screening and design of sub-projects and planning of mitigation
measures.

 The general environmental management clauses for civil works rehabilitation will be
inserted into the bidding documents and contracts. Detailed environmental assessments or
Environmental Management Plans and Resettlement Action Plans, if necessary, would be
carried out for all project activities that will trigger them and disclosed in-country and at
the Bank#s Infoshop before specific or rehabilitation civil works could start.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be small-scale, site-specific
and thus easily mitigated. There are no indirect or long term adverse impacts expected
during project implementation.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not Applicable

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The approach to safeguards will be to develop an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to cover all activities to
be financed under the project. An environmental consultant will be engaged to manage
and oversee the environmental and social management process, while providing
institutional strengthening and on-the-job training services throughout the project period.
This consultant would work closely with the implementing agency AGEROUTE; and
other implementing entities to apply and strengthen the ESMF and RPF procedures that
will improve subproject quality and sustainability through compliance with safeguards.
 During implementation, Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs),
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and/or Resettlement Action Plans
(RAPs) or Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) will be prepared as and
when necessary once sub-project sites and plans for civil works are finalized.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include:

 Ministry of Employment, Social Affairs and Solidarity
 Ministry of the Economy and Finance
 Ministry of Crafts and SME Promotion
 Ministry of Technical Education and Training
 Ministry of Youth Promotion and Civic Service
 AGEPE
 AGEFOP
 ANADER
 CIE
 AGEROUTE

 All stakeholders (Government, Agencies and Ministries, NGOs, private sector,
communities, development partners, etc.) will be consulted regularly. The project will
continue the dialogue with key stakeholders and the project will rely on the RFP and
ESMF to ensure that the appropriate mitigation measures are taken into account in
accordance with the Cote d#Ivoire and the Bank#s safeguards policies in consultation
with key stakeholders. This participatory approach will be carried on throughout
implementation, maintenance, supervision and evaluation of the project activities.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    05/31/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                06/15/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 06/22/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    05/31/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                06/15/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 06/22/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
Due to the emergency nature of this project, and in conformance with OP 8.00, the
completion and disclosure of the environmental and social instruments were not required
as a condition for appraisal of the project. However, these instruments: the ESMF and
RPF will be completed and disclosed within six months of project effectiveness.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          No
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              No
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        No
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the     Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                  Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Hamoud Abdel Wedoud Kamil         08/12/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba            08/12/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Salamata Bal                      08/12/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                   Ms Cristina Isabel Panasco Santos      08/15/2011
  Comments: Acting Sector Manager
