                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/16/2012                                   Report No.: AC6710
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P116080                 Original Project Name: Export Finance
                                             Intermediation Loan
Country: Croatia                             Project ID: P129220
Project Name: Export Finance Intermediation Loan Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Isfandyar Zaman Khan
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 27, 2012      Estimated Board Date: August 30, 2012
Managing Unit: ECSPF                         Lending Instrument: Financial
                                             Intermediary Loan
Sector: General industry and trade sector (40%);General finance sector (30%);Other
industry (25%);Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (5%)
Theme: Other Financial Sector Development (50%);Other Private Sector Development
(50%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            67
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                        0.00
                                                                         0.00
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the Project is to support the preservation and growth of exports by
providing medium and long term working capital and investment finance to exporters and
foreign exchange earning enterprises.

3. Project Description
The Croatia EFIL Project is a Financial Intermediation Loan (FIL) and is implemented by
Croatian Bank for Reconstruction and Development (HBOR). The original project was
supported by a loan of EUR100 million (US$141.2 million equivalent) with a 29 year
maturity and a 7 year grace period.
 For the additional financing, HBOR will continue to intermediate the funds through
Participating Financial Intermediaries (PFIs), which in turn will on-lend to eligible
private exporters and quasi-exporters such as the tourism sector. The envisaged project is
to be implemented through HBOR's funding department. Its responsibilities include: (i)
on-lending to PFIs for final lending to sub-borrowers (ii) ensure effective functioning of
the on-lending facility to final borrowers through PFIs; (iii) on-going monitoring of the
PFIs to ensure compliance with project criteria; (iv) responsibility for adherence to all
fiduciary and safeguard requirements of the World Bank for final borrowers; and (v)
monitoring and evaluation based on key project development indicators.

 There are no changes to the original project objectives, design or scope. The proposed
additional loan would help finance the scaling up of the Project, which is being so far
successfully implemented. Given the success of the original Project, additional funds are
requested to scale up the project and enhance the development impact. Under the
additional finance, the proposed amount is EUR 50 million.
 The original Project funds were intended for both investments and as working capital.
Due to the recession, all funds under the original Project were used either as working
capital or for equipment. According to the interest and current pipeline envisaged under
AF, majority of the funds will be on lent for investments thus requiring a greater level of
safeguard monitoring and implementation.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Sub-projects will target exporters and foreign exchange companies all over Croatia.
HBOR will remain an implementing agency. PFIs will carry out individual sub projects
screening and advise with HBOR on the results of the screening.HBOR will review and
approve the EA documents. During sub project implementation, PFI will be expected to
monitor sub-borrower's compliance with EMPs and report to the HBOR on the
environmental performance of their clients as an integral part of their regular reporting on
the status of portfolio. The HBOR will inform the IBRD on the environmental due
diligence applied through the general reporting on the project progress.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Natasa Vetma (ECSS3)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Assessment Policies will apply to the proposed project. The project
triggers Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The design of the project calls for FI
environmental category, as HBOR (borrower) will intermediate the funds through PFIs,
which in turn will on-lend to eligible private and quasi exporters. Environmental due
diligence will be applied through the procedures for the selection and implementation of
investments agreed between the Bank, the Borrower and PFIs. An environmental
management framework (EMF) document was prepared for the parent project to outline
the guiding principles of environmental screening, assessment, review, management, and
monitoring of sub-loans as well as to describe roles and responsibilities in carrying out
the environmental work in the course of the project implementation. The EMF is being
updated to reflect additional funds, however, procedures which included working capital
and investments, remain the same.
  Only EA Category B and C sub-projects will be eligible, therefore projects having large
scale impacts (Category A) are excluded. The environmental due diligence procedures
identified in EMF will comply with both Croatian national and WB environmental
safeguards procedures.

 Pest Management policy for the project is triggered as some sub projects might be in the
export-oriented food production and processing sector. If eligible sub-projects will
include financing for purchase of pesticides (including post-harvest treatment) or
investments which are likely to increase or expand the use of pesticides in such
operations, the EMF sets out requirements for applicants to prepare a simple Pest (and
Pesticide) Management Plan consistent with OP 4.09 requirements which will be prior
reviewed by the World Bank Environmental expert.

 Given the rich cultural heritage of Croatia the policy of physical cultural resources
OP/BP 4.11 is triggered in view of expectations that some operations will likely have a
direct impact on historical structures or sites (e.g. in tourism sector) and the possible
chance finds in sub projects as well as. The EMF indicates that sub-projects will comply
with local legislation on chance finds as well as including advance consultation with the
Ministry of Culture through local permitting process in case of potential impact on
historical sites or structures. Local legislation on this matter was reviewed and found
acceptable by the Bank."

 The EMF states that no potential beneficiaries can participate in the project if they
would need land acquisition for the activities to be supported under this project. Re-
habilitation and reconstruction (which could involve demolition of no longer suitable
structure and erection of a new one) of existing buildings within the same footprint would
be permissible. If reconstruction would exceed footprint of existing structure in any way,
the PFI and HBOR must ascertain that any additional land used is unencumbered (i.e. no
squatters or encroachers or not requiring the eviction of anyone resident in such property,
and no other land usage for any purpose or restrictions of access). and provide proof in
form of pictures and ownership title. The PFI's should verify for each sub project the
unencumbered status of the property prior to approving any sub-project which could raise
such issues. Under these restrictions in place, the project does not trigger OP / BP 4.12
Involuntary Resettlement.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The project will support medium and long-term working capital and investment finance
to exporters and FX earning enterprises (e.g. Tourism, Logistics), and it is not expected
that any proposed activities will cause multiple, significant, and irreversible adverse
environmental and/or health impacts. The screening procedures specified in the EMF are
designed to eliminate any subprojects which present these types of risks.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Despite a low likelihood of occurrence, sub-projects which would qualify for Category A
for environmental assessment purposes are excluded from the activities eligible for the
project support. Sub projects categorized as Category B may vary on their potential
impacts and therefore are divided in two sub categories: B+ mainly related to new
investments and B - involving smaller investments, working capital loans which include
purchase and/or use of hazardous materials (e.g. pesticides) or process improvement
loans that involve purchase of equipment/machinery presenting a significant potential
health or safety risk. Approval of higher risk Category B sub projects (B+) will require
prior review by HBOR and IBRD. HBOR will work closely with PFIs to assist them with
environmental work to ensure that PFIs are adequately applying environmental screening,
review, approval, and monitoring procedures. The status of environmental compliance
will be reported by each PFIs to HBOR on regular basis and the HBOR will provide this
information to the Bank as a part of general progress reporting.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
As part of the project Operational Manual the Borrower-HBOR has prepared an
environment section which serves as the Environmental Management Framework and
defines the environmental screening and assessment procedures for the project and sub
projects.

 Environmental screening of sub-project proposals remains essential to ensure that they
are properly categorized and respective environmental review is carried out for them.
 This mechanism of environmental screening, review, approval, and supervision of
subprojects, including roles and responsibilities of all agencies involved in it, is described
in the environmental framework document and included in the Operations Manual of the
project. According to the established environmental framework, sub-loan applicants will
be required to carry out adequate type of environmental assessment of the proposed
subprojects and to obtain environmental permits as prescribed by the national legislation.
 PFIs will remain responsible for environmental screening of sub-loan applications,
attaching relevant environmental categories to them, reviewing environmental assessment
reports submitted by sub-loan applicants, approving them, and carrying out
environmental monitoring in the course of sub-project implementation. HBOR will assist
PFIs and prior- review more complexes project that fall under B+ category.

 Depending on the assigned environmental category, the sub project application package
would include one of the following: a) full scale EIA and EMP; b) limited EA and EMP;
c) EMP alone; d) simplified (checklist) EMP alone; e) explanation of why no EA or
EMP required.

 Environmental Management Plans (EMP) will be developed to provide guidance on the
application of mitigation measures and a system of monitoring will be introduced to
ensure compliance of sub-project implementation with EMPs.

 The implementation of EMF during the original Project went well. The EMF was
publically disclosed and consulted. The PFIs consulted HBOR and WB environmental
specialist on three first applications which provided working capital funds and on few
applications for the replacement of equipment. HBOR together with PFI visited randomly
selected projects that were using funds for working capital and visited all sub projects
which financed equipment (3). HBOR in their regular reports to WB identified all sub
projects specifying the use of funds. All projects financed under original Project were
category C, with one exemption being category B- for which due diligence document was
prepared.

  HBOR has acted as implementing agency for several WB loans and GEF grant
(Municipal Environmental Infrastructure Project, Renewable Energy Resources Project,
and Energy Efficiency Project), therefore the staff is familiar with the WB safeguards
procedures. The staff as well successfully implemented safeguards procedures under the
original loan and have assigned environmental person in HBOR to work on the project.
HBOR has department that deals with approval of environmental projects implying the
adequate capacity for covering environmental issues. Prior to the approval of the original
loan, it was assessed that the institutional capacity could be strengthened, especially for
the PFI to which HBOR should on lend the funds. Environmental good standards applied
by potential PFIs are assessed to be diverse. The PFIs in Croatia usually have their
environmental policies and are strictly confirming the compliance with the national
legislation prior to the approval of the loan. For these reasons training on environmental
compliance was provided for PFI staff as well as HBOR. A special focus was done on
screening the investments and supervision of the same. Additional training will be
organized by WB environmental specialist for HBOR and PFIs to reinstate the
knowledge if individuals working on the project implementation in PFIs have changed
and to focus more on investment loans procedures because under AF more investment
loans are expected (which was not the case in original loan). The training will be
organized prior to effectiveness for both HBOR and PFIs and if required repeated during
the project implementation phase. Bank task team will facilitate the training and will
closely monitor the screening process to support HBOR.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the Croatian Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(HBOR), the Ministry of Finance, selected PFIs and exporters and FX earning
enterprises. The implementation agency is HBOR, however the environmental screening
will fall under PFIs responsibility.

 The draft Environmental Management Framework document along with an
announcement of the public consultation workshop was disclosed on the web-pages of
the HBOR in June 2009. The draft document, along with individual invitations was sent
out to the key stakeholders in the project. The Public Consultations Workshop was held
at the premises of the HBOR, on June 19, 2009.

 The updated EMF (which reflects AF information) will be re-disclosed on the HBORs
website.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  06/15/2009
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              06/15/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               07/12/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  06/15/2009
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              06/23/2009
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               06/22/2009
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    No
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Isfandyar Zaman Khan   06/11/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Natasa Vetma           06/11/2012
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Lalit Raina            06/27/2012
  Comments:
