                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC6837


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/22/2013

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Croatia                           Project ID: P133471
Project Name: Croatia Export Financing Guarantee Operation
Task Team Leader: Isfandyar Zaman Khan
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 15, 2013   Estimated Board Date: June 25, 2013
Managing Unit: ECSPF                       Lending Instrument:
Sector: Capital markets (34%);Other non-bank financial intermediaries (33%);General
finance sector (33%)
Theme: Other Financial Sector Development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            0
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                        0.00
        IBRD Guarantee                                               262.40
                                                                     262.40


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The main project development objective is to support exporters and FX earners in Croatia by
providing medium and long-term funding. Secondary objective includes supporting HBOR's
move towards market-based funding, through a Partial Credit Guarantee.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project builds upon Croatia Export Finance Intermediation Loan (EFIL) and
recently approved additional financing. The EFIL project is a Financial Intermediation Loan
(FIL) and is implemented by Croatian Bank for Reconstruction and Development (HBOR).
HBOR intermediates the funds through Participating Financial Intermediaries (PFIs), which in
turn on-lend to eligible private exporters and quasi-exporters such as the tourism sector.
  The Proposed Partial Credit Guarantee would provide a Bank PCG to enable HBOR to borrow
from the international capital markets with improved terms than what would be possible by
HBOR on its own creditworthiness.
  HBOR will on-lent as a wholesaler to qualified Participating Financial Intermediaries (PFIs) 70
percent of the funds, which in turn will support eligible private exporters and quasi-exporters
such as the tourism and logistics sector. The procedures for pre-qualification and eligibility of
PFIs will be determined by the World Bank in close collaboration with HBOR and detailed in the
pre-appraisal and appraisal stage. Given the risk-averse financial sector and the surrounding
environment, HBOR will be able to cater 30 percent of the guaranteed borrowing directly.
 Under the envisioned arrangement, guaranteed funds generated through the operation will be
utilized by private sector exporters and FX earners. HBOR will lend funds to PFIs and final
beneficiaries based on the cost of funds and a margin reflecting the credit risk.

 Drawdown options will be defined during pre-appraisal and appraisal stage and will ultimately
depend on the already predictable pipeline and the cost. The financial closing of the operation is
envisaged during two years and by that time, all funds should be withdrawn.

D. Project location (if known)
Sub-projects will target exporters and foreign exchange companies all over Croatia.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
HBOR has acted as implementing agency for several WB loans and GEF grant (Municipal
Environmental Infrastructure Project, Renewable Energy Resources Project, and Energy
Efficiency Project), therefore the staff is familiar with the WB safeguards procedures. The staff
as well successfully implemented safeguards procedures under the original EFIL project and
have assigned environmental person in HBOR to work on the project. HBOR has a department
that deals with approval of environmental projects implying the adequate capacity for covering
environmental issues.
 Environmental good standards applied by potential PFIs are assessed to be diverse. The PFIs in
Croatia usually have their environmental policies and are strictly confirming the compliance with
the national legislation prior to the approval of loans. Majority of the PFIs that work with HBOR
are signatories of Equator Principles. Prior to effectiveness of EFIL project, training on
environmental compliance and WB safeguards policies was provided to PFI staff as well as
HBOR. The same training will be repeated for the EFIL additional loan effectiveness. If the
client proceeds with the use of IFC performance standards the additional training will be
provided by WB environmental specialists.

 For the implementation of PCG project, HBOR will remain an implementing agency. PFIs will
however carry of an individual sub projects screening for the 70% of the funds allocated and
HBOR for remaining 30%. PFIs will inform and advise with HBOR on the results of the
screening outcome. During sub project implementation, PFI (and HBOR) will be expected to
monitor sub-borrower's compliance with EMPs or performance standards and report to the
HBOR on the environmental performance of their clients as an integral part of their regular
reporting on the status of portfolio. The HBOR will inform the IBRD on the environmental due
diligence applied through the general reporting on the project progress.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Natasa Vetma (ECSEN)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
    The project triggers Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The design of the project calls
for FI environmental category. The project will support small and medium enterprises, and it is
not expected that as such will have significant and irreversible adverse environmental impacts as
category A sub-projects (projects having large scale environmental impacts) would be excluded.
Only EA Category B and C sub-projects would be eligible.
      The Bank and the client discussed two options for addressing OP/BP 4.01. Option A calls
for adaptation of the current EFIL OM, more specifically Environmental Management
Framework (EMF) to suit Partial Credit Guarantees. Under this option same screening
procedures for the sub projects would be used, as part of assessing sub project eligibility, and
same environmental due diligence would apply. Option B as a more probable one, calls for
piloting the application of the IFC Performance Standards, to facilitate Bank support for private
sector led projects by applying environmental and social policy standards that are better suited to
the private sector. HBOR and the Bank would agree on options in mid December 2012 or early
January 2013.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                      X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                               X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                              X
    Pest Management policy for the project might be triggered as some sub projects might be in
the export-oriented food production and processing sector. The eligible sub-projects might
include financing for purchase of pesticides (including post-harvest treatment) or investments
which are likely to increase or expand the use of pesticides. The EFIL EMF sets out
requirements for applicants to prepare a simple Pest (and Pesticide) Management Plan consistent
with OP 4.09 requirements which should be prior reviewed by the World Bank Environmental
expert
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                               X
    Given the rich cultural heritage of Croatia the policy of Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP
4.11 is triggered in view of expectations that some operations will likely have a direct impact on
historical structures or sites (e.g. in tourism sector) and the possible chance finds in sub projects
as well as. The EFIL EMF deals with cultural heritage issues.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                    X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                           X
    The original EFIL loan and additional financing loan did not trigger OP/BP 4.12 and no land
acquisition was allowed. The team might reconsider triggering the policy as investments in
tourism could include purchasing of properties and / or expanding of current structures.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                        X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                   X
    Given the project will not finance ant wastewater treatment plants nor new water supplys, the
policy will not be triggered.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                            X


Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 03/01/2013

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The studies and consultation of the same should be done some time mid February

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Isfandyar Zaman Khan                                        02/07/2013
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Ms Agnes I. Kiss                                               02/11/2013
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Ms Aurora Ferrari                                              02/11/2013
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
