                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 04/05/2012                                 Report No.: AC6680
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P117355                   Original Project Name: DJ-Rural
                                               Community Development & Water
                                               Mobilization / PRODERMO
Country: Djibouti                              Project ID: P130515
Project Name: DJ-Rural Community Development & Ware Mobilization - Additional
Financing
Task Team Leader: Garry Charlier
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 6, 2012        Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2012
Managing Unit: MNSSD                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (35%);Animal
production (20%);Water supply (19%);Irrigation and drainage (19%);Agricultural
extension and research (7%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (34%);Other rural development (23%);Water
resource management (15%);Rural non-farm income generation (15%);Rural policies and
institutions (13%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              3
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                        0.00
                                                                         0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                          Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access of rural communities to
water and enhance their capacity to manage water and agro-pastoral resources in the
project areas using a participatory approach to community based development.

 The additional financing applied to PRODERMO is aligned with the PDO of
PRODERMO and does not require any change thereto. Only the geographical scope of
the project is expanded, as described in section 4, below.
3. Project Description
To achieve its PDO, the project will implement several actions aiming at: (i) mobilizing
surface and ground water for human consumption as well as for small scale community
agricultural and livestock production activities to enhance the resilience of rural
households to climate uncertainty, particularly droughts; (ii) enhancing the production
and added value of agricultural and livestock activities of rural communities around water
points; and (iii) strengthening the organizational, technical and management capacity at
the community level as well as the capacity of the implementing entity and its central and
regional staff. The project is based on a participatory planning and implementation
approach allowing beneficiary communities to select small investment subprojects based
on their needs and implement them at their own pace, in consultation with local and
regional authorities and partners.

 Component 1. Priority Community Investment Subprojects (total cost US$ 4.79 million
or 54% of total project cost). This component would finance priority community
investments in the project areas that have been included in Annual Hydraulic and Pastoral
Planning Schemes , formulated and prioritized by the targeted communities through a
participatory approach and in accordance with the project Operations Manual. The
funding will cover consultant services for the carrying out of the detailed design and
supervision of the selected community investments, as well as goods and civil works for
the implementation and operation of these community subprojects. Community
investments are expected to be demand-driven and in the following specific sub-
categories:
 (i) Water mobilization and soil conservation subprojects: covering the rehabilitation or
construction of small water harvesting or collection infrastructures (underground cisterns,
open-air reservoirs, shallow wells and borehole wells) for drinking water, livestock and
agriculture, as well as soil and water conservation activities to protect water structures
and to enhance vegetation regeneration around these structures;
 (ii) Agriculture and livestock subprojects: including rangeland development (through
set-aside, re-seeding and shrub planting), improving livestock production, and supporting
small-scale irrigated vegetable and fodder production; and
 (iii) Income generating activities: on a pilot basis, such as handicrafts, fisheries, etc.

 Component 2. Capacity Building and Provision of Technical Assistance (total cost US$
1.26 million or 14% of total project cost). This component would finance capacity
building and technical assistance to the Implementing Agency (the MAPE-RH) and its
Project Management Unit (UGP), as well as the community development committees
(CPL) and grassroots organizations (water users associations, and community groups,
etc.) targeted by the project to support the formulation and implementation of
participatory Annual Hydraulic and Pastoral Planning Schemes in the project areas, while
fostering the application of a participatory approach to local and community based
development. To this effect, this component will also support the sensitization and
mobilization of beneficiary communities and other project stakeholders in order to
facilitate and enhance their effective involvement in the participatory planning and
project implementation process. This would be done through:
  (i) Enhancing the capacity of the MAPE-RH and UGP:, the provision of technical
advisory services, basic equipment, training and study tours, the carrying out of
workshops and field visits for technical staff at the national and regional levels in the area
of participatory community-based development, integrated water resource management,
agronomy, and fisheries, among others. This component will also fund specific technical
studies, including a hydro-geological study in the Obock region.
  (ii) Enhancing the capacity of the beneficiary communities: (a) the provision of
technical advisory services, basic equipment, training, and the carrying out of workshops
and field visits to CPLs; and (b) provision of technical advisory services, training, and the
carrying out of workshops and field visits to beneficiary communities organized in
grassroots organizations (local Water and Pasture User Associations (CGEPs),
community groups, etc.). Technical assistance and training will focus primarily on the
operation and maintenance of water infrastructure, sustainable management of water and
agro-pastoral resources, irrigation and crop production techniques, income-generating
activities, and community organization. The Additional Financing will also support
capacity building and training in the area of disaster risk management at all levels to
increase resilience and reduce vulnerability to recurrent natural disasters.

  Component 3: Project Coordination and Management (total cost US$ 1.59 million or
25% of total project cost). This component would provide support to the UGP through
funding of incremental costs associated with project implementation, coordination,
management, supervision, and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E). Incremental costs to
be financed include incremental contractual staff costs, office rehabilitation works,
equipment and operations, transportation equipment and operations, domestic travel, etc.
It will also cover the costs of establishing and operating a M&E system for the project
and the preparation of regular audits.

 The additional financing applied to PRODERMO retains the same components and
activities as PRODERMO. Only the geographical scope of the project is expanded, as
described in section 4, below.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Scope of Intervention. The PRODERMO is focusing its interventions in two geographic
regions: (i) the Khor Angar-Obock area in the northern region of Obock; (ii) the Cheiketi-
Hanlé area, in the southern region of Dikhil. The additional financing would focus in the
new selected area of the Sagallou-Tadjoura-Obock coastal zone located between the
catchment basin of Oued Indai (Obock Region) in the east and that of Oued Assaleyi
(Tadjoura Region) in the west, and as far north as the foothills of the Mablas, Dadar, and
Mount Goda mountains. This area was also severely affected by the prolonged drought
that has affected the Horn of Africa since 2007.

  The unit of intervention is based on traditionally recognized local communal grazing
areas or parcours, shared by a particular group of villages and communities who possess
traditional grazing rights over a common area of rangeland. In total, the project area will
cover three parcours, one in Obock and two the Dikhil. In Obock, the targeted parcours
covers a total area of around 40,000 hectares. In the Dikhil region, the two distinct
parcours cover a total area of around 80,000 hectares. In the Sagallou-Tadjoura-Obock
coastal zone, project activities will encompass the full range of options available to
communities under Component 1 of PRODERMO, but is expected to place greater
emphasis on income-generating activities more appropriate to the geography of that
region, in particular fishing and handicrafts.

 The selection of these areas was based on criteria that include: (i) poverty rate and
national development priorities; (ii) population density; (iii) importance of potential
surface water to be mobilized; (iv) agro-pastoral potential; (v) coverage by other ongoing
projects or programs; (vi) accessibility for implementation (heavy machinery, transport of
raw material, supervision, etc.); and (vii) potential for income generating activities. It is
important to note that the PRODERMO aims to complement and expand PROMES-GDT
activities by intervening in areas that are not yet covered by the Program, and that have
been identified as priority areas by the Government based on the criteria stated above.

  The extension of PRODERMO project activities to the Sagallou-Tadjoura-Obock region
through additional financing will not require additional environmental assessment beyond
that which is already provided in the existing ESIAF prepared for PRODERMO. The
ESIAF contains the necessary measures to identify and mitigate environmental and social
risk associated with project activities in that area.

 The additional financing to PRODERMO will be used to extend the geographical
coverage of the project in drought affected areas, and not to intensify project activities in
the existing targeted areas of Obock and Dikhil, and therefore is not expected to increase
environmental pressure in these areas. If intensification does occur, the existing ESIAF
contains sufficient risk management measures to ensure that no large scale, significant
and/or irreversible impacts occur.

  Beneficiaries. The direct beneficiaries at the local level would primarily be household
members in poor rural communities in the areas targeted by the project. Beneficiaries
include small herders with small livestock, their families, women and fishermen (Obock).
It is estimated that around 4,000 households (1,000 in Obock, 2,000 in Dikhil, and 1000
in the Sagallou-Tadjoura-Obock coastal zone) would benefit directly from the
PRODERMO. Taking into account the average size of 6.2 individuals per household, the
total number of beneficiaries would consist of about 24,500 people, representing
approximately 10 percent of the total rural population of 240,000 in Djibouti (including
youth, estimated at 54 percent of the population). On a regional basis, the project would
therefore benefit approximately 24 percent of the rural population in Obock and 19
percent in Dikhil (estimated at 26,000 and 64,000 people respectively). It is believed that
Obock is one of the poorest regions of the country, with about 80 percent of the
population considered poor.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Fatou Fall (MNSSO)
   Mr Andrew Michael Losos (MNSEN)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is expected to have positive environmental and social benefits. PRODERMO
is designed to be a participatory project where one of the objectives is to provide rural
households with better access to water for human and animal consumption. The project
will thereby enable communities to sustainably manage and use water resources in a
participatory and integrated manner. Overall, project activities (sub projects) will result in
positive impacts on the environment and living conditions of affected populations.

 However, some activities under component 1 of the Project could have a negative
impact if adequate mitigation measures are not implemented. This component includes
sub-projects investment of two types:
 -      Subprojects involving water mobilization and soil conservation:
 o      rehabilitation or construction of small infrastructure to capture water for human
use, for livestock or agriculture (underground cisterns, basins and surface reservoirs,
earth dikes, wells, boreholes manuals or solar);
 o      activities of soil and water conservation to protect and promote the regeneration
of the vegetation around these structures;
 o      possibly strengthening the desalination plant at Khor Angar.
 -      Subprojects involving agriculture and livestock:
 o      rangeland development (through set-aside, re-seeding and shrub planting);
 o      improving livestock production;
 o      seed production (nurseries).
 -      Subprojects involving income generating activities:
 o      assistance in developing income-generating activities such as fisheries,
handicrafts, etc. on a pilot basis;

 The project is classified as environmental category B and the Environmental
Assessment (OP 4.01) safeguard policy is triggered by the project due to the nature of
anticipated activities. No other environmental safeguard policies are triggered as a result
of project activities or of additional financing.

  The environmental assessment established that the project will not create significant or
irreversible potential negative impacts on the environment. Most potential negative
environmental impacts are expected to be minor, temporary and site-specific in nature
and could be expected during the construction phase, if the contractor/community does
not comply at all times with the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP).
The most important impacts will require the implementation of appropriate mitigation
actions covering:
  -     The hydrological functioning of watersheds
  -     The availability of water resources
  -     The monitoring of groundwater quality
  -     The monitoring and improvement of water quality in the infrastructures created
(especially in tanks intended for human consumption)
  -     A breakdown of hydraulic infrastructures
  -     The risk of overgrazing and degradation of vegetation cover
  -     The modality of use and access to land
  -     The reinforcement of the desalination plant at Khor Angar

 Additionally, the design of subprojects that involve construction of hydraulic structures
will include necessary engineering measures as well as good-practice environmental
measures / guidelines to ensure proper construction and operation. Furthermore,
subprojects will be screened by applying the environmental and social screening checklist
and individual sub-project ESMPs will be prepared as necessary and implemented.

 The reinforcement of an existing 200 m3/day capacity desalination plant in the Khor
Angar area of the Obock district could be a possible subproject. In case this is identified
in a community development plan, the project will first need to undertake a review of the
entire water supply system in Khor Angar and decide whether it will be feasible to
support this reinforcement. If the review concludes that it is feasible and beneficial for
the project to support this, then the borrower will be required to prepare a separate
environmental assessment and management/monitoring plan for the desalination plant
which will need to be reviewed and cleared by IDA before the implementation can begin.

  Involuntary physical resettlement of people is not foreseen in the context of the project.
Involuntary land acquisition (expropriation) is not foreseen either. OP 4.12 is not
triggered. The Environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) indicates that all land
belongs to the state and that its attribution is under the responsibility of the administrative
authorities. In rural areas, the ESIA indicates however that the management of land, in
particular of the grazing areas (parcours) and forests has been traditionally under the
responsibility of local customary authorities.

 In the context of the PRODERMO, some activities under component 1, which will be
determined in a participatory manner including the communities themselves, will require
the use of land. Given the role that both the administrative and customary authorities
play, the project management unit has indicated that it seeks to include all relevant parties
since the formulation stage. The determination of land areas to be used to implement
some of the project activities and the decision to use these areas will be done in a
participatory manner, on the basis of consultation meetings with administrative and
customary authorities and local steering committees which represent communities. The
decisions made will be documented in the annual planning scheme, which is prepared by
the local steering committee with the support of the project management unit and which
lists (a) the activities chosen by the community and (b) the land areas designated, without
compensation, to implement those activities. According to the project management unit,
the annual planning scheme can constitute a formal agreement between the customary
and administrative authorities regarding the use of specific parcels of land for the
implementation of activities.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No potential indirect or long term negative impacts are expected.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
For this environmental category B project, the borrower has prepared an environmental
and social impact assessment (ESIA) and an environmental and social management
framework (ESMF). The ESMF includes a screening checklist/criteria, potential impacts
and recommend mitigation measures for the various likely interventions. It also includes
good-practice measures and guidelines relevant to these interventions, which will be used
as a guide during the preparation of sub-project ESMPs, as necessary. The ESIA was
reviewed and cleared by the Bank.

 The PMU (UGP) is responsible to ensure that all subproject proposals undergo the
screening process (described in the ESIA) and that individual sub-project ESMPs are
prepared as necessary before they are approved for implementation. This screening
checklist was specifically designed to help communities avoid or minimize
environmental and social impacts while developing their subprojects. Officials of the
PMU and local authorities review applications and determine whether further studies or a
detailed plan for managing impacts are required before approval of a subproject.

  The MAPE-RH is the responsible government implementing agency with daily
management of the project handled through the UGP (at central and regional levels).
Environmental and social safeguards monitoring and reporting is done by the UGP at the
central level in coordination with the regional offices. This is the first World-Bank
lending operation with the MAPE-RH. Overall, as noted in the PAD, the MAPE-RH and
the UGP lack institutional capacity, especially human and technical capacities, as well as
in terms of familiarity with Bank operations including environmental and social
safeguards policies and procedures. Component 2 of the project is devoted to capacity
building and technical assistance. Institutional capacity building on monitoring and
reporting on social safeguards related measures have been determined during appraisal
and budgeted. It is also important to note that the PRODERMO finances additional UGP
staff at the national and regional levels, in particular the recruitment of an adjunct project
coordinator and field workers at the regional level whose responsibilities include
monitoring and reporting on environmental and social safeguards measures. These
specialists have now been hired and training has begun for the implementation of the
EMPs of sub-projects.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
In accordance with World Bank disclosure policy and guidelines, the ESIA for the
original PRODERMO project was disclosed in Djibouti on January 29, 2011 at the
MAPE-RH central office and regional offices in Obock and Dikhil as well as on the
PROMES-GDT and ministry websites. The executive summary (in English) of the ESIA
as well the full report (in French) was disclosed at the Infoshop on February 1, 2011. The
ESIA for the PRODERMO, including additional financing, was received by the Bank on
April 2, 2012, disclosed in-country on April 4, 2012, and on the Infoshop on April 5,
2012.

 To protect the interests of potential affected communities, the ESIA process has
included consultation and disclosure of information to key stakeholders involved in
and/or affected by the project. As per the objectives of consultation and disclosure,
various stakeholders and interested parties both at the national and regional levels have
been consulted and informed of the proposed project. Stakeholder consultations have
been carried out by the project during project preparation. Additional consultations in the
Sagallou-Tadjoura-Obock coastal zone were carried out on 27-29 March 2012 in
preparing for additional financing.

 These stakeholders include beneficiary communities, local community organizations,
local customary and administrative authorities and relevant sectoral/technical staff. They
were given the opportunity to express their views and opinions regarding the potential
impacts that might affect their livelihood. The ESIA report includes a summary of the
outcomes from these discussions, including key issues raised and how they will be
addressed by the project. No issues were raised in terms of social safeguards related
matters except to indicate that land use has never been an issue of conflict or reticence
when it comes to installing water points.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?          Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                          04/02/2012
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                      04/04/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/05/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name                      Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Garry Charlier                           04/05/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Gael Gregoire                            04/05/2012
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Alaa Ahmed Sarhan                        04/05/2012
  Comments: Acting RSA
Sector Manager:                     Ms Hoonae Kim                               04/05/2012
  Comments:
