                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 04/11/2012                                    Report No.: AC6675
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P086379                 Original Project Name: Djibouti Power
                                             Access and Diversification Project
Country: Djibouti                            Project ID: P130493
Project Name: DJ- Power Access and Diversification Project Additional Financing II
Task Team Leader: Ilhem Salamon
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 29, 2012 Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2012
Managing Unit: MNSSD                         Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery
                                             Loan
Sector: General energy sector (70%);Oil and gas (30%)
Theme: Natural disaster management (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):December 30, 1899
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                       0.00
                                                                        0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [X]       No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed additional financing aims at reducing the negative effects of drought on
water pumping in both rural and urban areas by strengthening the country’s power supply
resilience to natural catastrophes, through the creation of HFO and diesel security stocks.

 Djibouti doesn’t have any mechanisms to prevent energy risks associated with natural
hazards, a situation that renders the country incapable of meeting its energy needs when
disasters occur. Contrary to what is practiced in all developed nations and in an
increasing number of developing countries, there are no security oil stocks in place in
Djibouti. In the absence of such energy specific crisis mitigation mechanisms, the
drought taking place in the Horn of Africa has had a significant impact on the social and
economic wellbeing of the Djiboutian population. The objective of the proposed
additional financing II is to set up HFO and diesel oil security stocks and the regulation
that is required by such an undertaking, in order to reduce the country’s vulnerability to
natural hazards.
3. Project Description
The components financed under the parent project and a first additional financing
including: (i) extension of access and rehabilitation Arta and Balbala; (ii) HFO
procurement; (iii) smart metering; and (iv) a technical assistance components. In addition
to these existing components, the proposed additional financing includes the following
components:

 Component 1: Setting up petroleum security stocks - US $4.87 million. This component
will include (1) the purchase of diesel and HFO for security stocks (US $3,562,274 i.e.
73% of component cost) and (2) the rental of long-term storage capacities for both
petroleum products in Horizon Djibouti Terminals Limited storage facility (US
$1,305,399 i.e. 27% of component cost). According to the World Bank assessment, the
Government of Djibouti should be able to afford around 5 days of consumption of HFO
and 4 days of diesel within the allocated budget, as well as a 5 year rental and
maintenance contract for the storage tanks, though the precise figures will depend on the
outcome of the tendering process.

 Component 2: Institutionalizing the management of petroleum security stocks - US
$330,000. This component will include the recruitment of an international individual
consultant to assist the Government of Djibouti in purchasing petroleum products and
negotiating the maintenance and rental of storage capacity (contract estimated at US
$100,000 i.e. 30% of component cost); the hiring of a consulting service company to
design a simple regulation of security stocks management, including guidelines for
releasing and rebuilding security stocks (contract estimated at US $185,000 i.e. 56% of
component cost); and the recruitment of a local financial management expert to
strengthen the PMU’s capacity and ensure the timely execution of the activities of the
projec (contract estimated at US $45,000 i.e. 14% of component cost).

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The fuel purchased will be stored in the existing Horizon Djibouti Terminals storage
facility, located in Doraleh, Djibouti.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Fatou Fall (MNSSO)
   Mr Gael Gregoire (MNSEN)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Operational Policy 4.01 is triggered and the proposed classification of the project is “B?.
The potential impacts of the project are related to the storage of approximately 1600 tons
of heavy fuel oil and 2300 tons of diesel in the Horizon Djibouti Terminals tank farm.
The main risks associated to the proposed operation are the risks of pollution and/or
environmental damage that could result from an accidental fire or a spill.

 The proposed additional financing does not raise the environmental category of the
project ("B") nor triggers any new safeguard policy. The proposed changes also do not
involve any exceptions to Bank safeguards policies. The implementation of the proposed
activities, in particular those under Component 1, does not trigger any social safeguards
policies.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The project is not expected to have any serious, indirect, or long term environmental or
social impacts.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
There are not any viable alternatives to store and maintain the security stocks, which will
be financed through the proposed project. Horizon Djibouti Terminals is the only
hydrocarbon tank farm in the country.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The HFO and the Diesel will be stored in an existing facility (Horizon Djibouti Terminals
tank farm). The PMU prepared an Environmental Audit (EA) of the Horizon Djibouti
Terminals tank farm to assess the hazards of the existing terminal and the corresponding
existing prevention measures and emergency plan. The Environmental Audit concludes
that Horizon Djibouti Terminals tank farm has an Environment Health Safety policy in
place to prevent incidents and is maintaining a risk-based emergency response system to
control and mitigate the effects of any incident that may occur.

 Horizon Djibouti Terminals Limited Company will be required, through a clause in the
rental of petroleum storage capacities contract, to maintain the current health, safety and
environment arrangements as described in the Environmental Audit (EA), and, more
specifically (1) to have an Environment Health Safety (EHS) policy in place; (2) to
provide the management structure, personnel resources and guidelines necessary to
minimize adverse affects of its operations on the environment or human health and
safety; (3) to prevent pollution by implementing proven technology, promoting safe
working practices and maintaining property and equipment within acceptable
international oil and gas industry standards; (4) to maintain a risk-based emergency
response systems and facilities as necessary to control and mitigate the effects of any
incident that may occur.

 OP 4.12 is not triggered as there will not be any involuntary land acquisition or
displacement of people. The petroleum security stocks to be purchased (Component 1)
will be stored in an existing storage facility.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Environmental Audit Environmental Audit will be reviewed by the World Bank and
disclosed (in French) prior to appraisal, in-country and at the Infoshop.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 03/15/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             03/18/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              03/26/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Michael Hamaide           04/09/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Nina Bhatt                04/10/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Nina Bhatt                04/10/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Nina Bhatt                04/10/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Patricia Veevers-Carter   04/11/2012
  Comments:
