                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC6449


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/27/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Djibouti                         Project ID: P127143
Project Name: DJ-Geothermal Exploratory Drilling Project
Task Team Leader: Ilhem Salamon
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change          Global Supplemental ID: P127144
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 25,     Estimated Board Date: March 15, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: MNSSD                      Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                          Loan
Sector: Other Renewable Energy (50%);Thermal Power Generation (50%)
Theme: Climate change (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            6.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            6.64
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                          0.00
        OPEC FUND                                                   7.00
        Financing Gap                                              14.70
                                                                   21.70


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
1.     The project development objective is to quantify the applicability of geothermal
resources for large-scale power generation by shifting the risk and cost of exploratory drilling
and resource testing to the public sector through the use of donor grants and soft loans.

 2.     If proven viable, the proposed project will recommend an IPP international tender to
develop and EPC a geothermal power plant based on the exploratory test results. By removing
the geothermal exploration risk and cost from the IPP#s scope of supply, the remaining EPC and
plant operations scope which is traditionally taken by the IPP should result in significant
international interest and a significantly lower tariff. This, in turn, could enable Djibouti to
export electricity surplus through the interconnector, thereby creating a new and significant
source of export revenues.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
3.       The project aims to confirm the viability of geothermal resources for large-scale power
generation by taking on the risks and costs associated with exploratory drilling, thereby reducing
tariffs that IPPs would offer to build, own and operate the subsequent geothermal plant. It is
being structured using three primary service contracts with the scope of work outlined as
follows:

  4.    Contract 1 # Program Consultant (PC): The PC can be either an independent consultant
or the employee of a consulting firm; however, the intention of this contract is for one qualified
individual to fill the PC role in order to support the project management unit gain stakeholder
trust and provide continuity through the duration of the project. Primary responsibilities will
include: i) the preparation and management of the Drilling Consultants tendering process
pursuant to World Bank procurement rules; ii) providing PMU capacity as contract negotiator
and executive project manager as needed; iii) the facilitation of effective communication,
decision making and when necessary, dispute administration and resolution; and iv) interfacing
with expert geothermal consultants for review and comment of the well targeting analysis.

 5.      Contract 2 # Drilling Consultant (DC): The DC will need to be qualified as a reputable
geothermal exploration company with sound financial capacity and experience. The DC#s
primary responsibilities will include: i) complete design of the exploratory drilling program and
well test protocol; ii) preparation and management of the Drilling Service Company#s tendering
process; iii) on site management of the drilling program; iv) on site well testing and certification
of test result compliance with the test protocol; v) analysis of test results to confirm (or not)
viability of geothermal resource as a fuel for large-scale power generation; and vi) compilation
of test results for inclusion in an IPP tender document.

 6.     Contract 3 # Drilling Service Company (DSC): The DCS will need to be qualified as a
reputable geothermal drilling company with sufficient financial capacity and experience,
preferably in the region. The DCS will be responsible for the performance of field based
operations and drilling activities pursuant to the requirements of the approved drilling program.
The DCS will operate under the technical management of the DC but will be contracted directly
by the PMU.

 7.    Project design and implementation will be carried out in line with the components
outlined below:

 8.     Component 1: Exploratory Drilling:
 This component will finance the recruitment of a DSC to undertake the field based operations
and drilling activities pursuant to the requirements of the approved drilling program.

 9.     Component 2: Technical Assistance.
 This component will provide funding for technical assistance needed for the design and
management of the drilling program and well testing protocol, preparation of tender documents
for the DSC and its subsequent management when hired, certification of test results and
accompanying analysis needed to confirm geothermal resources, expert geothermal geologist
reviews of the well targeting analysis, and the recruitment of a PC to assist the local Project
Management Unit (PMU) with the tendering process, contract negotiation, etc.
 10. Component 3: Program Management Unit.
 This component will support the PMU and fiduciary management of the project.

D. Project location (if known)
11.    The project will be located at the southern border of Tadjoura Region, some 120 km (75
miles) west of Djibouti city, near the Assal Lake. More specifically, the project will take place
north of the Lava Lake. This area is mostly covered by airborne volcanic material or lake
sediments. The area is wild and desert-like. The waters of Lake Assal, which are very rich in
minerals, contain 400 grams of salts per liter and show no apparent signs of life.

 12. The proposed operation will include building of access roads and drill pads, water supply
arrangements and drilling of three deep geothermal exploration wells. The specific location of
the explorations wells hence the potential use of surrounding land areas and the potential human
presence around the project sites will be definitely confirmed, possibly 6 to 9 months after
project approval. Drilling of the wells will be followed by a testing period of three months in
order to evaluate the characteristics and the geothermal potential of the reservoir. In case the
results from proposed operation are negative, the drill pads will be removed and reshaped to
blend in with the landscape and all well heads will be minimized.

 13. Precise location of the drill pads (3 to 5) will be determined during implementation by the
drilling consultant. The drill pads will be located in an area between Lake Assal and the sea and
this will be determined in the environmental and social assessment that will be prepared by
Electricité de Djibouti (EDD), prior to appraisal. The assessment should also provide preliminary
information regarding potential human presence, potential land use, ownership and sources of
incomes around proposed project sites. During the identification mission, land tenure around the
proposed project sites was discussed preliminarily with the counterparts and was indicated to be
public land. In terms of human presence, none was noted on the proposed project sites.

 14. Since the proposed operation consists of exploratory drilling of up to 5 wells, the impacts
of the proposed project are expected to be insignificant or moderately negative on the physical
and biological environment.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
15.     The borrower in terms of the Government of Djibouti has experience with the Bank#s
safeguard policies. More particularly, EDD has specific experience with the Bank#s safeguard
policies. O.P 4.01 has been made available to the project coordinator. Terms of reference for the
environmental and social impact assessment have been reviewed by the World Bank. The
preparation missions prior to pre-appraisal will dedicate significant time to discuss the Bank#s
safeguard policies with the project management unit and to ensure that they are fully understood.

 16. Detailed institutional arrangement will be determined during ESIA preparation. At this
stage, it is expected that environment and social responsibilities will be overseen by EDD, with
the technical support of the drilling consultant. The drilling service company will actually
implement most of the mitigation measure and will be mandated to have a full-time HSE
(Health, Safety and Environment) officer, reporting directly to the Project Manager of the
Drilling Service Company.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Fatou Fall (MNSSO)
   Mr Gael Gregoire (MNSEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
    The proposed operation will include building access roads and drill pads, water supply
arrangements and drilling of 3 to 5 deep geothermal exploration wells. Drilling of the wells will
be followed by a testing period of approximately three months per well in order to evaluate the
characteristics and geothermal potential of the reservoir. In case the results from the proposed
operation are negative, the drill pads will be removed and reshaped to blend in with the
landscape and all well heads will be minimized.

      The proposed project is likely to have potential adverse environmental risks and impacts in
its area of influence. Therefore, OP4.01 is triggered. Since the environmental risk of this project
appears to be low, given the isolated and arid nature of the site, the proposed operation is
classified as a "Category B" project. During preparation, an environmental impact assessment,
examining the type, location and scale of the proposed project as well as the nature and
magnitude of its potential impacts will be prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal. Particular
attention will be paid to (i) water abstraction and (ii) impact of road construction and activities
servicing the drill sites on local ecosystems.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                      X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                               X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                          X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                           X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                    X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                           X
     The trigger of OP 4.12 is not finally determined yet as the location of the drill pads (hence
relevant use of land and human presence) will be better known after completion of the
environmental and social assessment that will be prepared by Electricité de Djibouti (EDD),
prior to appraisal.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                        X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                   X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                            X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 12/05/2011
B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   December 15, 2011

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Ms Ilhem Salamon                                               10/26/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Hocine Chalal                                               10/27/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Olivier P. Le Ber                                           10/27/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
