                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 04/16/2012                                  Report No.: AC6673
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Djibouti                            Project ID: P130328
Project Name: DJ Crisis Response - Social Safety Net Project
Task Team Leader: Joana C. G. Silva
Estimated Appraisal Date:                    Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2012
Managing Unit: MNSHD                         Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery
                                             Loan
Sector: Other social services (100%)
Theme: Social safety nets (70%);Other social development (30%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              5
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                           0.00
                                                                      0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [X]     No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The grant will support the scale up of social safety nets for poor and vulnerable
households in Djibouti building on the activities of the ongoing safety net project
‘Djibouti: Crisis Response: Employment and Human Capital Safety Net’ (120588). The
proposed activities combine a workfare program with social assistance for nutrition,
using community-driven and participatory approaches as well as targeted capacity
building interventions.

  The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are to: (i) support the provision of short-
term employment opportunities in community-based labor-intensive works for the poor
and vulnerable; and (ii) support the improvement of nutrition practices among
participating households focusing on pre-school children and pregnant/lactating women.

 The innovation is in the integration of the proposed safety net program which combines
a workfare component (labor intensive community works for participating members) with
a social assistance component for specific vulnerable non-working members of
households (children and pregnant/lactating woman).
3. Project Description
The Grant activities consist in setting-up an integrated productive safety net (SN) for
poor households. The SN combines a workfare component for members of these
households able to work with a nutrition-based social assistance component for their
vulnerable non-working members (children and pregnant and lactating women) so as to
leverage the effect of the additional income on the family’s nutrition and enhance
sustainability.

  Component 1: Community-based Labor-Intensive Works and Services Provision. Under
this component, the Project will finance a workfare program in poor areas of Djibouti.
The works to be developed are selected by communities from a catalogue listing the
works that need to be carried out. This program is aimed at providing short-term
employment to able-bodied members of vulnerable/poor households. The workfare
program will include activities that will enhance the existing community assets in
selected areas. Proposed activities will include: (i) small civil works at the community
level, such as the pavement of existing footpaths and the construction of stairs and small
bridges along those footpaths, to improve pedestrian circulation between key community
facilities; (ii) services such as plastic garbage collection and recycling, and routine or
periodic maintenance of existing footpaths; and (iii) training provision for skills
development of beneficiaries.

  Component 2: Nutrition-Based Social Assistance to Support Investments in Human
Capital. This component will support community interventions aimed at preventing
malnutrition and promoting growth among pre-school children and women through
community-based sensitization sessions and growth monitoring. Proposed activities will
include: (i) conducting sensitization sessions and home visits by community workers, (ii)
distributing food supplements during the lean season, (iii) developing and conducting
training on the prevention of malnutrition and promoting growth and child development
through sensitization, in partnership with the Ministry of Health (MoH); and (iv) support
to the MoH for malnutrition prevention at the community-level. Sensitization sessions
will be organized on topics such as the importance of good nutrition practices,
appropriate utilization of key micronutrients, improved care practices for children, and
importance of education. Some sessions will consist of cooking demonstrations.

  Component 3: Monitoring and Evaluation. Under this component, the Project will
finance the establishment of a system to allow for monitoring and evaluation of the
project, and the development of a national registry of the poor and vulnerable households
in Djibouti. Activities will include undertaking baseline and follow-up surveys, setting up
lists of beneficiaries, and establishing monitoring and evaluation mechanisms for regular
monitoring of processes and outputs over the life of the project. This component will also
include the development of a unified database of the poor and vulnerable (national
registry of the poor and vulnerable) that can be used as a targeting mechanism across
different social assistance programs.

 Component 4: Project Management and Administration. This component will provide
support to the ADDS to: (i) hire consultants for project management and field
coordination; (ii) undertake audits; (iii) procure a vehicle for field visits and monitoring;
(iv) purchase office supplies; (v) build capacity of the ADDS in aspects of project
management; and (vi) provide operational/administrative support to grant activities.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Three areas have been identified: Balbala in Djibouti ville (eight neighborhoods), Obock
and Dikhil (Administrative capital “Chef lieux? of each of the two regions).

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Fatou Fall (MNSSO)
   Mr Andrew Michael Losos (MNSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental safeguards: Large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are not
expected to result from the project. Indeed, the environmental risk associated with the
project is low due to the small scale of the small civil works to be undertaken under
Component 1. However, due to the physical nature of those works, some localized
environmental impact is possible and mitigation is required. Therefore, this project is
nonetheless subject to OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and is rated Category B.
Individual community works under Component 1 may be of Categories B or C. Category
A community works are specifically excluded from eligibility for financing.

 Because the project is being processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
Emergencies), an Environmental and Social Screening Assessment Framework (ESSAF)
has been prepared which prescribes an approach to be applied in assessing and mitigating
the environmental risks of any given community work. The ESSAF is under preparation
and is expected to be ready for disclosure in Djibouti and on the Infoshop before the
project becomes effective in the fall of 2012.
 The ESSAF is the sole document governing both environmental and social safeguards
measures for this project. It contains a list of guiding principles, a list of the types of
community works eligible for financing, a procedure for screening each community
work, a set of generic environmental risks and mitigation measures for each of those
types to be used to generate a simple environmental management plan (EMP) for each
work, and a checklist to be used for monitoring. As the project implementing agency,
ADDS will be responsible for monitoring the implementation of safeguards for these
small works community works.

 Social safeguards: The implementation of the components financed by the project, in
particular the community-driven small civil works (or community works - Component 1)
will be undertaken on public land and will not cause the involuntary withdrawal of land
nor lead to an involuntary displacement of people and/or loss of habitat, resources or
sources of revenues or their access to them (as stipulated under OP 4.12). Selection
criteria, as discussed with the counterpart, will be integrated into relevant project
documents, such as the operations manual and the individual community works operation
sheet (fiche d’operation), to avoid inclusio of non-eligible community works. Therefore,
OP 4.12 is not triggered.

 In addition, ADDS and the Bank team have agreed on actions to be undertaken by
ADDS in order to ensure due diligence.

 Furthermore, the participatory decision making and selection process of community
works, which includes communities and other relevant parties, should allow all
stakeholders to make informed decisions. Such decisions will be documented by the
counterpart for record-keeping purposes.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be small-scale and site
specific, thus easily remediable. No indirect or long term adverse impacts are expected.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Overall safeguards capacity in Djibouti is weak. However, the implementing agency for
this project, ADDS, has experience in carrying out World Bank-financed projects in the
past, notably the Djibouti Crisis Response: Employment and Human Capital Safety Net
Project which shares its implementation arrangements with the present project and whose
safeguards performance has been generally good. As a result, the institutional capacity
for executing and monitoring safeguards elements built within ADDS during that project
will carry over into this one and be strengthened further. In addition, the Bank team will
be available to identify and reinforce any weak points on safeguards through its regular
supervision activities.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The proposed project will be complementary to and builds on the ongoing Djibouti Crisis
Response – Employment and Human Capital Safety Net project (P120588), financed
through a Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF) grant (emergency window) (US$3.64
million). It will build on the implementation manuals, catalogue of works, training
materials, management and information systems and partnerships developed under the
complementary project. Key partners include: Ministry of Health and WFP.

 The ADDS will consult project-affected groups and local nongovernmental
organizations on the project's environmental and social aspects if and when applicable,
and will take their views into account. The implementing agency will initiate these
consultations as early as possible, and for meaningful consultations, will provide relevant
material in a timely manner prior to consultation, in a form and language(s) that are
understandable and accessible to the groups being consulted.

 Individual community works will also involve consultation of the beneficiaries in the
immediate community work area, to discuss environmental protection measures and to
determine whether specific local context will require modification of the proposed
mitigation measures under the ESSAF.

 OP 4.12 is not triggered yet specific measures for due diligence (listed in the EPP) have
been agreed upon with ADDS and are expected to be followed by the counterpart on the
social related aspects.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 04/30/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             04/30/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/30/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
Due to the emergency nature of this project, and in compliance with OP 8.00, the
completion and disclosure of environmental and social safeguards instruments were not
required as a condition for appraisal of the project. However, the ESSAF is under
preparation and will be reviewed, approved and disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop
as soon as possible following appraisal, and ideally prior to effectiveness.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                            Name        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Joana C. G. Silva      04/13/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Andrew Michael Losos   04/16/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Fatou Fall             04/16/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Nina Bhatt             04/16/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Gustavo C. Demarco     04/16/2012
  Comments:
