                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/30/2011                                      Report No.: AC6555
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P109932                  Original Project Name: DO Emergency
                                              Recovery & Disaster Mgmt
Country: Dominican Republic                   Project ID: P126840
Project Name: DO AF to Emergency Recovery & Disaster Management.
Task Team Leader: Javier Zuleta
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 27,       Estimated Board Date: November 17, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: LCSEN                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (27%);Irrigation and
drainage (26%);General energy sector (26%);Other Renewable Energy (21%)
Theme: Water resource management (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            20.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                         0.00
                                                                          0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [X]       No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project development objectives are to: (i) restore and strengthen priority, irrigation,
electricity, water, and sanitation infrastructure damaged by Tropical Storms Olga and
Noel or at risk of damage from future storms, and (ii) strengthen the National Institute of
Hydraulics# (INDRHI) and the Dominican Corporation of State Electrical Companies#
(CDEEE) capacity for future risk management. In addition the project provided financed
retroactively emergency works already completed in Water Resources Management,
Drinking Water and Sanitation and Electricity sectors. The Project development
objectives associated with the request for Additional Financing remain the same as in the
original project.

3. Project Description
This Project is designed to provide additional financing in order to complete original
project activities in response to the Noel/Olga disaster by (i) restoring and rehabilitating
water resources, electricity, water, and sanitation infrastructure damaged by the storms,
or at risk of damage from future storms, and, (ii) reducing vulnerability to future disasters
of the Dominican Corporation of State Electrical Companies (CDEEE) and the National
Institute of Hydraulic Resources (INDHRI). The drinking water sector was supported
with retroactive financing directed at two agencies, the Santo Domingo Water and
Sewerage Corporation (CAASD) and the Santiago Water and Sewerage Corporation
CORAASAN) to reimburse funds expended during the emergency phase of the disaster
response.

 The Project components and activities associated with the request for Additional
Financing remain the same as in the original project ERL. No additional components,
activities or works are part of the Additional Financing (AF).

 The Project is divided into three components.

 Component 1: Rehabilitation and Risk Management in Water Resources Sector-
US$47.90 (US$34.35M original, US$2 M from Non Allocated Funds, US$11.7M from
additional financing)

 This component aims to: (i) rehabilitate the principal irrigation works damaged by
Tropical Storms Noel and Olga; and (ii) support priority disaster-related institutional
strengthening activities and equipment. The project would restore the operation of these
systems through the reconstruction and stabilization of critical physical infrastructure
such as water storage facilities, headworks, and canal systems.

 Subcomponent 1.1. Rehabilitation and Reconstruction of Damaged Infrastructure

 Activities under this subcomponent include the retroactive financing of emergency
works completed in response to the disaster and the financing of reconstruction and
strengthening works required to restore the irrigation and water resources management
network. This component also includes financing for a technical audit of completed
works.

 Subcomponent 1.2. Strengthening of Risk Management Systems, Purchase of Technical
Monitoring Equipment, and Development of System Maintenance Program

 Under this subcomponent, activities will be undertaken to improve INDRHI#s capacity
for watershed management. Specific activities to be financed include the review and
strengthening of system maintenance and operations procedures and requirements.

 Component 2: Rehabilitation and Risk Management in the Electricity Sector -
US$44.70M (US$33.95M original, US$4.65 M from Non Allocated Funds and
US$6.1M from additional financing )

 The main objectives of this component are to restore priority electricity infrastructure
and make improvements needed in the short term in the areas affected by Tropical Storms
Noel and Olga, and to strengthen the sector#s ability to respond to natural disasters. It
includes four subcomponents.

 Subcomponent 2.1 : Rehabilitation of Generation Capacity.

 This includes the rehabilitation o f the hydroelectric generation facilities operated by
EGEHID, which were damaged by the recent tropical storms, and specifically includes
ancillary works (access roads), repair of dams (Las Barias and Valdesia), and
rehabilitation of power generation plants (Aguacate, Nizao-Najayo, and Aniana Vargas).

 Subcomponent 2.2: Rehabilitation of Transmission Capacity.

 Included activities are the rehabilitation of ETED transmission lines, including the
future reconstruction of the 69 kV lines of 15 de Azua-Sabana Yegua, Cruce Cabral-Las
Damas, Sabana Yegua-San Juan, Cruce Cabral - Vicente Noble, and Galeria Infiltracion
CAASD Manoguayabo, with a total length of 152 km.

 Subcomponent 2.3: Rehabilitation of Distribution Capacity.

 This subcomponent comprises rehabilitation works already performed by the
distribution companies of EdeNorte and EdeSur, retroactively financed by the project.

 Subcomponent 2.4: Strengthening Capacity to Respond to Natural Disasters.

 This includes activities aimed at enhancing the electricity sector#s capacity to respond
to emergencies caused by natural disasters and at implementing the proposed project.
This subcomponent also includes the completion of a technical audit to ensure quality of
works supported by the project.

 Component 3: Retroactive Financing of Emergency Relief and Urgent Rehabilitation of
Water and Sanitation Infrastructure in Santo Domingo and Santiago # US$5.04M
(US$3.5M original, US$1.54 M from Non Allocated Funds)

 This subcomponent consists of retroactive financing of emergency spending in Santo
Domingo, related to items such as water purification chemicals (such as chlorine and
aluminum sulfate) used immediately following the storms, as well as extraordinary
purchases of gasoline used for delivering potable water to the affected population in the
wake of the storms.

 This subcomponent also covered reimbursements for unanticipated expenditures in
Santiago incurred as a result of the disaster. For example, in the aftermath of Olga,
CORAASAN moved quickly and effectively to rehabilitate the damaged infrastructure
and restore services to the public. Within the first three months after the disaster most of
the rehabilitation work was completed or well underway. Special emphasis was placed on
restoring the facilities in the most economical way possible, repairing equipment
wherever possible and replacing only the parts that could not be restored.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Project activities are located in different parts of the Dominican Republic. The Project
locations are all associated with rehabilitation of existing facilities/works. All works
completed under the project pertain to the rehabilitation and reconstruction of damaged
infrastructure. Any design modification to existing structures will relate to improving the
structure's performance in future disaster situations. No works are planned in
environmental protected areas of physical cultural heritage sites. Works activities in
components 1 and 2 are dispersed throughout the country and are generally located in
rural non-urban areas

  For component 1, the works are associated with different irrigation and water supply
canals (see Figure 1). For component 2 the works are the rehabilitation of hydroelectric
power facilities and existing 69kv transmission lines. Specifically, the hydropower
facilities of Las Barias, Valdesia, Aguacate, Nizao-Najayo, and Aniana Vargas and the
transmission lines of 15 de Azua-Sabana Yegua, Cruce Cabral-Las Damas, Sabana
Yegua-San Juan, Cruce Cabral-Vicente Noble, and Galeria Infiltracion CAASD
Manoguayabo (total length of approximately 152 km).

 For component 3, the retroactive financing was associated with expenditures in two
urban areas: Santo Domingo and Santiago. Project activities related to institutional
strengthening and planning are office related studies/work.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Elena Correa (SDV)
   Mr Robert H. Montgomery (LCSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                   X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There is no Project-related potential large scale, significant irreversible impacts. The AF
to ERL does not involve any new project components or activities. All works to be
completed under the Project pertain to the rehabilitation and reconstruction damaged
infrastructure. No significant change in location, service level or function will be made
under the Project.

 No amplification or augmentation of services is contemplated under this project and
design modifications will be included to strengthen the works against future events.
Transmission lines to be rehabilitated may be moved within existing right-of-ways or to
new rights-of-ways (as explained above) to reduce their vulnerability. Additional gabion
structures may be included to improve the performance of existing structures. Access
roads to critical dams will be rehabilitated to reduce vulnerability and to guarantee access
to dam sites during emergencies.
 The Project-related environmental and social impacts are those typical of small scale
infrastructure construction activities and are limited to direct impacts to the work site
during actual construction. Positive impacts include the restoration of basic services such
as electricity and irrigation, and risk reduction of future infrastructure impact due to
disasters.

 Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)

  Since the Additional Financing does not involve any new project components or
activities, this Project is also classified as Category #B# (partial assessment) and OP 4.01
is triggered.

  All works to be completed under the Project pertain to the rehabilitation and
reconstruction damaged infrastructure. The original ERL project and this AF do not
involve the construction of new facilities. No significant change in location, service level
or function will be made to infrastructure rehabilitated under the Project. Typical
activities include: repair of power transmission lines, repair and rehabilitation of
irrigation canals, replacement of damaged water control structures, and repair of
hydropower power generating facilities. Works are of small to medium size and will be
executed within existing right-of-ways and at existing service sites. Impacts are limited to
those typical or construction repair activities and are temporary in nature, limited in scope
to the period of construction. The Project-related environmental and social impacts are
those typical of small scale infrastructure construction activities and are limited to direct
impacts to the work site during actual construction. Positive impacts include the
restoration of basic services such as electricity and irrigation, and risk reduction of future
infrastructure impact due to disasters.

 An Abbreviated Resettlement Plan (RAP) was prepared as part of the original ERL
restructured in November 2010 to address potential acquisition of transmission line right-
of-way access for some limited transmission line sections that were altered to reduce
disaster risk vulnerability (see OP/BP 4.12 discussion below).

  An Environmental Management Framework was included in the original ERL project
and is still applicable and being implemented. The client has prepared a revised
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) based on an environmental review
conducted during AF preparation and disclosed in accordance to WB policies. This plan
requires the inclusion of environmental management clauses in Project civil works
contracts. Specific Environmental Assessments has been developed for component 2
transmission line rehabilitation works and environmental permits have been requested to
environmental authorities.

 Based on the requirements of the ESMP, the Borrower will revise the project Operations
Manuals to incorporate any changes in safeguard management requirements identified
under this plan.

 Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)

 Since the Project locations are all associated with rehabilitation of existing
facilities/works, the Project will not cause significant direct or indirect impacts to natural
habitats. The Project locations are not within any designated environmental protection
area. Thus the Natural Habitats safeguard policy is not triggered.

 Forests (OP/BP 4.36)

 Since the Project locations are all associated with rehabilitation of existing
facilities/works, the Project will not cause significant direct or indirect impacts to forests.
Thus the Forests safeguard policy is not triggered.

 Pest Management (OP 4.09)

 The Project does not involve the use of pest management practices. Thus the Pest
Management safeguard policy is not triggered.

 Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)

 The Project locations are all associated with rehabilitation of existing facilities/works,
and there are no physical cultural resources within these areas. Thus the Physical Cultural
Resources policy is not triggered.

 Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)

 There are no designated Indigenous communities within the Project locations where
rehabilitation of existing facilities/works will be performed. Thus, the Indigenous
Peoples safeguard policy will not be triggered.
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)

 During the execution of the original ERL project, CDEEE identified transmission line
locations that were determined to be unacceptably vulnerable to potential disaster related
damages. Based on this assessment, CDEEE elected to relocate these lines to more
secure locations in the vicinity of the original alignments. Because these new alignments
required the purchase of right-of-way access, the project was restructured in November
2010 to include Bank Safeguard OP/BP 4.12, Involuntary Resettlement. The impact of
these right-of-way realignments is relatively minor and will not require the physical
relocation of affected persons or their land use activities. Affected landowners will be
able to use their land and have access as usual. Likely social impacts from the
construction of new transmission lines will be minimal and those typically associated
with this type of activity. An Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan has been developed
and disclosed in accordance with Bank policies in July 2010 and remains in effect.

 Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)

 Both CDEEE and INDRHI works have components relating to dams. INDRHI is the
agency responsible for the maintenance of dams and CDEEE is the entity responsible for
the operation of those dams used for the generation of hydroelectric power. As part of the
original ERL project, several dams were identified to be evaluated to determine if OP
4.37 was applicable. At start of the project, a Bank dam safety specialist performed a
review of the relevant dams and concluded that the condition and operational procedures
in place were in compliance with the requirements of the policy. Specific
recommendations included the requirement that activities relating to the structure of dams
be reviewed by the International Committee of Experts in accordance with procedures
established for large dams under internationally accepted best practices. A Memorandum
of Understanding with respect to dams has been executed between INDRHI and CDEEE
requiring joint review of all activities relating to dams to assure proper coordination and
application of safeguard requirements. Project performance with respect to this safeguard
has been satisfactory. Activities recommended by the Bank specialist have been
implemented or are in the planning stages. Specifically:

 #     Institutional Strengthening of the Departamento de Presas in Indrhi.

 In 2010, an international expert was been appointed as Senior Adviser at the Dams
Department and continues to work with INDRHI in the preparation of ToRs,
identification of consultants, assist in the supervision of studies, provide technical
assistance to the International Panel of Experts, provide technical advice to the Director
of Indrhi and to the Comite de Operacion de Presas (COPRE) and related activities.

 #     International Panel of Experts

 The International Panel of Experts on the safety of dams has been constituted with
highly qualified international experts and in their last visit (May 2011), were able to
review all works conducted by INDRHI with respect to Dams rehabilitation. CDEEE
participated in the sessions and they presented the status of the rehabilitation of the power
stations included in the ERL.

 #     Monitoring of Safety of Dams

 INDRHI has moved forward the procurement of accelerograph to monitor, in real time,
the seismic conditions in 7 main dams.

 #      Limnological studies to assess sediment transport and current capacity of dams

  The ToR and technical specifications of a large ICB to hire an international consultant
firm to conduct bathymetric, limnology and hydrological studies have been finalized and
the procurement initiated.

 #     Rehabilitation of Dams

  The consultancy for designing the rehabilitation of dams (ICB) proposed by this project
is in advanced stage. INDRIH is conducting the negotiations with the best qualified
bidder and the contract will be under implementation soon.

 #     Revision of Operation Manuals of Dams

 The ToR and RFP for hiring an international consultant firm for updating the Operation
Manuals and procedures in critical dams in DR has been prepared and is moving through
the procurement process.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
There are no potential indirect or long term negative impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the Project area. Given that the Project does not involve new construction
works/facilities or significant change in service capacity, thus the long-term
consequences will relate to improved resilience of infrastructure to future disaster events.
No Project activities have been identified that will promote or induce growth or
development. Institutional strengthening activities are designed to improve management
capabilities particularly within the water resources management sector with emphasis on
watershed management and watershed rehabilitation and improved response capability
with the rehabilitation of the meteorological early warning system.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Since this Project consists of Additional Financing that does not involve any
new/difference Project components or activities, consideration of alternatives is not
applicable. The original ERL project (as this one) has an objective is to restore damaged
infrastructure assets. Alternatives in the rehabilitation process relate to design
modifications included to improve future performance of the Project-related works during
a disaster. No new infrastructure will be constructed under the Project.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental compliance:

  As per the Project Operational Manual, CDEEE and INDRHI are managing the
environmental and social compliance for their respective works. Contracts for all project-
supported works include specific environmental compliance clauses designed to deal with
issues related to typical construction activities. Associated with the original ERL project,
the government prepared an Environmental Assessment (EA) that examined Project
activities and potential environmental and social impacts.

 An Environmental Management Framework was included in the original ERL project
and is still applicable and being implemented. Based on a recent environmental audit the
Borrower has prepared an updated Environmental and Social Management Plan that has
been disclosed in accordance to Bank guidelines. This plan requires the inclusion of
environmental management clauses in Project civil works contracts. Specific
Environmental Assessments have been developed for component 2 transmission line
rehabilitation works. The revised ESMP and any recommended enhancement in
procedures will be reflected in the Project Operation Manual.

 Involuntary Resettlement

 To comply with the requirements provided in OP/BP 4.12, an Abbreviated Resettlement
Plan was developed by CDEEE as part of the original ERL project restructuring to
address potential acquisition of transmission line right-of-way access to mitigate any
potential effects of minor land acquisitions related to the new rights of ways. The Plan
which was made publicly available and accessible in July, 2010 specifies the roles and
responsibilities of the client. The Plan is being implemented and monitored primarily by
ETED with the assistance of CDEEE. Client reports and Bank supervision missions have
confirmed that none of the 20 affected households have experienced any significant or
permanent adverse effects on their productive activities or quality of life. Consultations
were also undertaken with the land owners. The government has the capacity and staff in
place to manage social safeguards.

 Safety of Dams

 To comply with the requirements of OP/BP 4.37, a Bank specialist in dam safety has
conducted an initial safety review of all dams associated with the project prior to the
execution of - or disbursement against - any related works. This initial screening by the
Bank specialist has identified those sites which would be subject to the requirements of
the OP/BP 4.37 policy. After those sites were identified, and taking into account the
evaluation report of the Bank specialist in dam safety, the Borrower through INDRHI has
contracted an independent specialist to conduct a full inspection and review of procedures
and produced a written report of findings and recommendations, which was found
acceptable by the Bank.
  In addition to the requirements provided in OP/BP 4.37, the project will include an
institutional strengthening element directly related to the operation of dams. Under this
task, a consultant will be engaged to review and revise dam safety operating procedures.
The purpose of the review is to update dam operations manuals taking into account the
availability of improved data from the meteorological early warning network, newly
calculated water balances, and changes in land use and rainfall/runoff characteristics.

 Supervision of safeguard compliance and Institutional Capacity

 For all project works, environmental mitigation/management requirements are to be
included in the works contract. Other measures, as applicable, are implemented by
INDRHI and CDEEE. No changes in institutional arrangements are anticipated or
required. Inter-agency agreements between government institutions will continue in force
and will be updated to accommodate the requirements of the additional financing.

 Environmental management and supervision is a responsibility of the Instituto Nacional
de Recursos Hidráulicos (INDRHI) and the Corporación Dominicana de Empresas
Eléctricas Estatales (CDEEE). In addition to Bank requirements, this includes ensuring
compliance with any national environmental requirements. For works in component 2, an
independent supervision contractor will be hired to supervision the construction,
including the environmental, health and safety aspects.

 The Environmental Units at INDRHI and CDEEE companies are functional and
adequately staffed with qualified professionals experienced in managing Bank projects
and in the application of Bank#s Safeguard Procedures including the monitoring of all
EA recommendations. The supervision of the compliance of safeguards during
implementation will be done by the environmental staff of each agency supported by
consultants as needed.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Project works involve the repair and retrofitting of existing infrastructure. In these cases,
impacts to stakeholders will relate to the temporary inconveniences associated with
construction activities. These construction activities are managed to minimize these
impacts to the extent possible. Public notifications will be used to inform potentially
affected persons in order that they may plan their activities to accommodate construction.

  Community participation and communication is an important focus for INDRHI.
Irrigation systems are community based and secondary networks are community
managed through water user committees. Thus for component 1 activities, information
will be disseminated to the water groups. In the case of CDEEE, a large share of their
participation is in the form of retroactive financing for emergency works. Additional
works associated with component 2 hydropower facilities, are limited to within the
existing hydropower site and repairs to damage equipment and facilities. Any Project-
related community consultation will be done as part of the facilities ongoing community
interactions.

 The updated ESMP has been disclosed at the World Bank's Infoshop and at INDRHI
and CDEEE websites.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/09/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/09/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              12/22/2008
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 07/16/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             07/23/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              07/25/2010
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?             Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)         Yes
review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
  credit/loan?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
  Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                           Yes
  Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts      Yes
  (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
  Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements        N/A
  been made for public awareness and training?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                 Name                      Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Javier Zuleta                             09/27/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Robert H. Montgomery                      09/28/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Elena Correa                              09/27/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Enos E. Esikuri                           09/28/2011
  Comments:
