                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 02/09/2012                                   Report No.: 66821
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Mekong                               Project ID: P104806
Project Name: Mekong Integrated Water Resources Management
Task Team Leader: Toru Konishi
GEF Focal Area: I-International waters        Global Supplemental ID: P102141
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 1,         Estimated Board Date: March 8, 2012
2010
Managing Unit: EASTS                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%)
Theme: Water resource management (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             26
GEF Amount (US$m.):              7
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             4.10
         Financing Gap                                                 20.90
                                                                       25.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]     No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The overall objective of the proposed APL is to establish key examples of integrated
water resource management (IWRM) practices in the Lower Mekong Basin (LMB), at
the regional, national and sub-national level.

3. Project Description
This is a regional project, aiming at providing support to Lao PDR, and the Mekong
River Commission (MRC). The project would have the following three components:
 •      Component 1. Regional Water Resources Management (US$8.0 million). This
component aims to increase dialogue, cooperation and understanding on IWRM
principles among LMB countries. The activities will be implemented through the
Mekong River Commission Secretariat (MRCS), through the following subcomponents:

  (1-1) Regional Support for Trans-boundary IWRM Dialogue ($2.57 million): the
project would support dialogue and pilot activities to address priority trans-boundary
issues involving more than one country (such as wetland and flood management, fisheries
management, and water resource management in Se San and Srepok and the Mekong
delta). The activities would be implemented through a tailored grant mechanism.

 (1-2) Support for Establishing an Approach for Environmental Impacts Risk and
Disaster Risk Assessment in the LMB ($1.21 million). Key activities will include (i)
assessment on exposures of environmental impact and risks to reach environmental
baseline objectives in a selected Mekong river sub-area and (ii) initial support for the
developing LMB risk model framework. The project will support dialog and provide
technical assistance to MRCS and the countries to develop criteria for risk assessment
and initiate activities to develop a risk model framework for LMB.

 (1-3) Communication Outreach ($1.09 million): the project would support dialogue on
and communication of IWRM principles to different stakeholders, including government,
private sector, civil society and local communities, including indigenous groups, using a
range of different and adapted communication strategies and languages; and

 (1-4) Project Monitoring, Administrative Support, and Oversight ($3.12 million): The
project will support technical assistance for the preparation and implementation of the
national activities and overall project coordination and management, including
preparation of a 6-monthly consolidated progress report, as well as direct oversight and
reporting on Component 1.

 •     Component 2. National Water Resources Management (US$6.01 million). The
key objective is to support legal, institutional and human resources strengthening to
implement IWRM and better water resources planning in Lao PDR, which accounts for
over 30 percent of the Basin’s flow. The activities will be implemented through the
Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MONRE) of Lao PDR, through the
following subcomponents:

 (2-1) Support for Refining a Legal Framework Enabling Integrated Water Resources
Management ($0.66 million). This sub-component would support the Department of
Water Resources within MONRE in undertaking a legal review, stakeholder
participation, preparation of a legal issue paper, review on the harmonization with the
legal framework in the neighboring countries, and development of a “Roadmap? for
revising the law; drafting of and consulting on a new Water Resources Law; and then,
consideration by the National Assembly in 2013.

 (2-2) Support for Water Quality and Aquatic Ecosystem Health ($1.3 million): A
national water quality and aquatic ecosystem health policy and action plan has been
developed. The project will support the Water Resources and Environment Research
Institute (WERI) to implement the action plan, including carrying out water quality
monitoring (building on equipment and training being provided by Finnish assistance);

 (2-3) Support for Water Resources Modelling ($0.62 million): The project will support
WERI , including review and selection of appropriate, adapted models, technical
assistance and training;
 (2-4) Support for Hydromet Network Upgrading ($1.97 million): through provision of
equipment and training to the Department of Meteorology and Hydrology (DMH); and

 (2-5) Component Management (US$1.23 million), supporting the administration and
management costs associated with implementing Component 2, and would be responsible
for facilitating the implementation and monitoring of Sub-components 3-1 and 3-2.
 •      Component 3: Improved Floodplain and Aquatic Resources Management in
Regionally Significant Areas (US$12.58 million). The component aims to demonstrate a
successful implementation of IWRM practices regarding: (a) flood-plain management in
selected river basins in Lao PDR; and (b) development of trans-boundary fisheries
management in priority areas of the Lao PDR. The activities will be implemented
through the following three subcomponents:

 (3-1) Management of River Basins and Floodplains in the Xe Bang Fai (XBF) and Xe
Bang Hiang (XBH)—Lao PDR (US$7.50 million), key activities would include:

  (3-1-1) Strengthening management in priority river basins and floodplains: The Project
will support the development of river basin organizations and a basin planning
framework focusing on “hotspots,? development of a floodplain management plan for the
lower X and XBH, focusing on the junction between the tributaries and the mainstream
Mekong; the Project would support technical assistance, training, and minor goods and
office renovation; and

  (3-1-2) Upgrading of existing infrastructure for enhanced environmental benefits: The
Project will support rehabilitating and modification of existing flood gates to restore
flood-plain management and fish migration on 14,000 hectares and re-habilitation of
irrigation infrastructure to support restoration of flood-plain rice cultivation and fish
spawning on 8,500 hectares, together with providing support to improved, more water-
efficient rice cultivation systems through civil works, equipment and extension support;


 (3-2) Fisheries Management in Lao PDR (US$5.07 million), key activities would
include:

 (3-2-1): Support for establishing community-managed fisheries management
organizations in Champasak, Attapeu, Sekong Provinces in Lao PDR. The Project will
support development of participatory management plans, training on fisheries
management and conservation, development and implementation of alternative livelihood
and commune development plans including support to priority rural infrastructure; the
Project would provide training, establishment of the grievance mechanism, community
outreach, operating costs, goods and minor civil works;

 (3-2-2): Support for Public Sector Fishery Management. These Sub-Components would
strengthen the capacity of provincial and district fisheries authorities, to carry out the
public functions (i.e. enforcement of the fishing regulations, monitoring and reporting on
fish catch, extension services, research and development, and conservation of endangered
species. Key activities include: (a) fish catch data collection, monitoring and regulation,
together with the community fisheries organizations; (b) extension activities; and (c)
support for indigenous species aquaculture and stocking through rehabilitation of
hatcheries, water quality monitoring, technical assistance and study visits for fishermen
and/or local authorities. The Project would finance goods, works, training and operational
costs; and

 (3-2-3): Subcomponent Administration and Management. These Sub-Components
would provide logistical support for component management to the fisheries departments
in Pakse, Champasak province, including operating costs and minor office renovation.

 Note: This ISDS replaces the ISDS disclosed on February 2011 at which time the
project included a subcomponent for fisheries resources management in Cambodia.
Processing for this subcomponent in Cambodia has now been postponed to APL second
phase, which is expected to be presented to the Board of Directors of the World Bank in
November 2012.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The activities of Components 1 and 2 fall under the categories of technical assistance,
training, and capacity building; only activities under Component 3 might trigger Bank
safeguard policies. The floodplain management activities (Subcomponent 3.1) will be
carried out in the lower part of Xe Bang Fai (XBF) and Xe Bang Hiang (XBH) river
basins, which are located in the central part of Lao PDR. The trans-boundary fisheries
management activities (Subcomponents 3-2 and 3-3) will be carried out in two subareas:
(a) along the Mekong mainstream between Champasak (Siphandon area) province in Lao
PDR; and (b) the Sekong River in Lao PDR, which is part of the “3S? river system
(including the Sesan and Sepok rivers) spanning Vietnam, Lao PDR, and Cambodia
before discharging into the Mekong.

 Key physical and social characteristics of these areas are briefly summarized below.

  •      Xe Bang Fai River Basin (XBF, Lao PDR): Covers an area of 10,345 square
kilometers (km²) and comprises two provinces: Khammouan and Savannakhet. Mean
annual rainfall across the basin is estimated at 2,600 millimeter, resulting in a mean
annual discharge of 494 cubic meters per second (m³/s) with mean maximum discharge
being 3,422 m³/s, and peak floods of over 4,000 m³/s. During the d season, the XBF
carries little water, while most of the discharge occurs during the rainy season. The
downstream part of the XBF river basin is annually flooded, nurturing an extensive
floodplain that provides refuge and habitat to many of the migratory fish species of the
Mekong River Basin. As the population gradually expanded into the floodplain of the
XBF, these critically important habitats have increasingly been degraded. With the start
of full operation of the Nam Theun 2 Hydropower Project (NT2) turbines, which started
at the end of March 2010, this hydrological balance is being changed, as the downstream
releases of water (on average 200 m³/s) have been diverted from the Nam Theun River
into the XBF basin.

 The basin’s population in 2005 was estimated at 231,000, most of which engaged in
agricultural production, fisheries and related livelihoods. Some people dwelling along the
upper part of XBF (Mahaxay district) are of the Makong ethnic minority, belonging to
the Mon-Khmer group, and Makong is considered to be one of the vulnerable groups.
People in the lower part of the river are of Phouthay ethnic minority, one of the
mainstream Lao-Tai groups. Over the last decade, the area has been increasingly linked
to regional markets and trade-routes, with a Mekong Mainstream Bridge currently under
construction, connecting the basin to both Thailand and to Vietnam.

  •      Xe Bang Hiang River Basin (XBH, Lao PDR): The XBH is located next to the
XBF basin and covers most of Savannakhet province, with an estimated basin population
of 817,000 people. The river stretches over a length of 370 kilometers (km), flowing from
the Lao-Vietnam border to the Mekong, and draining an area of 19,223 km². Its main
tributaries are the Sepone, Sethamouk and Sechamphone. Mean annual precipitation is
1,600 millimeters, contributing to a mean annual discharge of 538 m³/s, a mean
maximum discharge of 4,097 m³/s and a peak flood of 8,500 m³/s. Like the XBF, the
XBH provides one of Lao PDR’s most important wetland areas, which provides a
critically important habitat to the country’s wildlife, including migratory fish. One of the
first two Ramsar sites (Xe Champhone Wetland) is located in this river basin. Similar to
other basins in central Lao PDR, the area has been subjected to increased regional
integration and economic development during the last decade; the towns of Mukdahan
(Thailand) and Savannakhet (Lao PDR) are now connected through the East-West
Economic Corridor, with a bridge over the Mekong, and a road network from Thailand
into Vietnam.

  •     The Champasak (Lao PDR) Transboundary Area: The area plays a major role in
the maintenance of biodiversity in the whole LMB. There are numerous spawning
grounds, dry season refuges and migration routes for a significant collection of Mekong
fish species. The total area stretches for about 161 km. Part of the Cambodian area is a
registered Ramsar site, while discussions are ongoing regarding designating the
Siphandon Area (the Lao PDR part) as a Ramsar site.

 Fishing in the area is mostly small-scale, conducted by rural households, and often
considered a secondary livelihood activity. Unsustainable fishing practices are common
in the project area. These include: (a) the use of destructive methods and gears; (b) the
exploitation of fish in sensitive areas (deep pool refugees, spawning grounds and
migratory routes) and at sensitive times (spawning and migration periods); Also, local
environmental disturbances (e.g., alterations of critical habitats, such as wetlands,
inundated forests, rapids) may be impacting on fisheries. Fish resources are also coming
under pressure from transboundary environmental impacts mainly due to infrastructure
developments, chemical runoff from farming, hydropower generation and flood-control,
including loss of genetic diversity and the depletion of indigenous stocks. Expansion of
commercial fish species and wider economic developments in the area (including better
access to markets and growth in tourism) also provide opportunities for the people to
improve their living standards.

 Champasak is the third largest province of Lao PDR (15,415 km2) and has a total
population of about 575,600 (37 persons/km2), of which 36 percent lives below the
poverty line. The majority of fishing villages in Champasak are of the predominant Lao
Tai group.

 •      The Sekong River is another large river basin located in the southeastern corner of
Lao PDR. The river emanates from the Vietnam highlands and flows through Sekong and
Attapeu provinces in Lao PDR before combining with the Sekong-Sesan-Seprok river
system in Cambodia and then discharging into the Mekong. Sekong (7,665 km2) and
Attapeu (10,320 km2) are small provinces in Lao PDR, with a total population of about
83,000 in Sekong and 114,300 persons in Attapeu (about 11 persons/km2 for both
provinces). Most of these populations belong to vulnerable ethnic minorities that are part
of the Mone-Khmer group, living in remote areas with limited access to roads and
infrastructure; they are not self-sufficient in rice and shifting cultivation is still a common
practice. Nearly half (45 percent) of the total population of these provinces live below the
poverty line. Effective management of fisheries and conservation of ecological health in
the area is critical for maintaining protein sufficiency in the people’s diet, which is
dependent on fishes as well as other aquatic animals (OAAs).

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul (EASVS)
   Mr Viengkeo Phetnavongxay (EASTS)
   Mr Sybounheung Phandanouvong (EASTS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                   X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                       X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                 X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                      X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
A. Environmental Aspects.
 Implementation of Component 3 of the Project will involve the following small civil
works: (a) rehabilitation of floodgates, located in the tributaries of the Xe Bang Fai and
Xe Bang Hiang (Component 3-1); (b) rehabilitation of village-based irrigation schemes
(Component 3-1); (c) rehabilitation/construction of small, province-level hatcheries
(Component 3-2); and (d) village-based rural infrastructure to support livelihood for the
identified fishing communities (Component 3-2). The sites for these investments have
been identified at appraisal for (a), (b), and (c) above, whereas the investments for (d)
would be identified during implementation through consultation with the respective local
governments and communities. No large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are
expected under the proposed Project. Field visits to the proposed Project sites by the
Bank’s safeguard specialists during pre-appraisal, together with a rapid assessment study
of potential impacts of the Project on the local environment and communities confirmed
this conclusion.

 Overall, environmental impacts of these investments are considered to be positive.
Rehabilitation of village-based irrigation schemes would reduce leakage and increase
water use efficiency; floodgate rehabilitation and modification would allow fish
migration; and the construction/rehabilitation of hatcheries would enable re-stocking and
result in reduced fishing pressures through village aquaculture. The project does not
envisage the support for the exotic fish species.

 However, some potential minor negative environmental impacts would include: (i)
impacts due to the planned small scaled construction works; (ii) increased agriculture
chemicals, and (iii) organic sludge from the hatchery operation. These impacts can be
mitigated. For impact (i) above, good engineering practices would be required as well as
close supervision of contractors. A code of good engineering practices will be included in
the bidding document and the potential contractors will be informed of this obligation.
This requirement will be included in the safeguard part of the Project Operation Manual.
For impact (ii) above, the Project would not procure any pesticides and would promote a
new rice cultivation technique, named System of Rice Intensification (SRI), and organic-
based rice cultivation. Furthermore, training of farmers and local officials would be
undertaken on the safe use of pesticides and Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and other
options to avoid using toxic chemicals.

 The community infrastructure proposed for the fishing villages under Component 3-2
may be situated close to the natural habitats along the mainstream Mekong and the
Sekong River. The part of the catchment of the Xe Bang Hiang has recently been
designated as a Ramsar Site. In this sense, the project triggers the Operational Policy on
Natural Habitats (4.04). However, considering the nature and location of the proposed
investments (e.g., small bridges and community access roads, located within the existing
villages), the conclusion is drawn that the proposed Project will not significantly convert
or degrade any protected areas, known natural habitats, or established or proposed critical
natural habitats as defined in the OP 4.04. A clear process for planning and
implementation in the Ramsar site has been developed as part of the safeguard operation
manual, and concurrence/approval from the concerned authorities on the natural habitat
shall be obtained prior to the Board presentation.
 Implementation of the project will also provide opportunities to enhance environmental
benefits and synergy with MRC activities in addressing environmental issues related to
the Mekong mainstream. Improving fisheries monitoring and enforcement as well as
improving awareness and cooperation of local fishermen (Component 3-2) could increase
positive impacts on conservation and management of the Ramsar sites and reduce
potential negative impacts on this critical natural habitats in a longer term. Special
attention will be given to ensure that the activities in and/or nearby the Ramsar sites will
be carried out with care and consistency with the management plan of the sites and in
close coordination with the agency responsible for managing the Ramsar site.

 Implementation of Component 1 would increase cooperation of riparian countries
through MRC secretariat at the regional and country levels. Effective cooperation among
these stakeholders in the basin development and planning process is the critical element
of IWRM and achievement of sustainable development in the LMB. Implementation
experience from this project could demonstrate ways to implement the IWRM concept at
regional level. Implementation of Component 2 would strengthen technical and
management capacity of MoNRE to take the lead in ensuring sustainable water resources
development in Lao PDR. Updating the water law, strengthening capacity on flood
forecasting, monitoring of water quality, and development of planning tool would
improve national capacity to facilitate effective management of water resources in Lao
PDR and this experience could be shared with other countries in the LMB.


 B. Social Aspects.

  Land Acquisition. No major land acquisition is envisaged under the Project. The
rehabilitation of flood gates and irrigation schemes would not require any land
acquisition and the new hatcheries are proposed to be situated on existing government
land. However, there is a possibility of small land acquisition for the construction of
community infrastructure such as small foot bridges and access roads. To address a
potential social issue related to possible small land acquisition, a Compensation and
Resettlement Policy Framework (CRPF) has been prepared for Lao PDR. The CRPF will
be applied when land acquisition is involved. The RPF/CRPF describes entitlements for
compensation and mitigation measures for all losses (if any), including a grievance
procedure and contents of an abbreviated RAP (Resettlement Action Plan). Voluntary
donations will not be applied for any assets, except very minor losses of residential land.
Relocation of people and assets are not allowed, and this will be included in the “negative
list.?

 Possible Restriction of Access to the Natural Resources: Component 3-2 aims to
improve fisheries management by providing support for the development of a
community-based fisheries management plan, which would include: establishment of fish
conservation zones (to protect critical habitats); closed fishing period (to protect
spawners); and restriction on fishing gears. While preparation of the fisheries
management plan would have positive environmental impacts, and perhaps longer time
benefits for the concerned communities, it would imply some restrictions on the access to
fisheries, which may affect the livelihood at least for the short-term.

 This issue was discussed during pre-appraisal and the following approach was accepted
in principle by the local communities and the local government as well as the local and
international non-governmental organizations active in the Project area:

 •      First, better fisheries management would benefit the local communities in the long
run by establish sustainable fisheries management;
 •      Second, the fisheries management plan would be developed through full
participation and ownership of the respective communities; and
 •      Third, the Project also envisages provision of livelihood development options
such as rural infrastructure and demonstration of supplementary
agriculture/aquaculture/livestock activities (which will be selected through participatory
planning with affected populations) in order to mitigate potential negative impacts.

 Indigenous Peoples/Ethnic Groups and Gender: The extensive consultation and
participatory process envisioned for this subcomponent will also ensure that indigenous
peoples/ethnic groups and women have equal opportunity to benefit from the selected
schemes. An Ethnic Groups Development Framework (EGDF) has been prepared for Lao
PDR to guide the consultation process with indigenous/ethnic peoples and local
stakeholders and the preparation of the Indigenous Peoples/Ethnic Groups Development
Plan, if needed. The EGDF comprises a preliminary screening of indigenous
peoples/ethnic groups, a sample consultation framework, and a reporting and monitoring
arrangement. The EGDF will be applied throughout the implementation period to ensure
that this consultative process represents free, prior and informed consultation leading to
establishment of broad community support.

 Transparency and Grievance Mechanism: In accordance with the GOL Decree 192 on
Compensation and Resettlement of People Affected by Development Projects, the project
will establish mechanism for grievance resolution and determining that the prime
responsibility for handing grievances raised by PAPs is the project developers. This
mechanism aims to ensure PAPs’ satisfaction with implementation of the RAP, and
provide the PAPs with a legal platform for on the ground monitoring and reporting on the
RAP implementation. Grievance mechanism will allow PAPs and persons who believe
they are affected persons to seek satisfactory resolution to grievances that they may have
in relation to the restriction of access to aquatic resources, possible land acquisition, or
other project interventions. Detailed grievance handling process is described in the
ESMF, CRPF and EGDF.

  Positive impacts on local communities: The project activities have been designed in
line with the concept of IWRM which promote an integrated planning process with active
participation of local communities and key stakeholders, especially women, and local
investment and capacity building. Implementation of flood management and fisheries
management (Component 3) would promote community planning as well as
strengthening cooperation of local authorities and local communities to address water and
water resources management issues, especially for efficiency of water use and water
resource allocation that would make the local-beneficiaries adaptive exposure to the
future changes. Planning and implementing communities infrastructure through a river
basin organization (RBO) mechanism could increase the government capacity to be
responsive to the local needs and people could be better protected against flooding.
Shorter floods could increase food (rice) production and so food security while reduced
flood risk could also reduce the contamination of shallow wells and increase sanitary
conditions. Providing complimentary livelihood options could also increase food
security and living standards. Subsistence fishers require fishes for their families on a
daily basis but increasing fishing pressure and illegal fishing could reduce availability of
capture fishes and other aquatic animals in a longer term.

 Community empowerment and participation and transparency will also be critical for
effective management of water and water resources. The project will facilitate and
ensure that empowering these groups on a more formal organization with equal
participation in key aspects of the project, if not all, and the strengthening of village
organizations, committees, production groups in the villages for the maintenance and
monitoring of the facilities and subprojects. Kum Ban and Commune involvement will
be promoted at villages and district levels to increase local responsibilities and ownership
and sustainability of local investment. The project will also improve roles of civil society
and NGOs during the planning, implementation, and monitoring, especially when ethnic
minority are involved. There are community-based activities in the areas of co-
management focusing particularly on the development of village organizations such as
Community Fisheries and structures which can represent the poor; women; ethnic
minority groups and other vulnerable groups. Gender equality will also be promoted
during the implementation of the project.


 C. Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)

 To ensure full compliance with the Bank’s safeguard policies, an ESMF has been
developed for Lao PDR describing key steps for: (i) conducting an initial eligibility
assessment using the ‘negative list’; (ii) conducting a safeguard screening, per defined
criteria, to identify potential safeguard issues and the required mitigation measures,
including the needs for preparation of safeguard documents (IEE, EMP, RAP, etc.),
information disclosure, and/or approval/clearance as may be required by the Government
and/or World Bank; and (iii) implementation of the measures and/or activities, including
monitoring and reporting. The ESMF will be applied to all Project activities that have not
been identified and care will be taken to minimize the side effect of flood protection
activities on the surrounding areas.

 To facilitate effective implementation and monitoring of safeguard measures, a
safeguard manual will be prepared, including the following items (as well as monitoring
template, as needed): (a) List of Prohibited Activities; (b) Safeguard Screening Criteria;
(c) Good Engineering Practices; (d) Simplified Policy Framework for Integrated Pest
Management (IPM); (e) EGDF; and (f) CRPF. Activities which require a full EIA will
not be eligible for funding under the Project.

 Notification on International Waterways. Despite the small magnitude of associated
infrastructure, after consultation with the legal team, it was decided that notification to
the riparian countries would be needed. Lao PDR has requested the Bank to notify the
countries (on their behalf) as needed by the Bank policy. The notifications to China and
Myanmar were sent out on October 1, 2010.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The Project will not create any potential indirect and/or long term negative impacts.
However, there are potential development activities that may affect the Project area and
Project activities. In particular, full operation of China dams starting 2015 would
significantly change the water flow and ecological patter in the Mekong mainstream
while development of a number of proposed hydropower schemes in the Mekong
mainstream is being considered. If the development occurs, particularly the ones in
southern Lao PDR, and in northern Cambodia, this could affect the efforts to conserve
and manage fisheries in the target areas. The Mekong River Commission (MRC) has
started a strategic environmental assessment to review the environment and social
impacts of the proposed hydropower stations – both in terms of impacts from individual
project as well as from the perspective of cumulative impacts. Preliminary conclusions
suggest that the dams in southern Lao PDR and in northern Cambodia would have
significant social and environmental impacts and would be less likely to proceed.

 The proposed Project would involve activities associated with flood plain management
on the XBF, which is the same river into which the water from the NT2 powerhouse is
released (after passing through a regulating pond and traveling through a 27-kilometer
downstream channel). The NT2 project is now in commercial operations. The quality of
water being released into the Xe Bang Fai by the NT2 project will be a key determinant
of NT2 project impacts and is therefore being monitored closely by NT2 through an
automatic system (including stations transmitting hourly data via satellite). The data thus
far shows that NT2 project water releases are having small impacts on the natural water
quality in the river (compared to control stations upstream of the release).

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Project alternatives analysis is not applicable to the Project. Investments under
Component 3 would be small in scale, located on existing public lands, and selected
through close consultation with key stakeholders. The planned new hatcheries would also
be small in scale and constructed in areas where intensive agriculture has already been
established. Locations and descriptions of the activities will be considered and selected
through a participatory process involving key stakeholders.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An initial assessment of the potential impacts of the Project on the local environment and
communities was conducted with assistance from an international social specialist and
national environmental and social specialists, including consultation with the target local
communities/indigenous/ethnic groups. An EGDF and CRPF for Lao PDR have been
developed and finalized and they are being translated into local languages and has been
disclosed in the respective countries at the national and local levels. Prior to negotiations,
a safeguard operation manual will also be prepared to guide effective implementation of
safeguard measures and monitoring of the results.

 Safeguard capacity of the agencies responsible for implementation of the Project varies,
but is considered inadequate in general; therefore, a series of safeguard training sessions
will be provided during the first three to four years of the Project, and a budget of
US$60,000 for Lao PDR will be allocated. In addition, US$60,000 for Lao PDR will be
allocated to help Lao Government to carry out social assessment during the
implementation period. Safeguard capacity of key agencies is discussed below:

 •       The national activities under Lao part will be implemented by key agencies of
Lao PDR under the leadership of MONRE. MONRE is th lead national agency
responsible for environmental conservation and management, including EIA/SIA review
and monitoring. MONRE’s capacity is being strengthened through technical assistance of
the World Bank and other donor agencies. The Department of Water Resources (DWR),
a department of MONRE, is responsible for ensuring effective management and
utilization of water resources, including adoption of the IWRM policy and for facilitating
effective implementation. DWR serves as the secretariat to the Lao National Mekong
Committee (LNMC), which was reestablished and became operational in mid-2009. A
River Basin Organization (RBO) decree was drafted in early 2010 and was approved by
GOL in mid June 2010. This decree will be the legal basis for formal implementation of
IWRM in Lao PDR. Under the Project, effort will be made to establish and operationalize
the XBF and XBH river basin organizations, which will be responsible for forging
effective/integrated planning and implementation of flood management and mitigation
measures. Significant capacity building and technical assistance, including availability of
offices, vehicles, and equipment, will also be provided to ensure that key agencies (e.g.,
DWR, provinces, and districts) have adequate capacity and knowledge to plan and
implement the Project activities according to the IWRM concept. The co-management
initiative subcomponent will promote ownership and participation of local communities
and will enhance sustainability of investment and conservation efforts.

 •     In terms of implementation experience related to safeguards, the provincial
MONRE offices for Khammouane and Savannakhet Provinces will manage the
Component 3-1 (floodplain management) activities and they have some experience with
Bank operations through the implementation of the Lao Environment and Social Project.
However, additional safeguard training will be provided by the Project. Implementation
of Sub-Components 3-2 (fisheries resources management) will enhance capacity of local
communities to promote sustainable fisheries and also strengthen technical capacity of
the Provincial Agriculture and Forestry Offices (PAFO) in Champasak, Sekong, and
Attapeu provinces in Lao PDR. These agencies do not have any experience with Bank
operations, including safeguards, so safeguard training will be provided to these agencies.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Project has three components, and the key stakeholders for each component are as
follows:

 Component 1: Regional Water Resources Management. One of major activity under
this component is to promote transboundary dialogue on critical IWRM issues. During
pre-appraisal, MRC had completed national consultation at each of the four member
countries (Thailand, Lao PDR, Cambodia, and Vietnam) and confirmed that there is a
strong commitment from the concerned local governments and communities; further at
the regional consultation which took place in Ho Chi Minh City on June 30, 2010, strong
commitment among the four countries towards strengthening regional cooperation was
also highlighted.

 Component 2: National Water Resources Management. The Project work would mainly
support the policy development and institutional strengthening through technical
assistance and investment. During Project preparation, however, consultations were
made with a few local governments (provinces and districts) which are facing with water
resources issues (water quality, flood proneness, etc.) to identify key priority issues.

  Component 3: Floodplain and Fisheries Management. This component aims to provide
investment and capacity building support directly to the concerned communities and local
government entities, and extensive consultation has been undertaken with the local
communities as well as civil society organizations through a number of meetings
organized by the agencies with assistance of national and international consultants. The
Project description and approach, including the draft ESMF, were presented and
discussed with the local communities (many of whom are indigenous peoples/ethnic
groups), during the finalization of the IESE report, and a consultation report is being
prepared. The safeguard documents (i.e. IESE, ESMF, CRPF and EGDF), are being
translated into local languages, and they will be disclosed at the agencies responsible for
Project implementation (MRC, MONRE and in the target provinces in Lao PDR) as well
as at the World Bank websites for Lao PDR.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/10/2010
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                             09/23/2010
 Date of submission to InfoShop                              09/01/2010
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/10/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             09/23/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              09/01/2010
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/10/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             09/23/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              09/01/2010
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/10/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             09/23/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              09/01/2010
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                      Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                     Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or    Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         Yes
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        N/A
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                  Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Toru Konishi                      11/11/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Viengkeo Phetnavongxay            11/11/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Sybounheung Phandanouvong         11/11/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul              11/11/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan   02/16/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan      02/15/2011
  Comments:
