                                                                                                      80641


                         INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                       APPRAISAL STAGE



Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:         20-Aug-20 13
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                      East Asia and          Project ID:              Pl23933
                               Pacific
 Project Name:                 Capturing Coral Reef Ecosystem Services (CCRES) (P123933)
 Task Team Leader:             Marea Eleni Hatziolos
 Estimated Board Date:         30-Sep-2013
 Managing Unit:                EASER
 GEF Focal Area:               International waters
 Sector(s):                    General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), Agricultural
                               extension and research (50%)
 Theme(s):                     Biodiversity (40%), Other environment and natural resources
                               management (40%), Climate change (20%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00               1\o
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                               Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       6.50                       Total Bank Financing:     0.00
 Total Cofinancing:                                   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                           Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                               2.00
    Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                 4.50
     Total                                                                                            6.50
 Environmental Category:       B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred        No
 project?


 2. Project Development Objective(s)
 The Project Development Objective is to design and support the uptake of innovative models for
 valuing mangrove, seagrass and coral reef ecosystem services with the potential to enhance the
 sustainability of marine-based enterprise and marine spatial planning in select coastal communities in
Indonesia and the Philippines.

3. Project Description
A. Project Context

I.       Coastal and Marine Resources, and their associated ecosystem services in the region are
linked to globally important Marine Biodiversity, and underpin a huge part of the regional economy.
Although this wealth of natural capital has the potential to be a major driver of inclusive green growth
in East Asia and the Pacific, huge challenges will need to be overcome. These include resource
governance regimes which allow open access and short term development planning, failure to account
for environmental externalities and impacts on future generations when calculating economic benefits,
inadequate scientific information to inform decisions on tradeoffs-including how natural and social
systems can interact to build resilience or undermine it--and the relationship between ecosystems
services, food security and livelihoods in poverty alleviation strategies. Coral reefs and associated
near-shore ecosystems (e.g., mangroves and seagrass beds) reach the height of their expression in an
area called the Coral Triangle (which includes parts of Malaysia, Eastern Indonesia, the Philippines,
East Timor, Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands), These icons of marine biodiversity and
ecosystem productivity are under severe threat from overexploitation and destructive use.

2.       Despite their unequivocal importance to human well-being and economic activity, the services
provided by these ecosystems are routinely taken for granted by communities, industry and policy
makers alike. That the natural capital these ecosystems represent is not considered in the same light
as other economic resources, contributes to their ongoing demise and encourages ad hoc decision
making that would not be acceptable in the management of other capital resources.

3.       Capturing the economic and cultural values of marine natural capital through valuation of
Ecosystem Services, and quantifying the cost of lost services due to environmental degradation, has
the potential to transform the development and stewardship of coastal areas by translating ecological
value into intuitive and financial terms for local stakeholders as well as policy makers. This
knowledge can be harnessed by decision support tools which can help to build the political rationale
for change. Together with marketable goods and provisioning services, marine and coastal ecosystems
also provide a range of non-market goods and services such as regulating global carbon and nitrogen
cycles and protecting shorelines. Local and global drivers of change influence each of these services
and it is imperative that management and policy be suitably informed to ensure the continued supply
of the ecosystem services on which human well-being and prosperity depend.

4.       As coastal development in the region is driving conversion of natural habitats, exposing large
areas of marine space to climate related impacts, and outpacing the provision of key public sector
services, Marine Spatial Planning (MSP) is being used increasingly by Local Government to
rationalize the use of marine and coastal space within their jurisdiction, If properly designed in
consultation with local stakeholders, MSP can serve as an integrative tool to help strengthen resource
management and biodiversity conservation by identifying the best locations for economic development
compatible with conservation and sustainable use, enhance resilience to climate change impacts,and
resolve user conflicts among competing economic sectors .. Similarly, within Marine Protected Areas,
the majority of which are designated for multiple use, with only a small core area demarcated as "No
Take", zoning of the surrounding space for compatible, sustainable use and developing the criteria for
effective management remains a challenge without adequate scientific information. The CCRES
project can help fill this information gap by mapping and assessing the value of coastal natural capital
(e.g., coral reefs, mangroves, seagrass beds) in terms of the flow of key ecosystem sevices to
surrounding communities. Identifying ways to enhance ES flows and to better capture the value from
these services as inputs to sustainable economic development, climate resilience and the delivery of
other social and environmental benefits, are important objectives to which CCRES will contribute.

5.      CCRES will finance ecological and economic valuation studies, develop innovative tools and
models to support decision-making and new opportunities for "eco-business" development, and
communicate results through knowledge management to promote uptake. This will be achieved
through CCRES's three integrated components: (i) Quantifying the value and market potential of coral
reef and mangrove ecosystem services; (ii) Forging community-led innovation in capturing and
sustaining benefits from marine ecosystem services and enhancing resilience in the face of climate
change, and (iii) Promoting behavioural change through outreach, decision support and regional
learning from results in selected field sites. A fourth component, Project Management and
Coordination, deals with Project administrations, Monitoring and Evaluation and due diligence
regarding Project FM, Procurement and reporting to the Bank.

B. Project Components

Component I: Quantifying the value and market potential of coral reef and mangrove ecosystem
services (US$1.0 M).

Despite their value to human prosperity and well-being, the services provided by ecosystems tend to
be taken for granted by communities, industries and policy makers alike. That natural capital resources
are not considered in the same light as other economic resources contributes to their ongoing demise
and encourages ad hoc decision making that would not be acceptable in the management of other
capital resources. Ec onomic valuation and systematic management of ecosystem services (ES) have
excellent potential to transform the development and stewardship of coastal areas. Translating
ecological value into meaningful terms for local stakeholders as well as policy makers, Component I
of CCRES aims to demonstrate how ecosystem services can be accurately valued and systematically
managed to deliver pro-poor, pro-environment outcomes, and to help build the political rationale for
change.

Previous economic analyses have usually ignored the state or health of an ecosystem and essentially
associated activities, such as tourism, with the existence of an ecosystem (implicitly assuming that it is
either present or absent). However, the real challenge facing people in tropical coastal areas is one of
ecosystem decline; most ecosystems will not 'disappear'. Thus, economic analyses are needed that
measure the marginal change in value as a function of ecosystem health. Valuing systems in this way
is a substantial scientific challenge but CCRES integrates the necessary disciplinary backgrounds
within the natural sciences, social sciences and economics.

Working at a number of pilot and demonstration sites in the Asia-Pacific region, Component I of
CCRES will first quantify the value of key coral and mangrove ecosystem services as a function of
system state. Services include reef fisheries, ornamental species (aquarium trade), island stability,
prestige diving tourism, blue carbon, and cultural benefits. By making the links between ecosystem
state and ecosystem services explicit, stakeholders will gain greater insight into how reef health affects
them. This is an important step in building greater constituency for reef stewardship and management.
Further, by estimating the real costs of allowing reef ecosystems to degrade, a compelling case can be
made at a governmental level on the threats to food security and opportunities to mitigate costs
through improved management.

The Component will also help operationalize the use of ecosystem services for marine spatial
planning. Existing tools for marine reserve design and modeling flows of services will be tailored to
the specific needs of people and eco-businesses in tropical coastal areas. Tools will allow stakeholders
to visualize the production and flows of ecosystem services and therefore evaluate the consequences of
different scenarios for development and management. Examples of questions that local stakeholders
will be able to pose include: How should eco-businesses be distributed to maximize potential
synergies while ensuring that ecosystem function is maintained at sufficiently high levels to sustain
enterprise? Which coastal areas are best set aside for conservation purposes? Where might marine
reserves have the greatest benefit to fisheries? Who would benefit from an improvement in watershed
management?

The key deliverables from the overall activities under Component I will be:
•       Three models will be developed relating to the valuation of eco-system services, e.g.,
supporting reef fisheries, eco-tourism, blue carbon, coastal defense, and water filtration.
•       Innovative, comprehensive decision support systems for marine reserve design which help
optimize management objectives will be developed
•       A planning framework that incorporates models of ecosystem functions and services and
decision support systems will be developed which can be tailored to stakeholder demand

Component II: Using Ecosystem Services valuation to develop new markets and eco-business
opportunities and inform development trade-offs (US $2.5 M).

Component II will draw on the results of Component I to build business models that support the health
of marine and coastal ecosystem services. Component II will examine how investment in marine and
coastal ecosystem services and the strengthening of community livelihoods and resilience to climate
variability might be operationalized using eco-business models.

Through the development of sustainable alternative enterprises and new income generating
opportunities, communities can be empowered to move away from unsustainable coastal resource use
practices and towards activities that support improved ecosystem health, increased production
outcomes, and greater resilience achieved through livelihood diversification.

A central feature of Component II is, therefore, to bring business thinking to scientists and
concurrently, an appreciation of the importance of ecosystem services to business. Component II will
do this by using a modeling approach based on systems science, participatory management principles
and value-chain analysis to develop and evaluate multiple simulated eco-businesses scenarios. The
model can be used to design profitable eco-business options for alternative livelihood programs linked
to beneficiary projects such as the PRDP or COREMAP-CTI. Thus, the findings from Component II
can inform these and other GEF and World Bank projects regarding a range of sustainable alternative
livelihoods in coral reef areas in the region.

Key Activities and deliverables under this component include:

I.      Development of systems maps for each site detailing interactions between specific ecosystems
services and social-economic sectors (direct and indirect).
2.      Identifying the essential balancing and reinforcing loops impacting ecosystem
service-business linkages as well as key leverage points for affecting those loops.
3.      Advice on development of self-managed, community-based business that offers products and
services which give consumers clear value proposition while directly or indirectly benefiting from and
contributing to coastal and marine ecosystems.
4.      Toolkit development for use by business entrepreneurs
Component III: Promoting behavioral change through outreach, decision support and regional learning
from results of demonstration pilots (US $0.6 M).

Critical to catalyzing behavior change is the expansion of the knowledge base within government and
management agencies, the general public and in other key stakeholder communities. Communication
and outreach remains one of the critical elements for any campaign to raise awareness and influence
behaviors. Component III will develop the frameworks from which to move the science findings into
policy and management uptake.

Component III will focus on the effective uptake of information generated from Components I and II,
through the development and dissemination of the resources. Key objectives will include: (i)
catalyzing behavioral change through the effective interpretation of the Project findings into
appropriate formats for the various stakeholder audiences and providing mechanisms to ensure the
effective uptake of the information into policy and management practices, and (ii) Ensuring the Project
results are incorporated into current GEF and World Bank regional projects and future project design
frameworks.

An important element in ensuring effective engagement and dissemination of information at the
regional, national and local levels will be the establishment of an operational mechanism withi n each
of the targeted regions to improve the level of engagement and building of knowledge and
understanding of coral reef resources and their values to communities. Partnerships will be established
with project partners and regional networks (e.g. Non-Government Organizations, Coral Triangle
Center, PEMSEA and COREMAP III) to preview findings and information and work with the Project
to disseminate the results and information resources produced.

The key deliverables for Component III will be:
1.       A stakeholder analysis clearly detailing who the key beneficiaries or stakeholders and
stakeholder groups the Project will be targeting.
2.       An understanding of the values, drivers, triggers and incentives at field sites for the key
beneficiaries or stakeholders which will link into the Project's broader engagement and outreach
strategy.
3.       Information products e.g., models, frameworks, toolkits, etc. from the results from
Components I and II.
4.       Broader communication products e.g., website, policy briefs, technical manuals, information
packages, etc.

Project partners such as the University of the Philippines; LIPI (the Indonesian Science Foundation
and its Oceanography Department) and other research institutions will also play a role in working with
the Global Change Institute in developing knowledge products, information and tools which are
country specific and engage with stakeholders and audiences in each country to ensure maximum
uptake.

A Technical Steering Committee will be established to provide technical direction on the project's
activities and research and ensure the linkages and synergies across the project's components are
strengthened. The Committee will oversee the quality of the research and synthesize the results from
each component's projects leading to interpretation of the findings. It will also make policy and
management recommendations where appropriate.

Component IV: Project Coordination and Management (US $0.4 M).
A partnership arrangement whereby the University of Queensland (UQ), Australia, would serve as
recipient of the GEF grant funds on behalf of project beneficiaries, and as Executing Agency, will be
entered into with the GEF. This arrangement, in which the University's Global Change Institute
(GCI) would serve as the Project Executing Agency (PEA), has been determined to offer the optimal
combination of financial accountability, technical expertise, capacity building and long-term
institutional commitment (including substantial co-financing). UQ also served as executing agency
under the GEF global Coral Reef Targeted Research & Capacity Building for Management Project,
completed in 201 0; its performance was rated Highly Satisfactory in the final ICR.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
Although the project will be working in pilot sites in Indonesia and the Philippines to develop the
overall framework for valuation of eco-system services, preparation of marine reserve strategy, marine
spatial planning, and a framework to generate and evaluate viable and sustainable eco-system based
businesses, these sites have yet to be finalized. It is expected that these sites will be determined early
in Year 1. More importantly, this effort will be research-oriented and will involve working with the
communities, business owners, and academics to generate data and develop models and frameworks.

These outputs are then to be used to support eco-system wealth accounting, marine reserve planning,
marine spatial planning, and eco-business proposals and feasibility studies in specific sites proposed
by Bank and other government and donor-financed projects. It is important to note that the
implementation of the strategies and plans prepared by this project will not be undertaken under
CCRES, but will be the domain of the beneficiary projects seeking the application of the models and
frameworks to their project sites, e.g., COREMAP-CTI, The Philippines Rural Development Project,
and other Government financed implementation activities outside the realm of CCRES.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Juan Martinez ( EASIS)
Josefo Tuyor ( EASDE)

6. Safeguard Policies                      Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01        Yes              The project impacts are expected to be
                                                            overwhelmingly positive. The project is
                                                            designed to improve the way communities
                                                            interact with the coastal resources on which
                                                            they depend for essential ecosystem
                                                            services, by making these services more
                                                            explicit and mapping flows to demonstrate
                                                            how and by whom these benefits are
                                                            captured. Through such studies the Project
                                                            can inform coastal development planning,
                                                            and promote new business opportunities
                                                            based on the benefits which can accrues to
                                                            both the natural environment and dependent
                                                            coastal communities from healthy marine
                                                            ecosystems. Optimizing marine spatial
                                                            plans to help communities better capture
                                                            these benefits results in incentives for
                                                            conservation and better stewardship of the
marine environment. This creates the
potential for a positive feedback loop or
"virtual circle" of healthy ecosystems and
community welfare.

The project will not support implementation
of the marine spatial plans and business
model it develops. Uptake, to the extent it
happens, will be supported by the
beneficiary projects, i.e., PRDP and
COREMAP CTI, which include support for
alternative livelihoods. CCRES would make
use of the safeguard instruments developed
under the beneficiary projects, where
appropriate, to ensure that any unanticipated
impacts are minimized. A separate
safeguard instrument for CCRES will not be
necessary given the project interventions.
Instead, measures have been incorporated as
part of the project design. Under
Component I, the risks associated with any
application of the marine spatial planning
framework are safeguarded through
peer-reviewed scientific findings. The
project will be providing the framework or
processes to regional projects such as
COREMAP for possible uptake by local
planning authorities. Any application of
these planning frameworks would be
subject to the safeguards instruments and
mitigation measures established under the
beneficiary projects. Likewise, for CCRES
Component II, the activities will be driven
by the participatory systems analysis, which
will pick up on any potential risks and also
identify any pathways forward to avoid
these risks. There will also be a constant
engagement process with country team
members (from Indonesia and the
Philippines) and with stakeholder groups
the project is engaging with. Furthermore,
the establishment of the Country Advisory
Groups consisting of government agencies,
NGOs, businesses, research institutions,
individuals, etc., is also designed for the
Project to be made aware of any potential
for future risks and the development of
mitigation strategies against these.

Nevertheless, given that all the beneficiary
                                            projects to be supported by this project are
                                            Category B and there might be some social
                                            impacts related to restriction to access of
                                            natural resources from the development of
                                            marine spatial plans, this project is
                                            categorized as a B project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           Yes   The project will work in high biodiversity
                                            habitats such as coral reefs and sea grass
                                            beds, many of them still in a natural state.
                                            But since the objectives of the project are to
                                            protect these habitats and reduce the threats
                                            to them from unplanned development or
                                            unsustainable business practices, the
                                            outcomes are expected to be highly positive.

                                            Likewise, the beneficiary projects to which
                                            CCRES is linked aim to protect the coastal
                                            ecosystem and to enhance its sustainable
                                            management through improving the
                                            management effectiveness of Marine
                                            Protected Areas and supporting
                                            communities in the monitoring of their coral
                                            reefs to protect against destructive fishing
                                            practices and safeguard their natural capital.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No    Neither CCRES nor any of the beneficiary
                                            projects offering their sites for detailed
                                            strategy/plan preparation under this project
                                            are financing activities that would affect
                                            forests and forest-dependent communities.
Pest Management OP 4.09               No    The project will not procure any pesticides,
                                            nor will it result in increased use of
                                            pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No   The project will not involve any civil works
                                            that would affect any PCR.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         Yes   The pilot sites from the beneficiary projects
                                            where CCRES will be working will not be
                                            determined until early in the Year 1. If it
                                            turns out that there are indigenous people at
                                            these sites, they would be among the
                                            beneficiaries of the Project, and CCRES
                                            would use the IP safeguard instruments
                                            prepared under those projects. CCRES will
                                            not prepare a separate IP instrument, but
                                            will instead incorporate the elements of the
                                            policy in the project design itself. These
                                            would include consultations with and
                                            engagement of stakeholders in the
                                            collection of relevant data that could feed
                                            into the design of business models and
                                            marine spatial plans, and ensure that the
                                            views and broad community support of
                                            Indigenous Peoples are taken into account
                                            in any recommendations made with regard
                                            to Marine Spatial Plans, zoning or business
                                            practices that could affect them.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes   The valuation studies, marine spatial plans
                                            and eco-business model that CCRES
                                            produces are meant to benefit communities;
                                            by identifying ways to link investments in
                                            maintaining or restoring ecosystem health to
                                            improving community health and wellbeing.
                                            Any such plans would be developed in
                                            consultation with beneficiaries and any
                                            implications regarding access restrictions,
                                            for instance through zoning, would be the
                                            result of consensus, as was the case under
                                            CO REMAP II, the prior phase of
                                            COREMAP. In view of the possible access
                                            restriction, the policy is triggered. CCRES
                                            though will not finance implementation of
                                            these plans. However, should the
                                            recommendations emerging from these
                                            plans be supported under Beneficiary
                                            Projects, the Resettlement Frameworks of
                                            those projects will be applied.

                                            To mitigate any economic displacements
                                            that might occur as a result of zoning the
                                            marine space and to help communities
                                            transition to more sustainable use practices
                                            and governance regimes, an entire
                                            component in COREMAP-CTI, for
                                            example, has been designed to support
                                            alternative livelihoods opportunities which
                                            would be accessible to affected populations.
                                            CCRES would help identify new business
                                            enterprises and revenue streams through the
                                            development of innovative eco-business
                                            models based on sustainable use of marine
                                            natural capital and the ecosystem services
                                            they provide.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             No    This policy is not triggered as the Project
                                            will not finance construction or
                                            rehabilitation of any dams. None of the sites
                                            under the beneficiary projects offered for
                                            assistance in this project will fall in this
                                            category.
                                                                                            I
                                                                                            .\
                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                             I

                                                                                                             j
Projects on International Waterways         No              There are no project components involving
OPIBP 7.50                                                  international waterways as defined under         r
                                                            the policy. None ofthe project sites under
                                                            the beneficiary projects offered for
                                                                                                             I
                                                            assistance in this project will be located in
                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                             !
                                                            the international water boundaries.              I
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60       No              None of the sites under any of the
                                                            beneficiary projects offered for assistance in



II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                                                            this project will be located in any known
                                                            disputed areas as defined under the policy.
                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                             l
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                             ,,
CCRES is not envisaged to have any negative environmental impacts ~s there is no civil works nor             I
livelihood activities that will be supported by the project. Impacts on natural habitats are largely         •
                                                                                                             r
                                                                                                             •
positive and beneficial. If at all, the only impact that could potentially happen is the restriction of
access to natural resources by communities in the pilot sites in the Philippines and Indonesia.              I
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in          t
the project area:
The purpose of CCRES and linking the knowledge generated to various WB and GEF projects dealing
with management of coastal and marine resources in the region is to create a rationale for sustainable
development planning in the coastal zone, which includes conservation of natural capital essential to
the delivery of high value ecosystem services and the welfare of coastal communities. Marine spatial
                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                             l
                                                                                                             t
planning and demarcation of zones suitable for development activities consistent with ecosystem
carrying capacity and best use of the resource base is part and parcel of good coastal management and        t
the ecosystem-based approach. Thus, it is anticipated that environmental sustainability and the              J
resilience of linked ecological and social communities will be enhanced in areas which have had the
benefit of this marine spatial planning and its incorporation into long-term development plans at the        f
local (district) level.                                                                                      f
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse              1
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The purpose of CCRES and linking the knowledge generated to various WB and GEF projects dealing
with management of coastal and marine resources in the region is to create a rationale for sustainable
development planning in the coastal zone, which includes conservation of natural capital essential to
the delivery of high value ecosystem services and the welfare of coastal communities. Marine spatial
planning and demarcation of zones suitable for development activities consistent with ecosystem
carrying capacity and best use of the resource base is part and parcel of good coastal management and
the ecosystem-based approach. Thus, it is anticipated that environmental sustainability and the
resilience of linked ecological and social communities will be enhanced in areas which have had the
benefit of this marine spatial planning and its incorporation into long-term development plans at the
local (district) level.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders of the project are government agencies in the environment, coastal and marine,
and fisheries management sectors in the beneficiary countries as well as the communities and local
officials in the pilot sites (e.g., in Indonesia, the Philippines and a Pacific country). Also expected to
benefit are academic and research communities working on valuation of marine ecosystem services
and wealth accounting. Stakeholder analysis and consultations are inherently part of the project design,
and free flow of information will be promoted among these groups.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to InfoShop
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to lnfoShop
"In country" Disclosure
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to lnfoShop
"In country" Disclosure
Technical Assistance Project
For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument. please indicate type of document
disclosed, if any.

NIA
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
This is a knowledge project will incorporates safeguards mitigation measures in the project design.
Not separate safeguards instruments are required to be prepared and so none are disclosed.

C Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01- Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? J Yes [ ]                           No [X]        NA [ ]
OP/BP 4.04- Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or              Yes [   ]   No [X]     NA [ ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation   Yes [   ]   No [X]     NA [ ]
of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OPIBP 4.10- Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as       Yes [      ]   No [X]     NA [ ]
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
OPIBP 4.12 -Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [        ]   No [X]     NA [ ]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or       Yes [   ]   No [X]     NA [ ]
Sector Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure oflnformation
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [X]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [X]
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional             Yes [   ]   No[    ]   NA [X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [X]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include       Yes [X]     No[    ]   NA [ ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with         Yes [X J    No[    ]   NA [ ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


Ill. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:               Name-: Marea Eleni Hatziolos
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Advisor:
Sector Manager:
