                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 04/12/2012                                     Report No.: AC6685
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Egypt, Arab Republic of             Project ID: P126339
Project Name: Egypt Emergency Labor Intensive Investment Project
Task Team Leader: Alaa Mahmoud Hamed Abdel-Hamid
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 5, 2012      Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2012
Managing Unit: MNSHD                         Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery
                                             Loan
Sector: Other social services (100%)
Theme: Other human development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           200
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                     0.00
         Financing Gap                                                0.00
                                                                      0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [X]     No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to create short-term employment opportunities for
unemployed unskilled and semi-skilled workers in selected locations in Egypt.

3. Project Description
The project would be three years in length, and would be financed by a US$200 million
loan. It would be implemented by the Social Fund for Development.

 Component 1: Employment-Intensive Sub-projects (US$198.0 million)

 This component would include provision of grants to sponsoring agencies to carry out,
by governorate and local authorities, sub-projects consisting of small-scale infrastructure
public works including, but not limited to, the following activities: canal cleaning and
protection, school rehabilitation, housing, and rural roads.

  This component would also include provision of grants to sponsoring agencies to carry
out, by communities, sub-projects consisting of community services including, but not
limited to, solid waste collection, early childhood education, outreach for maternal and
child health, nutrition, population services and youth employment in rural and urban
settings.

 Component 2: Implementation Support (US$ 2.0 million)

 This component would include provision of project implementation support, including
project management, public information and communication, technical verification and
quality assurance, monitoring and evaluation, and social accountability mechanisms.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The activities financed by the project will have a nationwide coverage. However, the
locations will draw on Egypt’s poverty map an other poverty targeting tools, as well as
locations with the highest rates of unemployment figures. Preference will be for those
labor-intensive sub-projects that would self-target the poor.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Zia Al Jalaly (SARDE)
   Mr Alaa Ahmed Sarhan (MNSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed environmental category is “B.? OP 4.01 is triggered. The Task Team has
prepared an Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF)
to address, in a sound environmental manner and in line with the World Bank’s safeguard
policies, any likely negative environmental impacts potentially resulting from the sub-
project activities.

  The ESSAF includes a screening tool to ensure that the subprojects will not entail the
triggering of any Bank safeguards policies except for OP4.01 Environmental Assessment.
Also, the project through the utilization of the screening tool included in the ESSAF will
exclude any category "A" sub-projects from being funded through this project. Category
"B" projects will be subject to the national laws and regulations with regard to the
preparation of an EIA/EMP to mitigate for any negative environmental impacts. The
Bank team, however, through supervision as well as regular monitoring and follow-up
activities, will conduct post reviews for a selected sample of the EA documents of the
sub-projects. The ESSAF also includes examples of the typical environmental impacts
and the relevant mitigation measures of some of the sub-projects that could be potentially
funded by the project.

 The sub-projects of the proposed project are likely to result in a number of positive
environmental and socio-economic impacts. That is, all of the sub-projects are expected
to generate employment opportunities and improve income generation for many
individuals as well as improve the living conditions and livelihoods especially for those
representing the low- or poorest segments of society in targeted areas and communities.
For example, the improvement of housing conditions and solid waste collection for the
poor will lead to positive health and environmental impacts.

  From a social perspective, the Project’s impact is likely to be positive. With the
emphasis on rural areas with priority targetin to Upper Egypt and the targeting of villages
in the lowest 20 percent of the poverty map, the poorest and most vulnerable groups are
likely to see an increase in employment, social and economic opportunities. The youth
are likely to be the primary beneficiaries of employment opportunities, as they have
higher unemployment rates. Females also will be targeted through supporting
community services sub-projects.

 Gender: The impact on women will be positive, especially from the social services sub-
projects, where women would be more likely to be among beneficiaries of the services, as
well as more likely to be employed to deliver the services. The gender differentiated
impacts will be monitored by the monitoring and evaluation framework and will be a
special focus of the social accountability measures to allow for adjustment during
implementation to improve the impact on women. Given that male- under and
unemployment combined with discrimination against the areas where the project will be
located was part of what drove the revolution is Egypt, it is appropriate to target males in
the project areas through infrastructure works.

 Targeting. Under this program, special emphasis is being given to the poorest
communities and vulnerable groups. A well targeted program is one that reaches the
most people affected by a country shock. Targeting beneficiaries of public works
programs poses special challenges. The targeting methods that will be used will depend
on allocation of funds prioritizing poor areas guided by Egypt’s poverty map and based
on the nature of subprojects as follows:

 a. For community infrastructure subprojects using private contractors, the methods that
were mentioned to improve the contracting procedures will be applied given the
undesirable market distortions by setting wages to less than the market value.
 b. For community social services, community targeting will be used combined with a
Proxy Means testing, as determined by the Ministry of Social Affairs.

 Social Accountability. This will be taken in consideration through different
mechanisms as follows: (i) a grievance and transparency mechanism that allow citizens to
provide feedback to the SFD about project implementation and to allow potential
beneficiaries who were not included in the program to seek redress; (ii) public
information on the availability of employment opportunities created by the project at
relevant levels of implementation; (iii) client satisfaction surveys especially for
community social services subprojects; (iv) quality assurance surveys especially for
community infrastructure services using regional universities; and (v) independent
verification of results of project implementation using NGOs.

 However, despite the substantial positive environmental impacts that will result from the
implementation of the sub-projects, there may still be some negative environmental
impacts though potentially minor and not significant.

 This ESSAF has been developed specifically for ensuring environmental and social due
diligence for all the sub-projects funded by this project. It is intended to ensure that, for
all activities financed by the project, all efforts are made to avoid and minimize
environmental and social impacts; and where they cannot be avoided, that these impacts
are identified and the necessary mitigation measures are developed and implemented
following the relevant Egyptian laws as well as the World Bank policies.

 In addition, this Framework is to assist the SFD in screening all the sub-projects for
their likely environmental impacts, identifying documentation and preparation
requirements.

  World Bank BP/OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. Most of the proposed sub-
projects are likely to focus on canal weed reduction and protection of river banks,
rehabilitation of rural housing, maintenance of rural roads, school rehabilitation, and solid
waste collection. Given the nature of the proposed sub-projects, this policy will be
triggered. Individual sub-projects will be screened and assigned the appropriate
environmental categorization and environmental due diligence will be conducted in
accordance with OP 4.01.

 Considering the nature and magnitude of potential environmental impacts from
relatively limited scale and magnitude of reconstruction works, sub-projects classified as
“B? or “C? will be financed by the project. Any sub-projects classified as category ‘A’
will not be eligible for funding under this operation.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
None.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
None.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The SFD will prepare a safeguards screening summary for each sub-project in a format
specified in the Operations Manual. This will summarize: (a) the recommended
categorization according to World Bank policies; and, (b) the proposed environmental
safeguards documentation requirements for the sub-project. The safeguards screening
summary will be part of the sub-project identification package that will be submitted to
the Bank by the SFD.

 The Bank will review the screening of sub-projects on a selective basis to verify that the
screening tools and choice of documents are being applied appropriately and consistently.

 The SFD has 32 Environmental Focal Points (EFPs) from regional offices and
headquarters. In addition, the SFD has qualified environmental consultants.

 In terms of capacity, the SFD has acquired and enhanced its institutional capacity for
implementing safeguards policies throughout the implementation of the previous three
phases of World Bank support to the SFD. Moreover, the SFD has been implementing the
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the Local Area Development (LAD)
Program since 2006. The LAD EMP was reviewed by the Bank and cleared for
disclosure. In addition, the SFD has been implementing since 2010 the EMP for the
World Bank project: Enhancing Access to Finance for Micro and Small Enterprise.

 In addition to the above, the borrower will ensure the following:

  • The proposed project supports only environmental category “B? or “C? sub-projects as
per the World Bank classification f safeguards;
  • No sub-projects entailing resettlement will be eligible for funding under the Project as
per the World Bank policy OP/BP 4.12; and
  • No sub-projects that involve the use or pollution of international waterways will be
financed under this Project;
  • Sub-projects entailing weeding activities shall be manual weeding (i.e., by hand) and
will not involve the use of pesticides. As a result, World Bank OP 4.09 is not triggered;
and
  •Consultation and disclosure requirements will be simplified to meet the special needs
of these operations. The ESSAF will be shared with and disclosed in the SFD and
relevant governorates in Egypt as well as in the World Bank InfoShop.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The SFD will work in close partnership with the governorates, sectoral ministries at the
governorate level, local authorities, NGOs, and CDAs. The SFD will be responsible for
implementing and coordinating the activities of this project with the support of its 27
regional offices which monitors project progress and reporting structures.

 Safeguards documents will be subject to consultation and disclosure (in English and
Arabic) in an accessible place, in a timely manner, in a form and language understandable
to key stakeholders, prior to the finalization of the said documents. Particular attention
will be given to ensure that the project stakeholders receive adequate time and ready
access to draft documents before consultation is carried out. This is essentially to ensure
that the project stakeholders participate in and contribute to the sub-project planning and
implementation, and thereby help minimize any sub-project impacts while maximize the
benefits.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  03/27/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              03/27/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/02/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
  ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

  OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
  review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
  credit/loan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                            Name                           Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Alaa Mahmoud Hamed Abdel-Hamid            04/12/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Alaa Ahmed Sarhan                         04/12/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Zia Al Jalaly                             04/12/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Nina Bhatt                                04/12/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Yasser Aabdel-Aleem Awny El-Gammal        04/12/2012
  Comments:
