                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/27/2011                                   Report No.: AC6472
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P116194                  Original Project Name: EG-Giza North
                                              Power Project
Country: Egypt, Arab Republic of              Project ID: P116198
Project Name: EG-Giza North Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Jianping Zhao
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 4, 2011      Estimated Board Date: October 25, 2011
Managing Unit: MNSSD                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: General energy sector (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           304.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                     360.00
         EC: European Investment Bank                                 164.00
                                                                      524.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to contribute to improving the security and
efficiency of electricity supply by adding a new generation capacity based on the most
efficient thermal power generation technology.

3. Project Description
The proposed project activities to be financed by the additional financing would consist
of the following: (i) the construction of a third 750-MW unit at the existing Giza North
Power Plant with two 750-MW power generation units; and (ii) the construction of a 105-
km gas transmission pipeline to ensure sufficient supply of natural gas to the expanded
power plant. In addition, the design of the Giza North power transmission substation and
outgoing transmission lines is also upgraded to accommodate the larger plant. The power
plant component is implemented by Egyptian Electricity Holding Company (EEHC) and
the gas pipeline component is implemented by Egyptian Natural Gas Co. (GASCO).
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The power plant is located at Giza North, on the El-Beheiry canal in El-Kata village, the
Sixth of October governorate. It is on El-Manashi / El-Khatatba road, with Riah El-
Beheiry canal from the east and agriculture land from the north, south and west sides.
The site is located approximately 30 kilometers northwest of Cairo City and along the
Manshyyet El-Qanater / Etay El-Baroud Regional Road, which runs parallel to the El-
Rayyah El- Beheiry canal. The site is a part of the flat agricultural land partly covered
with fruit trees and palm trees. The site has historically been used for cultivation of wheat
and vegetables and showed no evidence of any current or past encroachment or squatters.
The site with approximately 295,000 square meters of flat land is flanked on three sides
(west, north and east) by agriculture lands with similar land use. The main road runs
parallel to the southern side of the site connecting to the city - Sixth of October, which is
15 km east with a reported population of over a million people. The site did not indicate
presence of any industrial contamination or waste disposal or cultural properties. The site
of the Giza North power plant was chosen due to its proximity to water canal, gas
network and the national electricity transmission network.

  The 105 km Nubaria # Metnama pipeline will be buried below the ground level at a
depth of 2-3 meters. It will run through agricultural lands and cross transportation routes
and waterways. Farming will be temporarily disrupted but no physical resettlement is
expected. After completion of works, the land will be fully restored to original condition,
and farmers will be allowed to cultivate. There will be some restriction within the right of
way with respect to future construction that may potentially damage the pipeline. All
river and water body crossing for the pipeline will use Horizontal Directional Drilling
(HDD) technique to pass under the river bed, which is an internationally accepted
standard practice to minimize environmental obstruction to water course. Most of the
land acquisition will be temporary and limited to the construction period. Only about 4
feddans are expected to be acquired permanently for the valve rooms. With regard to
temporary land acquisition it should be noted that Egypt has a well-established and
transparent crop compensation system that is generally in compliance with Bank
safeguard policies. Farmers will be compensated for loss of agricultural income prior to
the start of physical works. agricultural income. This approach has successfully been
applied in several previous Bank-funded projects and the proposed gas pipeline
construction should benefit from this experience. Compensation rates are well known and
detailed records are kept. Farmers interviewed generally expressed satisfaction with the
system. The exact alignment of the pipeline is not yet finalized but communities have
been consulted, and are reportedly supportive of the project.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Knut Opsal (EASER)
   Mr Sanjay Srivastava (SARDE)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
An ESIA was undertaken for original Bank funded project, which proposed to finance
construction and operation of 2x750 MWe, dual fuel Combined Cycle power plant. The
ESIA was reviewed, cleared and disclosed following a rigorous Bank safeguards review
process. The proposed additional financing includes financing of an additional unit of
750 MWe, increasing the capacity of Giza North power project to 3x750 MWe. The
earlier ESIA study from 2010 was updated by EEHC through independent consultants by
assessing environment and social impacts of another unit of 750 MWe, which are
summarized below.

 The 3x750 MWe gas power plant will continue to be based on Combined Cycle Gas
Turbines (CCGT) including low NOx burners and once through cooling system designed
to meet the World Bank emission and discharge requirements. The additional unit will be
housed in the same original site, which is a flat land purchased directly from a private
owner through a commercial transaction that has been completed and settled. The site has
historically been used for cultivation of wheat and vegetables and showed no evidence of
any current or past industrial or commercial activity or encroachment or squatters.

 Given the location of site, easy and adequate availability of water next to the site, choice
of gas as primary fuel and choice of technology and easy access to highway, the ESIA
indicates that environmental impacts associated with the site will be primarily
construction related such as increased dust, noise, and vibration, which are expected to be
non significant, reversible and non-cumulative. Any adverse environmental impacts that
may result during construction will be mitigated by implementing an Environmental
Management Plan, prepared as part of the ESIA.

 Regarding the operation of the power plant, the Gas Turbine Units will be dry NOx
type, i.e. equipped with low-NOx combustors, minimizing the emission of NOx which is
the key pollutant associated with combustion of natural gas. Detailed design will also
consider further NOx reduction techniques, such as over fire air ports and flue gas re-
circulation. Air pollution control systems will ensure compliance with both the WB and
EEAA emission standards for power plant. Stack emissions to the air from the proposed
plant are expected to be within the Egyptian, as well as the World Bank guidelines, with
full compliance with SO2 standards when firing the emergency light fuel oil. The
anticipated ambient air quality (PM10, NOx and SOx) due to emissions from 3x750
MWe plant will be well within the Egyptian 24-hour limit of 150 ug/m3. The maximum
24-hour ambient impact level of NOx at Giza North power project is 125.6 #g/m3
(excluding the background level). The maximum combined 1-hour impact level,
including the highest value during 2006, is 354.75 #g/m3. The Giza North plant
contributed 327.3 #g/m3 at this location. To ensure continuous compliance with the
emission levels, monitoring stations equipped with meteorological monitoring system
within the power plant site will be installed to regularly monitor air quality in the area.

  Cooling water and process water for power plant operation will be drawn from the El-
  Rayyah El-Beheiry (a small branch out of the mainstream of the Nile river) via an intake
structure. The quantity of the cooling water that will be returned back to the El-Rayyah
El-Beheiry is about 40.8 m3/sec, which represents a loss of only about 0.07%. Potable
water will be supplied to the power plant via the El-Kata local potable water system.
Cooling water will be returned to the El-Rayyah El-Beheiry via a discharge structure
whilst waste process water will be disposed through El-Kata local sewer system or after
treatment via discharge system. No ground water or other surface water will be used
during power plant construction and operation. The Contractors will be responsible for
relevant water/toilet facilities during construction and the need to provide appropriate
services will be specified in their contracts. The aquatic environment surrounding the
project site is characterized by poor biodiversity and no sensitive ecosystems. The project
is expected to have limited and insignificant impacts due to construction of the power
plant, dredging and or due to construction of the intake and discharge structures. In
addition, good site management and engineering practices during construction will ensure
that any residual impacts are reduced to a minimum. A wastewater treatment facility on
the site will treat liquid wastes and produce an effluent suitable for discharge into the
canal. All oil waste effluents will be collected into a separate network and sent to an oil
separator, then disposed of by a specialized company.

 The use of water treatment chemicals will be reduced to the minimum required to
achieve safe and efficient operation of the power plant.

  Power plant operation will result in a heated plume of returned cooling water being
discharged into the El-Rayyah El-Beheiry. Thermal modeling of the discharge plume
shows that, at max. operational conditions, the point at which the plume has decreased in
temperature to 3°C above ambient, lies at approximately within 100 m from the point of
discharge. The temperature of the returned cooling water at the point of discharge
conforms to the Egyptian Standard, and the discharge as modeled satisfies the World
Bank standard of a maximum increase of 3°C above ambient at the edge of the mixing
zone (100 m from the point of discharge).
 The construction of the Giza North power plant is expected to generate an ambient
maximum noise level of 59 dB(A) during the day at the fence of the power plant and 57
dB(A) at night. These worst-case construction noise levels are both within Egyptian and
World Bank guidelines, and for most of the construction periods, the noise levels will be
lower than these values.

 As assessed during the original project, the land requirements for associated
infrastructure will be minimal, and a Resettlement Policy Framework has been developed
that provides details of policies, procedures and implementation arrangements to address
any cases of involuntary resettlement that may arise. In case of land acquisition,
resettlement and rehabilitation will be addressed through preparation of a specific
Resettlement Action Plan.

 The associated infrastructure requirements due to new additional unit of 750 MWe
continue to remain same. The environmental impacts of associated infrastructure such as
gas pipeline, transmission lines, potable water connections and access road are expected
to be localized, short lived, and reversible. Mitigation measures have been provided by
adequate institutional arrangements and budget for effective implementation, supervision
and monitoring. These requirements will be included as conditions of contract on the
contractor and any subcontractors employed to build or operate any part of the power
plant.

 The new gas pipeline connection will be provided to the site from the nearest point from
an existing gas supply junction. This work will be done in consultation with EGAS. The
exact route for this gas supply line is still being determined. The gas pipelines will be
buried underground along the identified route and no land acquisition is expected. Most
of the impacts will be construction related and are expected to be temporary and
insignificant. The anticipated environmental impacts include generation of dust, noise
and workers health and safety issue, which will be mitigated by implementing the
Environmental and Social Management and Monitoring Plan prepared for the revised
power plant project.

 A separate Environmental and Social Impact Assessment has been prepared for the
Nubaria # Metnama pipeline. Finally Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPFs) have been
prepared for the power plant and the Nubaria # Metnama pipeline respectively to ensure
that any land acquisition will be in compliance with both Egyptian legislation and Bank
relevant rules and regulations. The RPFs will as relevantly be used as a basis to identify,
prepare, implement and monitor Resettlement Action Plans.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The updated ESIA indicates that the environmental and social impacts associated with the
power plant including the associated infrastructure, if mitigation measures are
implemented, will not be of major significance, unprecedented or irreversible. The
indirect impacts of associated infrastructures are summarized as follows:
  Impact due to Transmission Lines. The power plant will be connected through eight
lines, connecting to two separate 2x220 kV network interconnected to the National
Unified Power System (NUPS). The length of the proposed transmission line route is
estimated to be 11-15 km long. The project will use manual methods for removal of
shrubs along the right of way for the transmission lines, and does not envisage use of
herbicides or chemicals for maintenance of right of way, therefore, the policy on Pest
Management has not been triggered (OP 4.09). ESIA includes procedures consistent with
the Bank policy on Cultural Properties OPN4.11, for any chance find of any cultural
properties. The majority of affected land owners seem to have fairly large farms, with
average land holdings estimated at 8-10 Feddans. The land required for each tower
footing is expected to be maximum 20x20 meters. This requirement will be almost half
for angle towers compared to suspension towers. Very small pieces of land will be taken
against compensation, but no resettlement will be associated to the power interconnecting
lines.

 Access Road. As part of the development of the power plant, an existing access road
will be paved from the main regional road on the verge of the site west southern
boundary to the inside of the proposed site, over a very short distance of about 1.7 km.
The environment impacts of construction will be mitigated and monitored using the
Environment Management Plan. It is likely that the right of way of the existing road will
be sufficient and additional land acquisition is not expected.

  Potable water connections: Even though potable water network may exist to the power
plant site, the power plant produces its demand of potable water via its own water
treatment system. No potable water pipelines are envisaged to be extended particularly
for the power plant

 Local livelihoods: A few part time fishermen utilize the waters near the planned power
plant. Based upon experience from a number of similar plants elsewhere along the Nile
 River and its branches, as well as the opinions of the fishermen, the impacts of slightly
warmer water on fisheries are likely to be positive.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
A "no action alternative" was considered but was found to be unviable as it will result in
the demand for electricity exceeding supply, with an increasing deficit as demand
increases in future years, which is likely to have much higher social and economic
implications.

 The project also considered various choice of technology for meeting the power needs.
This included: gas/oil-fired steam units; gas/oil-fired combined cycle units; gas/oil-fired
simple cycle combustion turbine units; pumped storage; wind farms; and integrated solar-
combined cycle generating units. Other possible options included #importing electricity#,
#rehabilitation of existing power plants#, #transmission and distribution investment# and
#IPPs#. However, an assessment of various economic, social and environmental
parameters favor a gas/oil-fired combined cycle units of a net 3x750 MWe generating
capacity at Giza North. An analyses of alternatives indicated that compared to other
fossil fuel generating technologies, gas-fired combustion turbine generators have a
relatively low emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2), moderate emission levels of nitrogen
oxides (NOx) and the lowest emission levels (almost traces) of sulfur dioxide (SO2) and
particulates. Analyses of various choice of fuel indicated that Natural gas has the least
and social environmental impacts.

 A comparative analyses of various designs options for power plants was undertaken to
decide the current design, which includes a stack designed to maximize buoyancy and
dispersion of emissions and its height (82 m) exceeding good engineering practice; Gas
Turbines equipped with low NOx combustors minimizing emissions of NOx; direct
cooling water to maximize generating efficiency, minimizing visual impact, noise
emissions and the potential for visible vapor plumes or ground fogging.

 The ESIA considered 3 sites for power generation plant. The selected site was chosen
due its proximity to road, water canal, transmission links and with low environmental and
social impacts. Two alignment options were considered for transmission lines. A shorter
connection had also been discussed, but has not been found acceptable as it will likely go
through a number of orchards as well as cultivated lands.

 The proposed option seems to be less intrusive, both in terms of adverse socio-economic
impacts and land acquisition challenges. The proposed transmission route of 11-15 km
with an estimated 69 transmission towers would be footed mostly (at least 80%) on dry,
unproductive land. The final location of towers and sub stations is yet to be determined
following a detailed land survey. A preliminary walk through of these sites does not
indicate the presence of any sensitive habitats or receptors indicating that the identified
route will cause no significant, cumulative or irreversible environmental impacts.

 There are several conceivable alternative routes for the Nubaria # Metnama pipeline, but
in selecting the proposed alignment GASCO has made a systematic effort to avoid any
buildings and structures, including graveyards, religious sites and any possible historical
areas.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Project Management Units will have the overall responsibility for implementation of
Environment and Social Management Plans and the RPFs. The PMU will hire
environmental and social specialists who will work closely with contractors and
subcontractors to ensure that all environment and social impact mitigation measures
including occupation, health and safety guidelines are mainstreamed into the project
design; monitored and supervised. Assistant Plant Manager reporting directly to
Chairman/ General Manager of CEPC/GNPP and supported by CEPC Project Manager in
collaboration with PGESCo Site Manager will have direct responsibility for the
Environment, Safety and Quality Assurance program on site during construction and
operation. All staff employed at the plant will be trained in general operation of the
power plant; occupational health and safety; and contingency plans and emergency
procedures.

 Egypt has a well established and transparent crop compensation system that is generally
in compliance with Bank safeguard policies. Farmers will be compensated prior to
initiating any construction works for any temporary loss of agricultural income. This has
been applied successfully in several previous Bank-funded projects and compensation
rates are well known and detailed records are kept.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During the preparation of ESIA and RPF for the original project, the client undertook
consultations with a variety of organizations to assist them in the identification of
environmental and social concerns and the overall development of the project. These
stakeholders included the Egyptian Electricity Holding Company (EEHC), Cairo
Electricity Production Company (CEPC), Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency
(EEAA), the 6th of October Governorate and the District Council of the 6th of October,
including Imbaba & Menshat El-Qanater zone, Egyptian General Authority for Shore
Protection, Hydraulics Research Institute and local population leaders. The purpose of
these consultations was primarily to provide information regarding the project, identify
published and non-published sources of relevant data and information relating to the site
and surrounding area, obtain views on the scope of the project, and open channels for
ongoing discussions. The key environmental and social issues raised during these
consultations are summarized in the ESIA report and these issues were subsequently
taken into account in the preparation of ESIA documentation both for local permitting
requirements and this ESIA report. Mini meetings were held with fishermen along the
El-Rayyah El-Beheiry at about 5 km to the north west of the proposed site, the El-Kata
area representatives, Imbaba and Menshat El-Qanater District Administration, General
Authority for Fishery Development and two active NGOs in the 6th of October zone,
"October for Environment & Development", 6 of October City, and "Youth and
Environment Friends", Siqil, Ossim.

 In addition to continued consultation during the ESIA process for the original project,
formal consultations were undertaken by EEHC and CEPC to discuss the ESIA/ESMP
and RPF. A scoping session was convened on October 21, 2009 where a wide selection
of stakeholders participated. A second public consultation meeting was held on January
11, 2010. No scoping session was held for the additional financing, but a public
consultation session was convened at the draft ESIA stage. On February 17, 2011 36
persons participated in the Nubaria # Metnama pipeline consultations, and April 19, 2011
over 150 persons participated in consultations on the power plant. The details of the
above meetings have been outlined in the ESIAs for the original project and AF
respectively, and the documentation includes Q & A, newspaper advertisements,
invitations, consultation agendas, list of participants, nontechnical summary, as well as
presentation slides and photos.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/31/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/31/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/23/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                              07/07/2011
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/31/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/31/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/23/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?           Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)       Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the       Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process           Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector     Yes
Manager review the plan?
  OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
  Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         No
  If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           N/A
  requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
  to the RVP prepared and sent?
  Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        N/A
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             No
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Jianping Zhao                             07/26/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Sanjay Srivastava                         07/26/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Knut Opsal                                07/26/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms Hana Salah                                07/26/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Hocine Chalal                             07/26/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Jonathan D. Walters                       07/26/2011
  Comments:
