                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/15/2011                                     Report No.: AC6045
1. Basic Project Data
Country: El Salvador                         Project ID: P117157
Project Name: STRENGTHENING PUBLIC HEALTH CARE SYSTEM
Task Team Leader: Rafael A. Cortez
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 26, 2011     Estimated Board Date: July 14, 2011
Managing Unit: LCSHH                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Health (100%)
Theme: Health system performance (60%);Population and reproductive health
(20%);Child health (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            80.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objectives of the Project are to: (i) expand the coverage and quality of priority health
services for target populations, with improvements in equity for utilization; and (ii)
strengthen the stewardship capacity of the Ministry of Health (MINSAL) to manage
essential public health functions.

3. Project Description
Component 1: Expansion of Priority Health Services and Programs (US$45 million). This
Component seeks to expand the coverage of target populations with a comprehensive set
of essential health interventions and improve delivery of priority programs focused on
health promotion, disease prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation. To ensure the
delivery of high quality services under priority health programs, this Component will
finance equipment, medical supplies and technical assistance to manage these
interventions and programs, through two subcomponents.

 Subcomponent 1.1: Strengthening Priority Health Services and Programs (US$27.5
million). This subcomponent will finance support to strengthening priority health services
under Integral and Integrated Health Care Service Networks (RIISS) at all levels.
MINSAL is in the process of defining a comprehensive set of essential health
interventions, the recurrent costs of which are financed through the State budget. To
complement MINSAL’s recurrent expenditures, this subcomponent will finance the
capital investments required to implement the Primary Health Care Strategy in eligible
municipalities on a gradual basis, including medical equipment, maintenance and minor
rehabilitation of facilities to allow installation of equipment. This subcomponent will also
strengthen the delivery of selected priority public health programs, including those
addressing maternal health, reproductive and sexual health, teenage pregnancy, child
health, nutrition, dengue control, and chronic kidney disease, through the financing of
goods, technical assistance, and training in eligible municipalities. The MINSAL, through
the Family and Community Health Teams, will identify and register their target
populations and monitor delivery of health care services using the "Ficha Familiar" as the
main instrument. The collected data will be sent to the Directorate of Communication and
Information at the central level through the SIBASI and Health Regions. A technical
review will assess the Project’s results in terms of outputs and health indicators included
in the MINSAL’s Single Unified Health Information System. The MINSAL has
committed to complementing the investment of the proposed Project with the necessary
recurrent expenditures (in the eligible municipalities) to ensure increased coverage and
quality of health services.

  Subcomponent 1.2: National Medical Emergencies System (US$17.5 million). This
subcomponent will support the implementation of the action plan of the National Medical
Emergencies System in 16 eligible hospitals and strengthening of coordination with the
hospital system and other providers, such as MINSAL, Salvadorian Social Security
Institute (ISSS), Ministry of Defense, the National Civil Police, Fondo Solidario para la
Salud (FOSALUD), and the Red Cross. The proposed Project will finance the installation
of a national call system, the purchase of ambulances and resuscitation room equipment,
training of staff and strengthening medical emergency response at the community level.

 Component 2: Institutional Strengthening (US$35 million). This Component seeks to
strengthen the capacity of the MINSAL’s essential public health functions in order to
reinforce its institutional and management capacity at all levels of care. To this end, this
Component will finance three subcomponents:

 Sub-Component 2.1: Strengthening Stewardship and Monitoring Capacity of MINSAL
(US$26 million). This subcomponent will finance: (i) strengthening of the Single Unified
Health Information System; (ii) implementation of a national pharmaceutical policy. This
includes activities to improve quality, efficiency and security in the access of rational use
of medicines as well as transparency in procurement; and (iii) activities of the National
Health Institute, including training of clinicians and lab technicians, surveillance,
knowledge generation and research, and Central Laboratory investments.

 Subcomponent 2.2: Responding to Public Health Emergencies (US$5 million). The aim
of this subcomponent is to strengthen the capacity of Government to respond to public
health emergencies. As such, this subcomponent will finance the development of a public
health emergency preparedness plan for the most likely public health emergencies in
coordination with other relevant sectors. In the event of a public health emergency, and
the Government’s subsequent declaration , this subcomponent will finance the immediate
purchase of medical equipment, medical and non-medical supplies, operational costs, and
other necessary expenses related to recovery efforts and defined in the preparedness plan.
It will not finance any activities related to construction or pest management (e.g.
fumigation of houses or the buying of pesticides). After two-thirds of the loan has been
disbursed or three years of project implementation (whichever comes first), the
Government may request that any remaining funds for this subcomponent be re-allocated
to other Project Components.

  Subcomponent 2.3: Project Management and Monitoring (US$3.6 million). This
Component will finance: (i) monitoring of Project activities through semi-annual,
external technical reviews and annual health facility surveys to assess the achievement of
health coverage and results targets, and carrying out of an impact evaluation; and (ii)
support to the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in carrying out the management,
monitoring and supervision activities of the Project, including training and financial
audits, as well as strengthening the MINSAL units that will perform the Project’s
fiduciary activities.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The proposed Project will benefit 2.1 million people who are among the poorest in 92
municipalities. The population in these municipalities has been identified as having the
greatest health needs, requiring financial protection, and lacking access to disease
prevention and health promotion services at the primary care level.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Mary Lisbeth Gonzalez (LCSSO)
   Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN)
   Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter (LCSSO)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed Project is expected to have a positive social impact on the population of El
Salvador, with particular attention on the urban and rural poor including indigenous
people and, therefore, triggers the indigenous peoples safeguard policy (OP/BP 4.10).
The proposed Project seeks to expand basic health services for the underserved,
particularly women and children. An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF)
was prepared by the MINSAL to guide Project implementation so that it benefits the
targeted populations in a culturally appropriate way. The IPPF was discussed and
approved by MINSAL through consultations with the indigenous community and
associations. It was disclosed in-country on the MINSAL#s website on March 10, 2011
and in the World Bank#s InfoShop on March 22, 2011. The main recommendations of
the IPPF are to: (i) provide training for the MINSAL staff on cultural appropriateness
strategies; (ii) improve an informed consultation process; (iii) carry out the
implementation of an action plan through which indigenous peoples receive culturally-
sensitive and appropriate health services; (iv) monitor and evaluate the effective
implementation of the action plan; and (v) conduct mid-term and final evaluations of the
social impact of the Project. The Project will not finance any activity which includes land
or property acquisition and therefore, OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) is not
triggered.

  Although it triggers the environmental safeguard policy (OP/BP 4.01), the proposed
Project is categorized as Environmental Category C given that it is not expected to
generate adverse environmental impacts. An environmental assessment of the potential
impacts of the Project was conducted and an environmental management plan,
satisfactory to the Bank, was developed by MINSAL and was disclosed in-country on the
MINSAL’s website on March 10, 2011 and published in InfoShop on March 22, 2011.
The Project’s activities are not expected to generate adverse environmental impacts. The
Project will support small-scale rehabilitation of existing health care facilities to ensure
installation of appropriate medical equipment required to expand the delivery of health
services. During implementation, supervision will focus on monitoring any potential
environmental impacts related to (i) health waste management in health facilities and
laboratories; and (ii) minor rehabilitation of health facilities (related to the installation of
equipment) that will be financed under Component 1 of the Project. During project
supervision, the Bank team will also monitor progress on implementation of the
environmental management action plan to ensure that it meets Bank standards. The
MINSAL’s Environmental Unit has been rated by the Bank as satisfactorily able to
support environmental protection and conservation.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The proposed Project will directly benefit the Salvadorian population, with particular
attention on the urban and rural poor including indigenous people in El Salvador in the
eligible "municipalities". The Project seeks to improve the coverage of health services,
especially for the poor and those in remote rural areas through priority programs, such as
adolescent reproductive health, maternal and child mortality, malnutrition, reproductive
and sexual health, chronic kidney disease, dengue, and mental health disease. The
capacity building interventions will also benefit indigenous peoples in that the personnel
working in primary health care services will receive training to better understand
indigenous and traditional medicine and care in the areas of intervention of the Project.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
MINSAL is well aware of the fact that indigenous people have not yet benefitted
appropriately and adequately from health care services for cultural reasons. The Project
has prepared an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) which includes
recommendations for better planning of basic health services which will be better adapted
to the cultural realities of these populations. The IPPF is based on already existing
documentation on indigenous people’s health, which has been prepared by indigenous
associations in collaboration with PAHO. This IPPF will be implemented in project
intervention areas. The Government is addressing indigenous population social
challenges under the Integrated Health Program.

 The MINSAL will train and incorporate a safeguard team to follow up the
implementation of the IPPF and coordinate with MINSAL, indigenous communities, and
indigenous people’s organizations to ensure culturally appropriateness of health sector
policies in the project intervention areas.

  The IPPF includes the following sections: (i) framework of reference; (ii) description of
the project; (iii) possible effects of the activities of the project; (iv) indigenous population
estimates; (v) methodological framework of processes related to information,
consultation and participation; (vi) guidelines for the social assessment preparation; (vii)
indigenous peoples planning framework; (viii) institutional requirement planning
framework for strengthening institutional management of the MINSAL; (ix) monitoring
and evaluation system of IPPF; (x) mechanisms for the dissemination of the Indigenous
People’s Plan developed under the IPPF; and (xi) mechanisms for attention and resolution
of claims of indigenous population.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The indigenous and other rural populations in El Salvador are important stakeholders of
the proposed Project, including administrative and social organizations. Although among
the rural poor it is sometimes difficult to distinguish indigenous peoples, mainly due to
the stigma of being indigenous in El Salvador, the major groups include (i) the
Nahua/Pipiles, who are the most numerous, live mainly in the Department of Sonsonate,
and who speak the major indigenous language in El Salvador, the Nahuatl; (ii) the Lencas
live in the east of the country and speak Poton Lenca, which appears to be a language
almost lost; (iii) the Cacaopera live in the Morazan Department and their language, Ulwa,
is being taught by leaders in the context of a program supported by the Ministry of
Education; and (iv) the Chorti people are very few and live in the Ahuachapan
Department close to Guatemala.

  Other major stakeholders are the institutions which are implementing the Project, such
as the Regions, the SIBASIs, the hospitals, Municipal Health Units, Health Centers,
Maternal Health Care Centers, and Rural Nutrition Centers. NGOs and volunteers are
other stakeholders. One very important stakeholder category is that of indigenous
traditional healers and health practitioners, such as "parteras" and "sobadores", because
they will play a significant role in bridging the gap between western and traditional
medicine and health care. The indigenous people’s associations, such as the Salvadorian
Indigenous National Coordinator Council and National Committee for Development,
have and continue to play a very important role as intermediaries and vehicles through
which indigenous people#s health care models and action plans have been elaborated, in
particular with the support of PAHO.

 Consultations with stakeholders are, and will continue to be, an ongoing, interactive
process for MINSAL, and in particular with the indigenous community. People at
different levels of the institutional health framework are always involved in consultations
with the community in one way or another. The mid-term and final impact evaluations
will include an indigenous people section that addresses an orientation towards
indigenous socio-cultural differences, consultations in indigenous communities, response
to their health needs and practices, and the Project’s contribution in solving social
exclusion in the delivery of health care services in its areas of intervention.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     02/25/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 03/10/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  03/22/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     02/25/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 03/10/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              03/22/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             No
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Rafael A. Cortez                       04/22/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Gunars H. Platais                      03/09/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Mary Lisbeth Gonzalez                  03/01/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                  Mr Fernando Montenegro Torres                 04/22/2011
  Comments: The ISDS was approved by Fernando Montenegro Torres (Acting SM) and Sajitha
  Bashir (SL)on April 22, 2011.
