                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/16/2011                                    Report No.: AC6534
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Ethiopia                              Project ID: P127507
Project Name: Agricultural Growth Project - Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Achim Fock
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 12,          Estimated Board Date: December 1, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: AFTAR                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (45%);Irrigation and drainage
(35%);Agricultural extension and research (20%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (39%);Rural markets (22%);Land
administration and management (16%);Water resource management (16%);Rural policies
and institutions (7%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                          0.00
         Global Agriculture and Food Security Program                     50.00
                                                                          50.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                     Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The development objective of the proposed AGP is to increase agricultural productivity
and market access for key crop and livestock Products in targeted woredas with increased
participation of women and youth. The objective of the Additional Financing (AF) of the
AGP is identical to that of the original AGP; and the design / component-structure also
remains as originally designed. The Project Appraisal Document (PAD) of the AGP
already identified a financing gap of US$50 million and this AF closes this financing gap.
In addition, and given that additional resources were secured from bilateral donors, the
AF allows for an intensification of selected AGP interventions and the involvement of a
newly-created Government Agricultural Transformation Agency (ATA).

3. Project Description
Approach. To achieve its PDO, the AGP will: (i) focus on smallholder famers that
contribute to the majority (around 90 percent) of agricultural production in the country;
(ii) adopt an approach that seeks to scale up existing best practices and innovations
among public sector institutions as well as among farmers and the private sector in both
agricultural production and post harvest value addition with due emphasis on natural
resource conservation and rehabilitation; (iii) strengthen the ability of public and private
advisory service providers to respond to smallholder demand for new technologies,
advice on improved practices and investment in infrastructure; (iv) focus on improving
knowledge of and access to existing technologies that have proved to be effective among
some farmers;(vi) invest in rural infrastructure such as small scale irrigation; watershed
management, including water harvesting and micro-irrigation technologies; rural roads;
market infrastructure and possibly other areas such as the development of alternative
energy sources. Most interventions will be implemented in a decentralized manner,
based on bottom up planning by local communities or farmer groups (whether formal
cooperatives and cooperative unions or informal common interest groups).

 Expected Benefits. Specific benefits expected to arise from the AGP interventions
include: improved production and productivity, value addition and market opportunities,
resulting in increased incomes, employment opportunities and food security of the
smallholder households engaged in the commodities targeted by the AGP. These benefits
will primarily result from: (i) increased production and productivity; (ii) reduced post-
harvest losses; (iii) improved access to goods, services, markets and information; (iv)
reduced transaction costs; (v) improved product quality and increased producer (farm
gate) prices; and (vi) improved economies of scale. Increased output, income and
employment in the AGP woredas is expected to result in increased demand for goods and
services, which is expected to generate additional income and employment effects, and
increase GoE tax revenues. As the AGP is supporting relatively high potential areas in
the production of major crops and livestock, the increased output from the targeted areas
will increase national production, and thereby contribute to growth in the overall GDP
and national food security. In addition, increased exports and/or reduced imports will
result in foreign exchange earnings/savings. Furthermore, it is expected that consumers
will benefit from reduced consumer prices and improved availability of food
commodities of better quality, which would in turn improve food security.

 Beneficiaries. The primary beneficiaries of the AGP are the small- and medium-size
farmers in the 83 selected AGP woredas (districts) which have a total population of 9.8
million. An estimated 2 million agricultural households in 2,109 kebeles (villages) will
primarily benefit in the following ways: (i) directly, through capacity building, support to
farmer sub-projects, value chain enterprises and irrigated agriculture; and (ii) indirectly,
through improved public and private advisory services, road and market infrastructure,
and sustainable watershed management. The project will focus on the participation of
women and women-headed households (about 19 percent of total) as well as the youth.
Other beneficiaries of the AGP are farmer organizations, large commercial farms, traders,
agro-processors and public and private advisory services.

 Component Design. The AGP has two technical components, Component 1:
Agricultural Production and Commercialization and Component 2: Small scale Rural
Infrastructure Development and Management, and a Project Management and Monitoring
and Evaluation Component. Component 3.
 Component 1: Agricultural Production and Commercialization. The objective of this
component is to strengthen the capacity of farmer organizations and their service
providers to scale up best practices and adopt improved technologies in production and
processing, and to strengthen marketing and processing of selected commodities through
engagement with private sector stakeholders. It would support strengthening farmer-
market linkages and promote agri-business enterprises. The component would have the
following three sub-components: Sub-component 1.1: Institutional Development and
Strengthening; Sub-component 1.2: Scaling-up of Best Practices; and Sub-component
1.3: Market and Agribusiness Development (to be funded through USAID and, possibly
other development partners).
 Component 2: Small scale Rural Infrastructure Development and Management. The
objective of this component is to support the construction, rehabilitation and/or
improvement, and management of small-scale rural infrastructure to improve
productivity, and to further develop and increase the efficiency of key value chains
through improved access to markets. The component would have the following two sub-
components: Sub-component 2.1: Small Scale Agricultural Water Development and
Management; and Sub-component 2.2: Small Scale Market Infrastructure Development
and Management
 Component 3: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation. The objective of
this component is to support effective coordination and management of the AGP at all
levels of implementation, to establish an effective monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
system, and to create a learning environment for continuous improvement of the AGP
design and other agricultural growth interventions. The component would have the
following two sub-components: Sub-component 3.1: Project (AGP) Management; and
Sub-component 3.2: Monitoring and Evaluation.

 The ATA would focus on three areas : household irrigation (under Component 2.1),
monitoring and evaluation (under Component 3.2) and strengthening of policy linkages
(under Component 3.2).

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
AGP is a five-year program implemented in the four major regions. Specific sites for the
implementation of project activities are not yet known. To achieve maximum impact in
the specified period and given limited resources, the program targets clusters of high
agricultural potential areas (AGP woredas) in the four main regional states; namely,
Amhara, Oromia, Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples Region (SNNPR) and
Tigray. Based on criteria such as suitability for agriculture, potentials for irrigation,
access to infrastructure and institutional capacity, a total of 83 woredas are selected; i.e.,
22 woredas in Amhara, 34 woredas in Oromia, 19 woredas in SNNPR and 8 woredas in
Tigray.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Yasmin Tayyab (AFTCS)
   Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour (AFTEN)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                   X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Environmental Category assigned to the AGP is Category B, predicated on the fact
that environmental risks and social impacts may be minimal, manageable and, in most
cases, reversible. The proposed operation will impact positively on the biophysical
environments since it will support land management (improvement of soil and water as
well as watersheds). In so much as the operation will impact positively on the
biophysical, this project still triggers six World Bank safeguard policies namely:
  Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), related to possible risks associated with the
biophysical environment;
  Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09), although AGP funds will not be used to manufacture,
purchase and distribute agrochemicals, it is likely that support through AGP to
agriculture would encourage farmers to use more inorganic fertilizers and pesticides, so
triggering OP/BP 4.09 is predicated on the possibility of agrochemical application and
disposal. The Pest Management Guideline in the ESMF is being updated to include
additional details on the risks, potential impacts, and mitigation measures, as well as
triggers for the preparation of site-specific Pest Management Plans;
  Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), because based on the finding of the Social
Assessment chance find seem likely and cannot be ruled out;
  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), predicated on the assumption that the
subprojects are likely to result in land take, loss of income and sources of livelihood;
  The proposed AGP will not undertake any sub-projects that will displace people. While
individual sub-projects are not yet identified, there will be support for activities such as
small scale infrastructure to improve productivity as well as other rural infrastructure
such as feeder roads that will affect land holdings of individual farmers. The AGP has
developed an ESMF which includes a resettlement policy framework (RPF) prior to
appraisal of the original project. While the project has not required land
acquisition/involuntary resettlement to date, given the increasing possibility that some
land acquisition activities may take place during project implementation, the RPF is
being updated to include additional information about the legal and institutional
framework, eligibility, entitlements, and implementation arrangements. This updated RPF
will be used for this project and other similar projects in the agricultural sector. All
Community Action Plans will be assessed and screened based on the guidelines provided
in the existing RPF and the Project Implementation Manual (PIM).
  Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), while AGP would not finance any new establishment or
rehabilitation of large-scale irrigation facilities and dams above 15 meters, AGP might
finance check dams or small dams for water storage and will finance activities that may
rely on the performance of an existing dam.
  Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50), because AGP woredas are located in
international water basins such as that of the Blue Nile and Omo Rivers, and while the
impact of individual sub-projects such as small-scale irrigation would be negligible and
the cumulative abstractions minor, the policy is triggered. In accordance with OP/BP
7.50, riparian countries have therefore been formally informed.
  AGP activities will not be undertaken in the natural habitats; neither will AGP support
cutting down of forests and converting these into agricultural lands. The ESMF would
suggest screening criteria to be used when selecting AGP sites so that natural habitats and
forests are completely avoided. AGP will not finance any activities that would impact
adversely in forests, natural and sensitive habitats. The same principle and process
applies for areas under dispute between Ethiopia and any of its neighbors, so Projects in
Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) is not triggered. Finally, the social assessment has
determined that there are no indigenous groups in the woredas that the sub-projects will
be implemented in.
  This operation will finance activities, especially those related to groundwater
abstraction, small-scale irrigation schemes, establishment of product storage facilities and
large-scale adoption of innovative agricultural and livestock productivity-enhancing
approaches. Likely environmental (loss of vegetation cover, biodiversity loss, pollution,
contamination, etc), health (e.g., pesticide poisoning) and safety (e.g., accidents at work
camps) risks may be associated with pre-construction, construction/rehabilitation and
operation of facilities, use and disposal of agrochemicals. Inappropriate use of
groundwater resources (through over-use, agrochemical sippage, etc.) could result in
aquifer depletion and contamination, affecting water quantity and quality in neighboring
communities and downstream in riparian countries.
  Recognizing that AGP could result in potential adverse risks, AGP has formulated an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that describes in broad terms
how potential project related risks and impacts associated with all the World Bank
safeguard policies would be mitigated and addressed before and during implementation
of project activities. In addition, it describes the institutional responsibilities, capacities,
financial resources and monitoring needs essential to implement mitigation measures.
Also, to guide implementation at the woreda and kebele level, the ESMF has a simple,
easy to use checklist that woreda level environmental and social experts could use to
screen and vet subprojects against their environmental and social soundness before these
are approved for support. Furthermore, the ESMF has emphasized the need to undertake
site-specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and Resettlement
Action Plans (RAPs) for those subprojects that are likely to cause significant negative
environmental and social impacts.
  While it is unlikely that the sub-projects will cause any potential large scale, significant
and/or irreversible environmental and social safeguard impacts, there is a likely chance of
small scale impacts. There are community groups and households who are victims of
tribal and administrative boundary conflicts. Earlier inhabitants and local groups land,
trees, and natural resources are at stake due to high influx of migrants. Resentments are
observed among farmers whose communal land is given out to large scale commercial
farms in a situation where an extreme land shortage exists. The first category of those
identified groups are being marginalized, others are in a stiff competition for natural
resources (grazing and open land, water and trees) that will affect the implementation of
AGP Component 2 (PIM 5.2. Rural Infrastructure Development and Management) as
well some aspects of Component 1 (PIM 5.1.) to support farmers# sub-projects in
activities related to livestock. The project triggers OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement in
line with the Bank safeguard policies. The access to and use of common or natural
resources need to be safeguarded through public consultations. Consultations must take
place between all those traditionally inhabiting an area with those external people who
made agricultural investments in the area. The ESMF has developed mechanisms through
which kebele-based arbitrations and compensations are implemented. At kebele level,
grievance redressing complaints and issues related to the implementation of sub-projects
that affect private and community properties will be incorporated in participatory sub-
project planning guidelines and screening criteria in the Project Implementation Manual.
  In connection with its support of small dams, per the requirements of OP 4.37, the AGP
has developed Small Dams Safety Guideline, which helps provide potential owners of
small dams with the requirements that they must meet to construct, operate and manage
small dams.
  Substantial numbers of community-based sacred and ritual sites of religious and cultural
importance, (sacred trees, springs, rivers, ritual sites, etc) have been identified by Social
Assessment in all target locations, thereby triggering of OP4.11 Physical Cultural
Resources. Implementation of AGP sub-components in the area of small irrigation
schemes, water reservoir and dam excavation and rural roads construction may likely
affect physical cultural resources (PCRs). A set of procedures and measures for ensuring
that PCRs are considered in the designing process of AGP sub-projects is part of the
ESMF. Mandatory measures are detailed when a PCR safeguard is triggered during a sub
project screening process.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
AGP resources are expected to support institutional building of farmer organizations,
processing and marketing entities and strengthening advisory and extension services,
sustainable land management (including soil & water conservation, watershed
protection), improvement in agricultural and livestock productivity and socially and
environmentally sound subprojects such as crop and fodder production, agro-forestry.
This operation will also finance small-scale rural infrastructure including micro-irrigation
and market related infrastructure such as foot paths, footbridges, rural side drainage, rural
roads, market centers, and community warehouses. Woreda experts and kebele members
will receive training in environmental and social safeguard management during
implementation of AGP and if any potential long-term or cumulative impacts are
anticipated it is believed that these could be detected early enough so that they can easily
be avoided or mitigated. In view of this, there is no anticipation of any indirect and/or
long-term negative impact in the areas where AGP will be operating. It is anticipated that
AGP will result in long-term positive safeguard impacts in the project area because of the
emphasis the project places on ensuring sustainable agricultural production practices.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The formulation of the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) as a
screening and vetting tool for assessing the environmental and social soundness of
subprojects is designed to eliminate subprojects likely to have irreversible environmental
and social impacts upfront. The ESMF also contains a positive and negative list of
subprojects to be supported or rejected under the AGP financing.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Recipient and, specifically, the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) has experience
working with Bank projects but would need support to augment safeguards management
and oversight capacity. In early 2009, the federal EPA delegated safeguard review
authority to seven technical line Ministries and MoA was one of them. Safeguard
management augmentation would likely be sourced and secured from country-based
allies including the federal Environmental Protection Authority (EPA), the regional
authorities responsible for environmental management and protection and local
consulting firms. In some of the targeted regions, these public agencies are also
responsible for land management/administration and land-use planning. The federal EPA
and the regional level entities do have reasonably good safeguard management capacities,
especially in environmental safeguards and particularly in areas related to conducting
reviews of safeguard reports and monitoring implementation of safeguard management
action plans (e.g., environmental management plans, pest management plans,
resettlement action plans, etc).
  MoA capacity in both environmental and social safeguard management in general is
weak. This has been duly recognized by the MoA as well as the Bank. Cognizant of this,
various measures have already been taken to improve safeguards implementation,
including the recruitment of environmental specialists both at the federal (MoA) and
regional (Bureaus of Agriculture (BoA)) levels as well as training organized by the MoA
on the ESMF for experts in the AGP Implementing Agencies (IAs). The upcoming
safeguards training program for Ethiopia will include all the newly recruited safeguards
staff from the MoA and BoA. It is expected that such measures i.e. training and capacity
building will continue to be undertaken during implementation phase to enhance the
capacities of public, private and civil society capacity for environmental and social
management, including those outside safeguards such as gender, participation, inclusion,
elite capture, etc. The Ministry of Agriculture has also developed a Small Dams Safety
Guideline to guide the proper construction, operation and management of small dams.
Overall, the preparation for implementing safeguard policy under the overall AGP so far
is rated as satisfactory.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
--



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    03/01/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                03/05/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 11/15/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    03/01/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                03/05/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 11/15/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    03/01/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                03/05/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 11/15/2011
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
The ESMF referred to above is that for the overall AGP. It includes chapters on RPF and
Pest Management Guidelines and has been received by the Bank on March 1, 2010, and
disclosed in-country on March 5, 2010. I was resubmitted to Infoshop under this AGP
Financing and received on November 15, 2011.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    No
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                           No
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts      No
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements        No
been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         Yes
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        N/A
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Achim Fock               08/22/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour    08/23/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Yasmin Tayyab            08/23/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi    10/20/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks   10/20/2011
  Comments:
