                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/02/2011                                     Report No.: AC6498
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P113220                  Original Project Name: Productive Safety
                                              Net APL III
Country: Ethiopia                             Project ID: P126430
Project Name: Productive Safety Nets Program (APL III) Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Wolter Soer
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 9,         Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: AFTSP                          Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                              Loan
Sector: Other social services (93%);Public administration- Other social services
(5%);Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (2%)
Theme: Social safety nets (86%);Rural non-farm income generation (8%);Natural
disaster management (3%);Vulnerability assessment and monitoring (3%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            270.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
         Financing Gap                                                256.50
                                                                      256.50
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]       No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The overall objective of the Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP) is to contribute to
reducing household vulnerability and improving resilience to shocks and promote
sustainable community development in food insecure areas of rural Ethiopia. This will
be achieved through continued consolidation of a safety net system that (i) provides
timely, predictable, and appropriate transfers to beneficiary households, thereby enabling
effective consumption smoothing and avoiding asset depletion; (ii) creates productive and
sustainable community assets that contribute to the large-scale rehabilitation of severely
degraded areas; (iii) stimulates local markets through demand linkages; (iv) establishes
more effective responses to drought shocks to avoid increasing destitution among
affected households; and (v) integrates and effectively supports critical interventions that
build assets, promote increased productivity, and encourage diversification at the
household level.
 The specific Project Development Objective for APL III is: Improved effectiveness and
efficiency of the Productive Safety Net Program and related Household Asset Building
Program (HABP) for chronically food insecure households in rural Ethiopia.

  The higher-level goal to which the PSNP aims to contribute is sustainable graduation
from food insecurity for a large number of households in the Program.

  In May 2011, the Government requested that the Bank consider an additional financing
of US$270 million for FY2012. The objectives of this Additional Financingare:
  #      The proposed US$270.0 million additional financing will contribute towards
filling the existing financing gap of US$ 526.46 million. Additional support from other
partners is under preparation to close the remaining gap.
  #      These resources will allow IDA to continue to finance and strengthen the PSNP
APL III, which unlike the previous two phases includes the Household Asset Building
component that requires significant effort and resources. The additional resources will
allow IDA to continue to strengthen design and efficiency aspects of the PSNP to achieve
its objectives of improving food security, using a multisectoral approach. Further, it will
enable PSNP to incorporate more firmly a systematic disaster risk management and
climate adaptability agenda into the social safety nets program of Ethiopia.
  #      The additional financing will also ensure that the program maintains its ability to
provide timely resources for transitory food insecurity in response to shocks within
existing program areas. Part of the additional financing will be used to replenish the risk
financing facility of the program, which has been triggered to respond to transitory needs
related to the current drought situation.

3. Project Description
The PSNP and HABP are targeted to 8.3 million chronically food insecure citizens,
roughly 10% of the population, who reside in 320 rural woredas (out of 800 nationwide)
in eight of Ethiopia#s ten Regions. APL III includes four components, which the
Additional Financing will continue financing:

  1.     Component 1 (US$120 million): Safety Net Grants will provide cash and in-kind
transfers to chronically food insecure households through: (i) labor intensive public
works for able-bodied households; and (ii) direct support to labor-poor households. This
component will also provide performance incentives to woredas to improve the
timeliness and predictability of transfers to households.
  2.     Component 2 (US$140 million): Drought Risk Financing aims to provide timely
resources for transitory food insecurity in response to shocks within the existing program
areas. This component will be financed using a contingent grant, which will provide
resources for scaling up activities under Component 1 in response to localized or
intermediate weather or price-related shocks in PSNP woredas.
  3.     Component 3 (US$5 million): Institutional Support for the PSNP will support
institutional strengthening activities focusing on (i) program management at all levels;
(ii) capacity building to fill any remaining gaps in general and those specific to the Risk
Financing facility; (iii) monitoring and evaluation; and (iv) transparency and
accountability.
 4.     Component 4 (US$5 million): Support to the HABP will finance a core set of
interventions aimed at: (i) strengthening the delivery of demand-driven and market-
oriented advice for household investments; (ii) improving the efficiency and effectiveness
of financial service delivery to food insecure households; and (iii) supporting program
management.

  Around 80% of beneficiaries would participate in labor-intensive public works, building
productive community assets that are planned within a watershed management
framework. These community activities will include micro- and small-scale area
closures/woodlots, agro-forestry, soil and water conservation measures such as hillside
terracing and soil bunds, mulching of degraded areas, gully control, community roads,
stream diversions, shallow wells, spring development, small dams, water ponds, drainage
canals, vegetative fencing, fodder system collection, multi-purpose nurseries,
construction and repair of classrooms, health posts and latrines, and the construction of
child care centres. Around 20% of beneficiaries would be from labor-poor households
including elderly, chronically sick or otherwise incapacitated households and these would
receive transfers as Direct Support.

 Under the HABP, households have access to business-planning support and micro-credit
to engage in household asset-building activities such as animal fattening, bee-keeping,
and other income-generating activities.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project will be country-wide. Public works activities under the PSNP and under the
HABP will be carried out in 320 woredas in Oromia, Amhara, SNNPR, Tigray, Afar,
Somali, and Harar Regional States, and Dire Dawa City Administration, in locations
selected on specific criteria outlined in the Government's PSNP Program Implementation
Manual.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Ian Leslie Campbell (AFTSP)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
From an environmental and social safeguard standpoint, the proposed operation is a
Category B project, since impacts of the project, for the most part, will be minimal and
manageable to an acceptable level.

 One of the key objectives of the PSNP is to address the underlying causes of food
insecurity, to which land degradation is universally agreed to be a major contributor,
particularly in highland areas. Thus the design of the PSNP public works program, is
intended to have environmentally positive impacts. Indeed, these activities, which
include, for example, soil and water conservation, land reclamation and improvement of
community infrastructure, have already been shown to constitute a vehicle for significant
environmental transformation and enhanced productivity.

 It is nonetheless common knowledge that past mass-mobilization efforts in
environmental rehabilitation in Ethiopia have sometimes failed or have been abandoned,
as a result of which the environment has returned to its degraded state. Furthermore,
negative impacts may occur if the locations or designs of the community activities do not
follow good environmental practice, or if they are incompatible with optimum overall
management of the watershed. Typical negative impacts that might occur from the micro-
and small-scale community activities include the following:

 Small-scale Irrigation Development Impacts
 #     Changes in natural drainage patterns upstream and downstream
 #     Depletion of surface or groundwater sources
 #     Deterioration in soil quality due to poorly managed irrigation; potential
waterlogging and salinisation of soils, leading to agricultural abandonment and land
degradation
 #     Runoff from irrigated fields and potential for agricultural chemicals to pollute
water bodies
 #     Abstraction effects on source streams and related aquatic ecosystems
 #      Lowering of water quality due to agricultural runoff
 #      Increased pest and disease control problems due to the promotion of monoculture
 #      Reduced biodiversity due to focus on cash crops
 #      Potential for disturbance of cultural and historic sites and resources, and damage
to nearby sites resulting from changes in the water table or salinisation.
 #      Stagnant waters and disease vectors arising from poorly managed irrigation
systems
 #      Increased use of agricultural chemicals with related human health concerns

 Watershed Treatment and Water Harvesting Impacts
 #      Increased access can aggravate soil erosion problems, especially in higher
gradient topography
 #      Poorly maintained drainage controls and in-stream structures can lead to eventual
failures and increased flooding problems
 #      Reduced downstream nutrient levels from dams that reduce stream transport of
organic material and sediment
 #      Social tensions arising from issues and rights of water allocation
 #      Mosquito and related health concerns arising from stagnant pools
 #      Impacts on cultural and historic sites and resources through changes in the water
table
 #      Social problems arising from poorly managed regenerated catchment areas

 Community Road Construction and Rehabilitation Impacts
 #     Alteration of drainage patterns and increased flooding and soil erosion from road
construction and materials excavation sites
 #     Right of way removal of vegetation and natural habitats
 #     Sedimentation of aquatic systems from soil erosion and runoff
 #     Impact of increased human use on adjacent habitats and wildlife
 #     Voluntary displacement or minor loss of access to resources normally used by
individuals or the community for cultivation, livestock grazing, fuel wood, etc.
 #     Stagnant pools at excavation sites that create breeding sites for mosquitoes
 #     Potential for disturbance of cultural and historic sites and resources
 #     Increased in and out population migration due to improved access
 #     Unplanned, haphazard land use development created by improved access

 Note: Projects requiring relocation of residents or involuntary loss of assets or access to
assets are not included in the PSNP.

 Afforestation and Revegetation Impacts
 #     Effects of some tree species (e.g., eucalyptus) in reducing groundwater levels
 #     Long term effects of forest harvesting on hydrologic systems and stream
characteristics
 #     Possible reduction in tree and plant species diversity arising from the introduction
of new plantations and re-vegetation schemes
 #     Effects of monocultures on ecosystem diversity, function and sustainability
 #      Changes in habitat characteristics and potential effects on endemic wildlife
species
 #      Social problems arising from issues related to the ownership and user of new
forests
 #      Potential replacement of open access forests and access to NTFPs with restricted
access forests and woodlots
 #      Effects of grazing bans on the cost of rearing livestock and shift of grazing
pressures to other areas

 Livestock, Pasture and Water Points Development Impacts
 #     Compaction of soils from increased activity around new water sources
 #     Potential contamination of water sources and needs for controls on human use
 #     Concentrations of livestock at specific watering sites/routes that result in
overgrazing of vegetation and related land degradation
 #     Potential social tensions over access to pastoralists water sources

 Drinking Water Sources Development Impacts
 #      Increased water withdrawals could exceed groundwater recharge rates in some
areas
 #      Development of springs may affect availability of downstream water supply
 #      Physical impacts of increased human traffic near water stations
 #      Potential contamination of open wells by livestock and human uses
 #      Reduced availability of aquatic ecosystems due to water abstraction
 #      Increased dependence on new water supply systems that prove to be unreliable
 #      Sanitation and health concerns associated with the operation of new drinking
water sources
 #      Land use and social issues and tensions over the siting of and access to new water
sources

 School and Health Facilities Rehabilitation Impacts
 #     Site disturbance and potential drainage alterations from construction activities and
expansion of facilities
 #     Water shortages due to increased demands on existing sources
 #     Increased production of human and medical wastes and potential for
contamination of waterbodies and groundwater
 #     Increased timber harvesting on nearby lands for construction materials
 #     Construction impacts on sensitive wildlife habitats and aquatic systems
 #     Water supply development impacts on aquatic ecosystems
 #     Increased pollution from site development and operations, including medical
waste
 #     Sanitation and health issues related to increased human presence and medical
waste disposal
 #     In-migration and settlement generated by rehabilitated facilities

 To address such issues, the approach to the environmental performance and
sustainability of the public works program is three-pronged:
  (i)   Public works are planned using a community-based approach to integrated
watershed management, a process which forms the basis of the awareness-creation and
training program, supported by a budget to provide technical and material inputs.
  (ii) Standards to be followed in the design and implementation of the individual
public works are established in Community-Based Participatory Watershed Development
Guidelines published by the MOARD. These are made available to concerned woreda
staff and Development Agents, who are trained in the techniques set out in the
Guidelines. These Guidelines include detailed provisions for area closure, which are
based on participatory community planning of all activities. This provides for community
management of the closed areas to allow farmers and families whose traditional access
has been voluntarily reduced to have continued access to the closed area for the collection
of fodder and other forest products, in order to ensure that there is no reduction in
livelihoods.
  (iii) The process of selection and screening of public works for possible negative
environmental impacts, and ensuring that appropriate mitigating measures are
incorporated in the design as appropriate, is in accordance with Ethiopia's Environmental
Impact Assessment proclamation. The process is documented in the Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) produced by the Government and re-disclosed
under APL III.

  To address the possible use of small quantities of pesticides in small-scale irrigation
schemes, the government Guide for Integrated Pest Management in Small-Scale
Irrigation Schemes is published and re-disclosed under APL III, in accordance with the
ESMF and OP 4.09.

 Under OP/BP 4.01, in the event that the Public Works includes rehabilitation or
expansion of health posts incorporating clinic facilities, a Medical Waste Management
Guide for Rural Health Clinics has been developed and disclosed under APL III.

 HABP investments will be micro-level, so significant site-specific impacts are not
expected. However, due to the potentially significant impact of the cumulative impacts of
numerous such subprojects, before the HABP program commences in a Woreda, the
acceptable types of HASP project for each Woreda are be determined by joint
consultation with the concerned PW Focal Unit, the Woreda Extension Case Team NR
Expert, the Woreda Environmental Expert and the NR DAs, such determinations being
based on a Woreda Environmental Profile, as specified in the ESMF. In addition, any
cumulative long-term impacts will be monitored, managed and mitigated by Woreda staff
supported by the Regional PWFU using procedures as specified in the ESMF.

  This Additional Financing triggers four safeguard policies: The Environmental
Assessment Policy (OP 4.01); the Pest Management Policy (OP 4.09), predicated on the
possibility of small quantities of pesticides being employed in small, community-level
irrigation projects; the International Waterways Policy (OP 7.50) because of small-scale
irrigation projects that may be implemented in watersheds of three international
waterways; and the Physical Cultural Resources Policy (OP 4.11), because although
deemed unlikely in view of the small scale of the subprojects, the possibility of #chance
finds# cannot be ruled out.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Activities under APL III are expected to include watershed development interventions,
and improved farming and land-use management systems, under the community
watershed development approach of the government. These are expected to make further
contributions to environmental regeneration and transformation, which is one of the
objectives of the PSNP. Any potential long term or cumulative impacts that might have
been caused by the PSNP public works activities such as infrastructure, or HABP
activities will be detected through the screening, monitoring and mitigation procedures
specified in the ESMF.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The public works are designed to have positive environmental impacts. However, each
project is screened under the ESMF procedures, and should there be any anticipated
negative impacts, these are addressed by re-designing the project at planning and design
stage, or substituting another community project. Under the HABP, project alternatives
are addressed by selecting environmentally and socially suitable activities for each
woreda from a list of project alternatives, as specified in the ESMF.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
A series of legal proclamations form the basis for the environmental assessment and
management framework in Ethiopia: The Proclamation on the establishment of
Environmental Protection Organs (No. 295/2002); The Proclamation on Environmental
Impact Assessment (No. 299/2002); and The Proclamation on Environmental Pollution
Control (No. 300/2002).

  There are two key public institutions that are directly responsible for monitoring
environmental compliance. These are the Environmental Protection Authority (EPA) and
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MoARD), which have decentralized to
the regional level. In the case of MoARD, decentralization has gone further to the woreda
and kebele levels. There exists a critical mass of capacity within the (MoARD) and EPA
at the federal and decentralized levels to manage environmental and social safeguard
issues.

 The process of selection and screening of public works for possible negative
environmental impacts, and ensuring that appropriate mitigating measures are
incorporated in the design as appropriate, is in accordance with Ethiopia's Environmental
Impact Assessment proclamation. The process is documented in the ESMF produced by
the Government. The ESMF, produced by Government and re-disclosed under APL III,
which covers both the PSNP and the HABP, is incorporated in the awareness-creation
and training programs. Responsibilities for its implementation and monitoring are
designated at federal, regional, woreda and kebele levels in the ESMF Implementation
Guidelines. In addition, joint government-donor 6-monthly public works reviews are
conducted, which include monitoring of ESMF implementation, followed by corrective
measures if required.

  These reviews have shown that with the ESMF system is in use, and 6,000 Development
Agents (Agricultural extension staff) regularly trained in its implementation, there
remains room for improvement, due mainly to staff turnover and the administrative
difficulties in ensuring and documenting screening of some 40,000 separate activities
each year. Thus in order to strengthen government#s capacity to apply the ESMF to a
higher standard, the PW Coordination Unit (PWCU) is regularly reviewed and
strengthened by the addition of Technical Advisors, whose mandate includes improving
the capacity of the regional PW Focal Units (PWFU) to manage the M&E and ESMF
screening of the PW activities, and consultancies, including the upgrading of the ESMF
training packages.

 For APL III, Government and the Bank notified the concerned countries in accordance
with the International Waterways Policy OP 7.50, covering the 5-year period of 2010-
2014. Since (i) this Additional Financing lies within this period, and (ii) water abstraction
rates are well within notified levels, there is no need for further notification for the
Additional Financing.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the beneficiary farmers and their families, and those involved in
the implementation of the program. The provisions of the ESMF are incorporated into the
training materials used at woreda and kebele levels, which reach over 1 million
beneficiary households, and are regularly updated according to community and
government staff feedback. Following consultations in accordance with government and
World Bank policies, the ESMF was re-disclosed under APL III on 8/12/2009.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/12/2009
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                             08/12/2009
 Date of submission to InfoShop                              08/12/2009
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
 Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/12/2009
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             08/12/2009
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              08/12/2009
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    No
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            N/A
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          N/A
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         Yes
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        N/A
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Wolter Soer                               11/02/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Ian Leslie Campbell                       11/02/2011
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                     11/02/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz                   11/02/2011
  Comments:
