                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 04/06/2012                                   Report No.: AC6667
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P101473                 Original Project Name: Urban Water
                                             Supply and Sanitation Project
Country: Ethiopia                            Project ID: P129174
Project Name: Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Project Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Yitbarek Tessema
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 19, 2012 Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2012
Managing Unit: AFTUW                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Water supply (41%);Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (41%);Sanitation
(15%);Sub-national government administration (2%);Central government administration
(1%)
Theme: Urban services and housing for the poor (40%);Other urban development
(20%);Other human development (20%);Municipal governance and institution building
(20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            150
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                        0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Development Objective of the Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Project is to
increase access to sustainable water supply and sanitation services in Addis Ababa and
four secondary cities. Because of cost over run and need to include one more city, an
additional financing is required. The objective will be maintained in the AF with slight
modification to reflect the addition of the new city and provide more flexibility. i.e the
revised development objective will be “to increase access to sustainable water supply and
sanitation services in Addis Ababa and a few secondary cities.? Accordingly, the
objective will be achieved by:

 i)    Producing more water for customers and extending the distribution network to
unserved areas.
 ii)   Improving the operational efficiency of the participating water utilities by
reducing non revenue water and improving financial management.

 iii) Strengthening the autonomy of existing water boards and utilities and introduction
of performance based contracts with utilities.

 iv) Out sourcing selected activities to private sector providers to increase capacity
and attract more investment.

 v)     Constructing public sanitation facilities in low income areas, finance priority
elements of municipal sanitation plans, and promote improved hygiene and sanitation
practices.

3. Project Description
The Additional Financing will be used to: i) complete the original project activities that
faced financing gap due to cost overrun incurred in the course of implementation caused
by an unanticipated design change and ii) include support to the second federal city that
is in great need of the WSS improvement intervention.

 Addis Ababa city: Under the current project, provision is made to improve the sanitation
situation through rehabilitation and expansion of the waste water treatment plant for the
southern catchment of Addis Ababa city. The City’s ongoing urban renewal project
coupled with the rapid urbanization of the city, called for a change of design from what
was anticipated during project preparation. As a result, additional financing of US$100
million is sought to finance upgraded design.

 Secondary cities: The source of water for Gondar city was found at a well field 30km
away from the city. As a result, the city faced a financing gap of US$ 10 million to
convey the water supply and complete the distribution system. The price escalation of
imported items for the construction of water supply and sanitation works and the
increased cost of related construction supervision activities due to the increase in the cost
of fuel has created a financing gap of approximately US$ 18 million to fully implement
the proposed improvement activities in Hawassa, Jimma, and Mekelle cities.

 Dire Dawa City: The GOE has also requested for additional financing of US$ 22 million
to respond to a pressing demand for improved WSS from the second federal city of Dire
Dawa.

 DireDawa is the second most populous Federal city with a population of 267,311 as per
the 2007 census result. In the last 30 years, the city has grown drastically including a
fourfold stretch of its administrative area. Not much has been done on the water supply
production front leaving the city with a wide demand- supply gap. The city is served with
301 l/s (22,000 M3/day) of supply from 12 bore holes scattered in the city and one spring
source. Though it is one of the two federal cities and is identified as one of the growth
corridors, it falls into the category of the secondary cities because of its population size,
the water supply and sanitation situation as well as the utility management arrangement.
It requires an increase in water production, improvement in NRW management, and
enhancement in its operational efficiency.

 The US$ 150 million Additional Financing will therefore be used to fill the financing
gap to complete the work in the original five cities and to include additional activities in
Dire Dawa City.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will be implemented in urban areas, namely, Addis Ababa, Hawassa, Gondar,
Jimma, Mekelle, and Dire Dawa Cities. The proposed sites for additional financing are
not situated in important habitats and ecosystems. Potential negative impacts subprojects
to be implemented by the additional financing will be avoided or mitigated using the
ESMF and ESIA.

 Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
 At the federal level, the project is implemented by the Ministry of Water and Energy
(MoWE). The Ministry has an environmental Unit. This Unit has been given the
mandate to monitor the implementation of the environmental management of projects
owned by the MoWE. It is envisaged that this Unit will regularly monitor the
implementation of ESMF and ESIAs of the Water Supply and Sanitation Project on a
regular basis. At city level, project coordinators are the focal persons to ensure
implementation of ESMF and ESIA.

  The Project has also employed an environmental specialist who will follow the day-to-
day implementation of environmental management plans developed for the project. The
environment specialist will have regular contact with the focal person at the regional
level.

  However, the Borrower’s institutional capacity, both at federal and regional levels, for
the implementation of the Bank’s safegu policies should be further strengthened with
training to ensure robust identification, assessment and mitigation of potential
environmental and social impacts.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Shankar Narayanan (SASDS)
   Mr Asferachew Abate Abebe (AFTEN)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                        X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                     X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
1.      Potential safeguard issues associated with this project include (i) soil and water
pollution, loss of vegetation, soil erosion, (ii) loss of livelihoods or access to economic
assets due to the planned rehabilitation and construction activities, and (iii) an increase in
water abstraction. The scope of the planned investments will not incur any large scale or
irreversible impacts.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The planned project activities will not incur any indirect and /or long term impacts.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
This project has been designed to support the operationalization of a broader growth
strategy, interpretation of Ethiopia’s Integrated Water Resources Management policy,
and contribution to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and interim
country goals. Hence, project alternatives were not discussed.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Given that the sub-projects in the AF are similar to those in the original project and do
not have significant adverse environmental and social impacts, the AF project will remain
as a Category B project. Since the exact locations of the planned investments and their
potential localized adverse environmental and social impacts could not be determined
prior to appraisal of original project in 2007, the Borrower has prepared (i) an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); and (ii) a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF). The ESMF outlines the environmental and social screening
process to be applied to future investments in Addis and secondary cities at the planning
stage. The ESMF also includes an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP),
Environmental Guidelines for Contractors and guidance on handling/managing physical
cultural resources. The RPF outlines policies and procedures to be applied in the event
that future investment activities require land acquisition. Given the Borrower’ limited
capacity to address safeguard policy issues, the project will include support for the
effective implementation of the ESMF and RPF. The borrower has completed the
following EIA and ESIA studies for the sub-projects listed below and is diligently
implementing the recommendations of each of these studies. This process is being
regularly monitored through implementation support missions on the project.

 1-Addis Ababa In city wells environmental audit-EIA-Completed – Disclosed on March
29, 2012
 2-Addis Ababa short term availability of water from Dire and Legedadi reservoir -
ESIA-Under Review
 3-Addis Ababa 10 test wells -ESIA-Completed – Disclosed on March 29, 2012
 4-Hawassa City water supply -ESIA-Completed – Disclosed on March 27, 2012
 5-Hawassa City Sludge drying bed-ESIA-Draft commented
 6-Jimma City water supply-ESIA-Completed – Disclosed on April 2, 2012
 7-Mekelle city water supply-ESIA-Completed – Disclosed on March 29, 2012
 8-Angereb Dam safety assessment-Safety assessment-Completed and recommendation
being implemented
 9-Gondar City Water Supply-ESIA-Completed – Disclosed on March 28, 2012

  The ESIAs have been cleared by the Bank and adequately capture the environment and
social issues. For the Hawassa project which is close to being commissioned and the 3
other subprojects that have been or are being implemented, the Government acquired
land without preparing RAPs. Management: i) undertook a quick review of the completed
ESIAs to determine the need to conduct RAP audits and engaged consultants to conduct
the audits; ii) the information generated from this exercise confirms that each of the
affected PAPs (a total of 31 households and institutions) in each of the 4 sub-projects
have been compensated as per the entitlements outlined in the Resettlement Policy
Framework for the project.iii). As the compensation complies with OP 4.12, ex-post
Abbreviated RAPs (ARAPs) will not be prepared. However, the Government is
committed to preparing RAPs or ARAPs during project implementation should any land
acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of access to resources
or livelihoods arise. The RAP audit has recommended that in all the cities, the Grievance
Redress Mechanism needs to be considerably strengthened. It is also important that there
be effective communication to all the PAPS about the existence and procedures of this
mechanism.

 Since the project will rely on the performance of existing dams, the Borrower has
carried out a Dam Safety Assessment in December 2006; and the project will implement
the recommendations of the same.

 OP 7.50 was triggered in the original project because the project affects international
waterways and that the notification has been done, and that therefore no further
notification is needed.
 There will be three basic approaches to ensuring adequate safeguards compliance:

 A.    Use of ESMF and RPF

  i.    In Addis Ababa City: Project activities will involve the expansion of a waste
water treatment plant. The location of the site of the plant is known; however, the
technology to be used for wastewater treatment, as well as where and how the trunk and
secondary lines, will be installed during the expansion have not yet been determined.

 ii.    In Dire Dawa City: The sub-project will involve development and supply of
drinking water from groundwater. The City has so far identified the well fields for
developing 23 wells. In the AF, four wells will be dug to supplement the water supply in
the City. The specific sites for developing the four wells have not yet been identified.

  iii. In Hawassa city: The original sub-project from a spring source is under
implementation for which an ESIA has been developed. The additional financing will
finance development and supply of drinking water from groundwater to achieve the
original project target. Preliminary design has not yet been completed.

 For these three Cities, ESMF and RPF checklist will be used to determine the kind of
safeguard instrument required when detailed information is known.

 B.    Preparation of a new ESIA

 In Gonder City: Preliminary design work has been completed and sub-projects screened
using ESMF and RPF triggered the need for the preparation of ESIA. The ESIA for the
Gonder was cleared by the Bank and disclosed in country during the AF project
appraisal. A copy is also at the Infoshop.

 C.    Implementation of existing ESIA

 As indicated in Table 1 above, ESIAs have been prepared for Addis Ababa, Jimma, and
Mekele Cities following the procedures set in the ESMF. The environmental management
plans described in these ESIAs will be enforced to ensure the sustainability of activities
planned in the AF.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the Ministry of Water Resources, the Regional Water Resources
Development Bureaus, the Water Boards, the Water Utility Operator, and consumers.
The ESMF has been prepared in consultation with AAWSA in Addis Ababa, with the
Town Water Boards of Jimma, Awassa, Gonder, and Mekele cities that would potentially
benefit from the Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Project, with the Environmental
Protection Agency (federal level), and with the World Bank Country Office. Staff
involved in the operation of water systems in: Addis Ababa, Hawassa, Jimma, Gonder,
Mekele, and Dire Dawa have also been interviewed. The ESMF includes provisions for
public consultations during the screening process of planned investments as well as
approval and disclosure of the screening results. The ESMF and RPF have been disclosed
in Ethiopia and at the Bank’s Infoshop during the original project appraisal in 2007. EIAs
and ESIAs have been disclosed during project implementation.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/16/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              02/14/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               02/14/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/15/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              02/14/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               02/14/2007
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                           Yes
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts      N/A
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements        N/A
been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         Yes
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        N/A
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Yitbarek Tessema         04/06/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Asferachew Abate Abebe   04/06/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr Shankar Narayanan        04/06/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi    04/06/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Ian Bannon               04/06/2012
  Comments:
