                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                 APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                      Report No.:
                                                                                                    81542
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-October-2012
I. BASIC INFORMATION
  1. Basic Project Data
  Country:                         Ethiopia              Project ID:                  P124074
  Project Name:                    Ethiopia REDD+ Readiness Support
  Task Team Leader:                Edward Dwumfour
  Estimated Appraisal Date:        N/A                   Estimated Board Date:        N/A
  Managing Unit:                   AFTN1                 Lending Instrument:          TF Grant
  Sector:                          Environment, (100%)
  Theme:                           Forests, Climate Change
  Financing (in USD Million)
    Financing Source                                                                                      Amount
  BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                            0
  Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF)                                                                    3.6
    Total
  Environmental Category:          B – Partial
  Is this a Repeater project?      No


  2. Project Objectives

  Project Development Objective
  The Project Development Objective of this grant is to strengthen the capacity of Ethiopia’s institutions dealing
  with land use on REDD+.
  Key Results
   i. The National REDD+ Secretariat within MoA is fully operational;
  ii. A national strategy to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+), including its
      legal and institutional framework, is prepared and validated by a broad spectrum of national stakeholders;
 iii.
  An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is prepared and validated through the use of a
  Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA). Depending on the outcome of the SESA, a
  Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and/or Process Framework may also be prepared;

  Detailed Description of Project Components



  This component will support the structures that will lead the coordination and implementation of the REDD+
  Readiness process in Ethiopia, including the National REDD+ Secretariat within the Ministry of Agriculture,
  the REDD+ Steering Committee (RSC) and the REDD+ Technical Working Groups (RTWG) at the national
  and regional levels by providing them with the adequate human, technical and operational resources. FCPF
    Grant funds will finance the following:

          Staff hired to strengthen the National REDD+ Secretariat within the Ministry of Agriculture, to ensure
           it can deliver the activities planned as part of the REDD+ readiness process. This will include: a
           National REDD+ Coordinator, a Communications Specialist, a Safeguards Specialist and MRV
           Specialists. A senior expert on monitoring and evaluation will be hired to strengthen of the M&E
           framework for the Process, support the mid-term review process and gather information towards the
           preparation of the R-Package1.
          Capacity strengthening targeted at the members of the REDD+ Secretariat, REDD+ Steering. As
           discussed under the “Implementing Agency Assessment” section, these are the structures responsible
           for leading the execution and strategic planning of the REDD+ process and for providing it with
           technical inputs. The grant will finance training, workshops and the operational costs associated with
           the meetings of the RSC and RTWG.
          Capacity building and institutional strengthening targeted at the decentralized levels (regions and
           woredas). Those regions where pilot projects are taking place will be prioritized, so as to ensure that the
           knowledge generated from the implementation of these pilots will enrich the REDD+ Strategy
           Implementation and inform the choice of legal and institutional options for the national REDD+
           implementation framework.
          FCPF grant management, including recruiting a Procurement Specialist and a Financial Management
           Specialist, in addition to costs associated with yearly audits of the grant.




    A REDD+ Strategy in Ethiopia will necessarily have to be multi-sectoral, placing special emphasis on the
    energy and agriculture sectors given the relevance of these sectors to deforestation and forest degradation. In
    addition, such a Strategy will also need to address governance and law enforcement issues. An indicative list of
    options for the National REDD+ Strategy has been elaborated in the Ethiopia R-PP and will serve as the basis
    for further dialogue. The final selection of strategic options and the eventual formulation of the REDD+
    Strategy document will require further analytical work, consensus building, prioritization and
    operationalization. Ongoing and planned pilot REDD+ projects, ongoing projects and programs as well as key
    GoE documents such as the CRGE and the GTP, will also provide lessons for the development of the REDD+
    strategy.

    A Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment of REDD+ in Ethiopia will also be conducted to ensure that
    the social and environmental risks associated with the implementation of the proposed strategic options are
    well identified and addressed. Associated with SESA will be the preparation of an Environmental and Social
    Management Framework to allow the government to mitigate the residual risks of implementing the proposed
    REDD+ strategies.

    Given the broad range of stakeholders involved, and the potential complexity of REDD+ processes in Ethiopia,
    a functional and easily accessible national feedback and grievance redress mechanism is critical from the
    earliest stages of R-PP implementation. In this regard, particular attention will be paid to geographically,
    culturally or economically isolated or excluded groups. The grant will support the design and early
    implementation of this mechanism. The FCPF Grant funds will be used to:

          Support multi-stakeholder consultation, mobilization and participation for the design of the national
           REDD+ strategy. This will follow the Consultation and Participation plan developed as part of the R-
           PP. The support will include the preparation of communication material targeted at different audiences;
          Conduct an in-depth analysis of drivers of deforestation and forest degradation in Ethiopia (including
           governance issues), identify potential pilot REDD+ projects and ensure knowledge exchange across


1
 The R-Package will summarize all the achievements of the REDD+ Readiness phase, and serve as the basis for the FCPF Participants
Committee to assess the country’s progress in achie ving REDD+ Readiness.
       ongoing activities related to REDD+ (REDD+ pilot projects and other projects and programs in the area
       of agriculture, energy, forestry, etc.). and consolidate and disseminate knowledge on the strengthen and
       weaknesses of Participatory Forest Management in Ethiopia;
      Conduct a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) of REDD+ in Ethiopia, and prepare
       an Environmental and Social Management Framework to mitigate the residual risks of implementing
       the RED+ strategy. This includes the multi-stakeholder consultations required to conduct the SESA.
      Finance the establishment or strengthening of a national feedback and grievance redress mechanisms.
       This will include an assessment of existing national institutional capacity for feedback and grievance
       redress and staffing to implement the identified redress mechanism during the REDD+ readiness
       process;




This component will contribute to identify legal and institutional options to deliver REDD+ in Ethiopia. As
such, the activities noted here are fully complementary with those identified in Component 2, and will be
implemented in close coordination. This component will allow Government to assess options to design an
institutional framework for REDD+ that is efficient, effective and deliver social and environmental co-benefits.
Among the most important issues to address in this framework are how benefits associated with REDD+ are to
be shared across stakeholders and levels; how REDD+ funds are to be managed (including the relation to the
proposed CRGE Facility); how to deal with different sources of funds for REDD+ (donors, markets, etc.); how
REDD+ projects fit into (nesting) a national framework for REDD+, among other issues. This component will
contribute to the broader structure for managing climate change investment activities currently under design in
Ethiopia through the CRGE. FCPF grant funds will finance:

      Identification of options for: i) development of an efficient, effective and fair mechanism for sharing
       benefits related to the implementation of REDD+; ii) mechanisms for managing funds at the national
       level and for distributing them to the local level; and iii) legal status of emission reductions (carbon
       credits) in Ethiopia;
      Support the development of a national registry for REDD+ initiatives, projects and to track financial
       flows to REDD+ activities.




4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
The R-PP implementation process aims to develop a national level set of strategic frameworks under the
REDD+ program and it is as such without specific locations. Specific physical characteristics cannot be
covered under such circumstances. Implementation of the major components of the REDD+ supported
activities and the R-PP will result in improving sustainable forest management in Ethiopia by refining the
Ethiopian forest policy and strengthening institutions involved in forest management. Future REDD+
investments are also expected to contribute positively by decreasing deforestation and forest degradation as
well as enhancing forests biodiversity and ecosystem services as well as contributing to building carbon stocks
below and above ground. REDD+ supported activities will also maximise beneficial social, cultural,
economical and environmental impacts.

However, there are many vulnerable groups, especially women and youth that are dependent on the natural
forest resources both timber and non-timber forest products for their livelihoods and welfare. REDD+
supported activities will target these resources and it is possible that in some cases many vulnerable groups
may be adversely impacted by the implementation of REDD+ supported activities and the R-PP activities.

Given that activities to be supported are upstream soft type activities and no specific locations can be identified
and described at this point in time, the instrument that has been selected to screen the R-PP implementation
process is the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA), a mechanism that is participatory and
analytical at the macro level. A SESA allows: (i) social and environmental considerations to be integrated into
the REDD+ Readiness process, in particular the REDD+ strategy; (ii) stakeholder participation in identifying
and prioritizing key issues, assessment of policy, institutional and capacity gaps to manage these priorities and
recommendations, and disclosure of findings in the REDD Country’s progress reports on Readiness
preparation; and (iii) the development of an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that
will be put in place to manage environmental and social risks and to mitigate potential adverse impacts related
to future investments and carbon finance transactions in the context of the future implementation of REDD+.
Thus, in order to ensure that the set of forestry frameworks as identified in the Ethiopia R-PP and future
REDD+ investments address environmental and social concerns, the R-PP Grant will fund the preparation of
the SESA and the ESMF. The ESMF will cover the application of the requirements of the Bank Policies and
Operational Policies (BP/OP) on Environmental Assessment (BP/OP 4.01), Natural Habitats (BP/OP 4.04) and
Forests (BP/OP 4.36). Depending on the outcome of the SESA, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
and/or Process Framework may also be prepared, which would cover OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).

With regard to the national institutional capacity for the implementation of safeguards, it is acknowledged that
the national institutional capacity to address SESA is weak. However the government plans to draw lessons
and build on the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) guidelines developed by the Federal
Environmental Protection Authority (FEPA), the ESIAs conducted under a number of donor financed
operations including the Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP), Sustainable Land Management Project
(SLMP) and the Agricultural Growth Program (AGP) which include social aspects with the aim of generating
lessons to build sustainable community assets, as well as the ESIA and social impact studies from the Bale
Mountain Eco-region REDD+ forest carbon activities will all serve as a basis for informing the SESA/ESMF
process.

Also, it is envisaged that a multi-stakeholder/disciplinary sub-group of qualified people to be established under
the REDD+ Secretariat to coordinate the development and implementation (including monitoring) of the SESA
and ESMF. This body would also ensure that institutional and capacity gaps for managing environmental
threats and social risks are fully assessed. It would work very closely with the national REDD+ Technical
Working Group (RTWG).

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Asferachew Abate (AFTN1)
Haddy Sey ( CPFCF)




6.Last modified by
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           Yes
                                                             In view of the nature of REDD + Readiness the
                                                             borrower will use a Strategic Environmental and
                                                             Social Assessment (SESA) in the context of
                                                             REDD+ readiness. The strength of a SESA for
                                                             REDD+ is that it will combine the analytical work
                                                             and consultation in an iterative fashion to inform
                                                             the preparation of the REDD+ strategy. The
                                                             SESA will help ensure compliance with the
                                                             Bank’s safeguard policies by integrating key
                                                             environmental and social considerations relevant
                                                             to REDD+, including all those covered by the
                                                             safeguard policies. The SESA will help the
                                                             borrower formulate their REDD+ strategy in a way
                                                             that reflects inputs from key stakeholder groups
                                                             and addresses the main environmental and social
                                    issues to be identified. The SESA includes an
                                    Environmental       and    Social    Management
                                    Framework (ESMF) as a distinct output, which
                                    provides a framework for managing and
                                    mitigating the environmental and social risks
                                    related to investments and carbon finance
                                    transactions in the context of the future
                                    implementation      of   REDD+.      The     future
                                    investments and carbon finance transactions will
                                    still require specific environmental and social
                                    assessments, but these will benefit from the
                                    strategic context created by the SESA and ESMF.
                                    The ESMF will include standard methods and
                                    procedures, along with appropriate institutional
                                    arrangements       for    screening,    reviewing,
                                    implementing and monitoring specific ESMFs to
                                    prevent adverse impacts as well as cumulative
                                    impacts.      Thus      Standard      project-level
                                    environmental and social impact assessment will
                                    not be prepared for REDD+ as it is not
                                    appropriate.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   This policy seeks to ensure that all options
                                    proposed in the National REDD+ Strategy should
                                    take into account the conservation of biodiversity,
                                    as well as the numerous environmental services
                                    and products that natural habitats provide to
                                    human society. Overall, REDD+ activities are
                                    expected to have significant positive impacts on
                                    natural habitats, as the country puts in place an
                                    effective strategy to reduce loss of natural forests.
                                    This policy strictly limits the circumstances under
                                    which any Bank-supported project can damage
                                    natural habitats (land and water areas, in which
                                    most of the native plant and animal species are
                                    still present). The SESA will address issues
                                    related to natural habitats and potential impacts of
                                    the National REDD+ Strategy, which will later be
                                    included in the ESMF.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have
                                    significant positive impacts on forest, in that the
                                    main goal of the program is to reduce
                                    deforestation and forest degradation, while
                                    contributing to the well-being of forest-dependent
                                    communities. Potential impact of the National
                                    REDD+ Strategy on natural forests will be
                                    assessed through the SESA and included in the
                                    ESMF. The SESA and associated ESMF will
                                    reflect the requirements of the Bank’s Operational
                                    Policy regarding forest management, in particular
                                    as these relate to the establishment of
                                    plantations.
Pest Management OP 4.09       TBD   Agricultural intensification and reforestation
                                    activities may form part of the final scope of the
                                    National REDD+ Strategy. While increased
                                    procurement of pesticides or use of pesticides is
                                    often associated with agricultural intensification,
                                    and could thus trigger this policy, it is assumed
                                    that the SESA process would lead to the
                                                                     identification of environmentally sustainable
                                                                     alternatives,    such      as      Integrated   Pest
                                                                     Management practices in strategy options related
                                                                     to intensified agricultural activities. The SESA will
                                                                     address critical issues related to pest
                                                                     management upstream, as necessary. The policy
                                                                     has thus not been triggered.

  Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11             TBD             This policy could be triggered if REDD+ activities
                                                                     promote actions in areas containing sites deemed
                                                                     physical cultural resources by the local
                                                                     communities (e.g. holy/secret sites such as
                                                                     sacred groves, sacred forests, etc.). Though it is
                                                                     not anticipated that the project will have negative
                                                                     impacts on any such sites, the existence of any
                                                                     such sites and the corresponding need to trigger
                                                                     this policy will be determined once the National
                                                                     REDD+ Strategy is completed.
  Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                      No
  Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                TBD             REDD+ activities might trigger Involuntary
                                                                     Resettlement in situations involving land
                                                                     acquisition and/or involuntary restrictions of
                                                                     access to legally designated parks, protected
                                                                     areas, or forest management / reforestation
                                                                     areas. The policy aims to avoid involuntary
                                                                     resettlement to the extent feasible, or to minimize
                                                                     and mitigate its adverse social and economic
                                                                     impacts in cases where resettlement or other
                                                                     involuntary restrictions cannot be avoided.
                                                                     Through the SESA process, any issues related to
                                                                     land acquisition or involuntary resettlement will be
                                                                     identified, and a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                     and/or Process Framework will be prepared.
  Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                          No              N/A
  Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 No                  N/A
  Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60              No              N/A


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
  A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
  1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any
  potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
  A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
  1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential
  large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

  At this stage of REDD+ strategy development, there are no potential adverse environmental issues likely to be
  associated. Environmental issues may emerge during the implementation of REDD+ investments including the REDD+
  pilots. Contrarily, the R-PP implementation, i.e., REDD+ strategy development could result in social risks particularly to
  vulnerable and marginalized groups such as women, youth and forest-dependent communities. This could be avoided
  by making the process all-inclusive, highly participatory and consultative and ensuring interest of vulnerable groups are
  considered and addressed. If the strategy fails to consider the particular interests of these groups such as access to
  forest resources and tenure issues, groups may be alienated, or deprived of sources of livelihoods or they could be
  unfairly treated in the sharing and distribution of benefits and rewards. The ESMF that will be an output of the SESA will
  address both potential environmental and social issues. An RPF and/or Process Framework may also be prepared,
  depending on the outcome of the SESA. Tools that are likely to developed and applied to mitigate and address
  environmental and social issues could include Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs)/Environmental
and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), Process Frameworks and/or Resettlement
Policy Frameworks (RPFs).
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project
area:
Future anticipated activities would focus on undertaking investments in the forestry sector. While generally, it is
anticipated that these investments would promote sustainable forest management, some investments could be
misdirected thereby impacting negatively on forests and natural habitats as well as vulnerable groups. Conventionally,
appropriate instruments such as Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs)/Environmental and Social
Management Plans (ESMPs), Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), Process Frameworks, and/or Resettlement Policy
Frameworks (RPFs) etc would have to be prepared, prior to executing the investment activities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The institutional capacity at the Ministry of Agriculture and its satellite agencies at the regional and woreda (district) levels
for the implementation of safeguards, particularly to address SESA is weak. However the government plans to draw
lessons and build on the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) guidelines developed by the Federal
Environmental Protection Authority (FEPA), the ESIAs conducted under a number of donor financed operations
including the Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP), Sustainable Land Management Project (SLMP) and the
Agricultural Growth Program (AGP) which include social aspects with the aim of generating lessons to build sustainable
community assets, as well as the ESIA and social impact studies from the Bale Mountain Eco-region REDD+ forest
carbon activities will all serve as a basis for informing the SESA/ESMF process.

Also, it is envisaged that a multi-stakeholder/disciplinary sub-group of qualified people to be established under the
REDD+ Secretariat to coordinate the development and implementation (including monitoring) of the SESA and ESMF.
This body would also ensure that institutional and capacity gaps for managing environmental threats and social risks are
fully assessed. It would work very closely with the national REDD+ Technical Working Group (RTWG).
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders for the REDD+ strategy development are the federal Ministry of Agriculture and its satellite
agencies at the regional and woreda (district) levels, Ministry of Water & Energy and the federal Environmental
Protection Authority and similar entities at the regional and woreda levels. Other stakeholders include forest-dependent
communities and vulnerable groups such as women and the youth. The preparation of the SESA and other instruments
will be conducted in a consultative and participatory manner. To ensure that vulnerable groups and forest-dependent
communities comprehend the tools that would be prepared, the executive summaries of these instruments will have to be
translated in the local languages of the respective forest areas and disclosed locally. Also, these documents will be
disclosed in-country and at the Bank's InfoShop. It is also equally important to mount tailor-made awareness campaigns
that target the spectrum of stakeholders, and to establish dispute and grievance redress/resolution mechanisms,
particularly at local community level.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                   N/A

Date of receipt by the Bank

Date of "in-country" disclosure

Date of submission to InfoShop

For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                   N/A

Date of receipt by the Bank

Date of "in-country" disclosure

Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                           N/A

Date of receipt by the Bank

Date of "in-country" disclosure

Date of submission to InfoShop

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues
are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the
project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                              Yes [ ]         No [ X ]   NA [ ]

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) review and               Yes [ ]         No [ X ]   NA [ ]
approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?             Yes [ ]         No [ X ]   NA [ ]

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural      Yes [ ]         No [ X ]   NA [ ]
habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical)   Yes [ ]         No [X ]    NA [ ]
natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                            Yes [ ]         No [X ]    NA [ ]

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts          Yes [ ]         No [ X ]   NA [ ]
on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate) been                Yes [ ]         No [ X ]   NA [ ]
prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as                Yes [ ]         No [ X ]   NA [ ]
appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review         Yes [ ]         No [X ]    NA [ ]
the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?             Yes [ ]         No [ X ]   NA [ ]

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and              Yes [ ]         No [ X ]   NA [ ]
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local
NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared      Yes [ ]         No [ X ]   NA [ ]
for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?             Yes [ ]         No [ X ]   NA [ ]

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of             Yes [ ]         No [X ]    NA [ ]
safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the            Yes [ ]         No [ X ]   NA [ ]
same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS

  Task Team Leader:                  Name: Edward F. Dwumfour
  Approved By:
  Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Name: Alexandra Bezeredi         Date:
  Sector Manager:                    Name: Idah Pswarayi-Riddihough   Date:
