                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/14/2011                                  Report No.: AC6483
1. Basic Project Data
Country: South Eastern Europe and               Project ID: P110910
Balkans
Project Name: South East Europe and Caucasus Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility
(Serbia and Macedonia)
Task Team Leader: Eugene N. Gurenko
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change                Global Supplemental ID: P123896
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 9, 2011        Estimated Board Date: November 8, 2011
Managing Unit: ECSS6                            Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                Loan
Sector: Non-compulsory pensions and insurance (70%);General water, sanitation and
flood protection sector (30%)
Theme: Other financial and private sector development (35%);Natural disaster
management (30%);Climate change (35%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):               5.50
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
         Local Communities                                               0.00
         Free-standing TFs for ECA SD Sector Unit                        4.50
         GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - Associated IBRD Fund                      12.00
         GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - Associated IDA Fund                        3.50
         Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery             1.50
                                                                        21.50
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enable Europa Re, a catastrophe and
weather-risk re-insurance facility, to develop new weather risk insurance products,
automate insurance underwriting, pricing and claims settlement processes for such
products, and increase public awareness of weather risk in participating countries.

 By increasing access to financial protection, the Global Environmental Objective (GEO)
will have been achieved, namely the reduction of economic vulnerability for
homeowners, farmers, the enterprise sector and government agencies to the adverse
impact of climate change. SEEC CRIF activities support GEF#s focal area on climate
change and more specifically, GEF's
 objectives on climate change adaptation. By increasing access to catastrophe and
weather risk insurance products and transferring weather risk to the private sector, SEEC
CRIF is also in line with the GEF strategy on adaptation. By transferring risk, SEEC
CRIF reduces economic losses at both the local and national levels, thereby reducing
economic vulnerability and creating a more climate resilient country. Furthermore, SEEC
CRIF will also incorporate long-term climate change adaptation with its insurance
products. By revealing the true cost of risk through actuarial pricing and by incorporating
incentives to mitigate against weather events, the program's catastrophe and weather risk
insurance products will contribute to more informed and less risky consumer and
production decisions, choices and behaviours. For all member countries, in the long-term,
SEEC CRIF will result in reduced physical and financial vulnerability to natural disasters
and the lasting ability to adapt to climate change.

3. Project Description
Under this project, funding from the GEF-administered Special Climate Change Fund
(GEF/SCCF) of US$5.5 million will provide additional technical and regulatory
assistance required to develop new insurance products that will increase participating
countries# resilience to climate change. GEF/SCCF funding will enable participating
countries (currently, Albania, FYR Macedonia and Serbia) to expand upon the existing
SEEC CRIF program by supporting additional activities that will not only quantify
climate change in the context of catastrophes and weather-risk, but also develop
insurance products to help those at risk to adapt and become more resilient to climate
change. GEF/SCCF funds will also enable insurance companies to offer lower coverage
prices for those who have undertaken climate adaptation activities.

 Component 1 -- Technical Assistance ($5.0 million). The proceeds of the GEF/SCCF
grant will finance the costs of equipment and technical services incurred in connection
with carrying out the preparatory work needed for the development of weather risk
insurance markets in Albania, FYR Macedonia and Serbia. Such preparatory technical
activities include but are not limited to acquisition of weather risk stations, public
information campaigns, regulatory assistance, and development of catastrophe risk
models and weather risk indexes.

 Component 2 -- Project Management ($0.5 million). GEF/SCCF will also provide
some funding to cover the costs of project management incurred by Europa Re in
connection with implementation of the grant.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will take place in Albania, FYR Macedonia, and Serbia.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                     X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project will not cause any environmental or social safeguard issues and is rated
Category C. Addressing the financial risk associated with natural disasters is one of the
pillars of the broader concept of disaster risk management. The financial effects of
natural disasters fall disproportionately on the poor who may lose their productive and
physical assets. Governments have limited capacity to replace these assets. Europa Re
does not directly target the poorest segments of the population with the proposed
insurance products, but instead pursues the objective of providing competitively priced
dependable catastrophe insurance products to middle and low-middle income class
population and businesses with the view to enabling the government better target post-
disaster subsidies to the truly needy. In addition, the facility would enable government
itself to purchase insurance protection against natural disasters for public infrastructure
and buildings as well as receive immediate insurance payouts into the budget in case of
adverse weather events pre-defined in parametric weather risk contracts. In the aftermath
of natural disasters, the proceeds from such insurance coverage will be made immediately
available to provide financial assistance to the poor. Often the financial incentives offered
by insurance products will induce environmentally responsible behavior (i.e. not settling
in flood zones or areas prone to landslides, retrofitting buildings to withstand
earthquakes, etc.).

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The insurance policies supported by Europa Re are expected to be affordable. The
premium prices will vary from country to country based on risk exposure
(frequency/severity), vulnerability of insured assets or income to natural disasters, and
the level of insurance deductibles. To determine the exact pricing of insurance policies,
the Facility will develop detailed catastrophe risk models that would enable it to set
actuarially sound premium rates and the level of deductibles that would make catastrophe
insurance coverage affordable. Nevertheless, based on the experience from other
countries and the fact that the risk will be diversified across a large region, the premium
rates are expected to be highly competitive and affordable for most of the population and
businesses.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
This project will provide additional technical and regulatory assistance required to
develop new insurance products that will increase participating countries' resilience to
climate change. Europa Re will act as the recipient of the GEF/SCCF grant and its
implementing agency. It will also act as the main Bank and government counterpart for
the purposes of project execution. To implement the project Europa Re will retain a
dedicated team of project consultants that will manage and oversee the implementation of
the work.

 Europa Re will provide underwriting, pricing, risk management and reinsurance support
to the local primary insurers, as well as regulatory and technical support to countries'
insurance regulators and government decision-makers. To ensure that the management of
Europa Re is immune from potential political pressures that may adversely affect its
operational and financial performance, one of the key elements envisaged by the business
plan is a clear separation of the company's business operations from the government
ownership of the Facility. To this effect, Europa Re has an independent professional
board of directors consisting of reputable insurance/reinsurance professionals with a well-
established track record in the industry. Overall strategic oversight and policy advice will
remain with the company's shareholders (the Ministries of Finance of the member
countries) and exercised through the Annual Meetings of Shareholders and the Advisory
Policy Board.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
SEEC CRIF activities are cross-cutting and collaborative. Because the program is
initially owned and governed by participating governments, it ensures the engagement of
major stakeholders. Moreover, because much of the technical work will be in establishing
systems to collect synthesize and analyze weather data, stakeholders will gain the
requisite skills and knowledge to better understand weather risk and to adapt to climate
change in their respective countries. Furthermore, public awareness of climate change
and the benefits of catastrophe and weather risk insurance will be raised through
information campaigns and new regulations, resulting in increased demand for
catastrophe and weather risk insurance products.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
Not applicable.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       N/A
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the     N/A
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                  Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Eugene N. Gurenko                 09/02/2011
Environmental Specialist:
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Wael Zakout                       09/13/2011
  Comments:
