                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                          Report No.: AC6290


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/12/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Europe and Central Asia               Project ID: P110910
Project Name: South East Europe and Caucasus Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility
Task Team Leader: Eugene N. Gurenko
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change               Global Supplemental ID: P123896
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 9, 2011       Estimated Board Date: November 8, 2011
Managing Unit: ECSS6                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: Non-compulsory pensions and insurance (70%);General water, sanitation and
flood protection sector (30%)
Theme: Other financial and private sector development (35%);Natural disaster
management (30%);Climate change (35%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              5.50
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
        Local Communities                                                0.00
        Free-standing TFs for ECA SD Sector Unit                         4.50
        GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - Associated IBRD Fund                       12.00
        GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - Associated IDA Fund                         3.50
        Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery              1.50
                                                                        21.50


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enable Europa Re, a catastrophe and weather-
risk re-insurance facility, to develop new weather risk insurance products, automate insurance
underwriting and pricing processes for such products, and increase public awareness of weather
risk in participating countries.

 By increasing access to financial protection, the Global Environmental Objective (GEO) will
have been achieved, namely the reduction of economic vulnerability for homeowners, farmers,
the enterprise sector and government agencies to the adverse impact of climate change. SEEC
CRIF activities support GEF#s focal area on climate change and more specifically, GEF#s
objectives on climate change adaptation. By increasing access to catastrophe and weather risk
insurance products and transferring weather risk to the private sector, SEEC CRIF is also in line
with the GEF strategy on adaptation. By transferring risk, SEEC CRIF reduces economic losses
at both the local and national levels, thereby reducing economic vulnerability and creating a
more climate resilient country. Furthermore, SEEC CRIF will also incorporate long-term climate
change adaptation with its insurance products. By revealing the true cost of risk through actuarial
pricing and by incorporating incentives to mitigate against weather events, the program#s
catastrophe and weather risk insurance products will contribute to more informed and less risky
consumer and production decisions, choices and behaviours. For all member countries, in the
long-term, SEEC CRIF will result in reduced physical and financial vulnerability to natural
disasters and the lasting ability to adapt to climate change.

  SEEC CRIF activities are also cross-cutting and collaborative. Because the program is initially
owned and governed by participating governments, it ensures the engagement of major
stakeholders. Moreover, because much of the technical work will be in establishing systems to
collect and synthesize weather data, stakeholders will gain the requisite skills and knowledge to
better understand weather risk and to adapt to climate change in their respective countries.
Furthermore, public awareness of climate change and the benefits of catastrophe and weather
risk insurance will be raised through information campaigns and new regulations, resulting in
increased demand for catastrophe and weather risk insurance products.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
Program Description

 SEEC CRIF is a catastrophe and weather-risk re-insurance program with the objective to
increase the number of homeowners, farmers, enterprises and government organizations insured
against weather-related risks and climate change. The main design features of SEEC CRIF
closely follow the previous prototypes of national and regional catastrophe and weather-risk
programs developed with direct technical and capital assistance from the Bank # the Turkish
Catastrophe Insurance Pool, the Romanian Catastrophe Insurance Pool and the Caribbean
Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility. However, the program contains several innovations. These
include (i) the development of both traditional indemnity type catastrophe insurance products
and parametric index-based weather risk hedging contracts; (ii) private management and
governance of the Facility; (iii) a sunset clause for the duration of government participation in
the program; and (iv) the openness of the Facility to a wider range of clients, inclusive of
households, farmers, government agencies and the enterprise sector exposed to weather risk.

 To implement the SEEC CRIF program, Europa Reinsurance Facility Ltd. (Europa Re), a non-
profit, government-owned organization, has been established as a specialized regional reinsurer
for the purposes of program execution. Europa Re was incorporated under Swiss Law in Zug,
Switzerland in November 2009 and will provide reinsurance, pricing and underwriting services
to private insurers in member countries for standardized catastrophe and weather-risk insurance
products.

  The Facility targets the entire SEEC region, but with a focus on the Balkans and the Caucasus
first. The World Bank is supporting SEEC countries# efforts to join the Facility by financing
their membership contributions. Albania became a member of the Facility last year and World
Bank staff recently completed negotiations with FYR Macedonia and Serbia and received Board
approval to finance the two countries# equity contributions on March 3, 2011. Negotiations with
Montenegro and Georgia are expected in the spring of 2011.

  To help establish the program, the World Bank, GFDRR, UN ISDR, and RCC, have jointly
funded a total of US$1.5 million to develop the CRIF framework. The World Bank is also
providing $12.5 million in IBRD loans and IDA credits to finance country membership
contributions in SEEC CRIF for Serbia, FYR Macedonia, and Albania. The Bank is also
financing over $3 million to strengthen Albania#s national hydrometeorological service and
disaster management system. All other country specific technical work required for the launch of
the program will be financed from donor grant funds.

  To this end, the Bank has secured a US$4.5 million grant from the Swiss State Secretariat for
Economic Affairs (SECO) to assist the CRIF in carrying out some of the necessary technical
activities in Albania, Macedonia, Montenegro, and Serbia. However, the initial cost estimates for
some technical activities funded under the SECO grant have been optimistic. For instance, the
original estimated costs of developing risk models for flood and earthquake models in the SEE
region already have been exceeded by 125 percent due to the innovative nature of the work and
the world-class quality of the provider. The SECO grant also does not cover some activities such
as the public information campaigns and public information tools (such as interactive weather
risk maps) which will be funded by the GEF.

 Project Description

  Under this project, GEF funding of US$5.5 million will provide additional technical and
regulatory assistance required to develop new insurance products that will increase participating
countries# resilience to climate change. GEF funding will enable participating countries
(currently, Albania, FYR Macedonia and Serbia) to expand upon the existing SEEC CRIF
program by supporting additional activities that will not only quantify climate change in the
context of catastrophes and weather-risk, but also develop insurance products to help those at
risk to adapt and become more resilient to climate change. GEF/SCCF funds (from the GEF-
administered Special Climate Change Fund) will also help develop insurance products that will
encourage the public to further reduce their risk of climate change by offering lower product
prices for those who have undertaken adaptation activities.

  The proceeds of the GEF/SCCF grant will finance the costs of equipment and technical services
incurred in connection with carrying out the preparatory work needed for the development of
weather risk insurance markets in Albania, FYR Macedonia and Serbia. Such preparatory
technical activities include but are not limited to acquisition of weather risk stations, public
information campaigns, regulatory assistance, and development of catastrophe risk models.

D. Project location (if known)
The project will take place in Albania, FYR Macedonia, and Serbia.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
N/A

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                              Yes              No             TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                                                      X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                    X


Environmental Category: C - Not Required

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   08/12/2011

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Not applicable.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Eugene N. Gurenko                                           06/20/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Ms Agnes I. Kiss                                               06/20/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Ranjit J. Lamech                                            07/12/2011
      Comments:



1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
