                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             CONCEPT/APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                        69614

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24 October 2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Ghana                              Project ID: P129329
                                            Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Building the Capacity of the Urban Poor for Inclusive Urban Development
in Ghana – Phase 1
Task Team Leader: Andrea Zeman
Estimated Approval Date: 2 October 2011     Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2013
Managing Unit: FEUCA                        Lending Instrument: Grant
Sector: Urban
Theme: Technical Assistance

Other financing amounts by source: CA MDTF US$250,000



Environmental Category: C
Simplified Processing                   Simple [X ]            Repeater [ ]
Is this project transferred to the region         Yes [ ]               No [X ]


B. Project Objectives [from Grant Proposal]:
The objectives of the Project
   1. To increase the public knowledge and information available on the magnitude and
       characteristics of settlements of the urban poor in Greater Accra Metropolitan Area
       (GAMA).
   2. To strengthen the capacity of communities to actively engage in constructive, results-
       oriented public community dialogue.

C. Project Description [from Grant Proposal]:

The Project will provide technical assistance for the following components:




Activities under objective one will include:
      Mobilizing communities to actively participate in local planning and development
       through the establishment of savings groups
      Identifying and training community leaders on methods of community profiling and
       savings
      Profiling all slums in four of the eight municipalities comprising Greater Accra
      Validating community profiles through consultation with selected urban stakeholders
   




   

   

   


The Project is a component of the Cities Alliance “Land, Services and Citizenship for the Urban
Poor? (LSC) program in Ghana, which aims to align urban development efforts at the national
government, local government and community levels and include the urban poor in planning and
decision-making processes.

The Project’s environmental and social impact will be temporary and negligible and will not
produce any irreversible environmental and social impact that could trigger safeguards policies.
The Project is a non-investment set of capacity building activities and is currently not linked to
any parallel or follow-up lending operations of the World Bank.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):

The Project will include data gathering and analytical work focused on the Greater Accra region,
but has no site-specific interventions.

E. Identify Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

The grant recipient is Slum Dwellers International, which has supervised previous Cities
Alliance grant-funded technical assistance projects. The Implementing Agency is SDI’s Ghana-
based affiliate, Peoples’ Dialogue.
Mr. Farouk Braimah, Director of Peoples’ Dialogue will manage project implementation, and
Mr. Joel Bolnick, Coordinator of Slum Dwellers International will supervise the project
implementation.

Andrea Zeman, Urban Specialist, FEUCA, from the World Bank will supervise implementation.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialist:
Not Applicable: The project will provide technical assistance.
The project has been classified as OP/BP 4.01 “Category C? and therefore no Environmental
and Social Management Plan is required.


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)             Yes         No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                     X

Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X

Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X

Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address                            X
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A
B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   ISDS: N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: N/A


IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Andrea Zeman                                             24 Oct 2011
    Approved by:
    Cities Alliance Safeguards Focal               Phyllis Wanjiku Kibui                                    02 November 2011
    Point or Regional Safeguards
    Coordinator:
      Comments:
    Program Manager:                               William Cobbett                                          02 November 2011

       Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
