                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/02/2012                                     Report No.: AC6641
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P056256                   Original Project Name: Urban Water
                                               Project
Country: Ghana                                 Project ID: P129544
Project Name: Additional Financing for Ghana Urban Water Project
Task Team Leader: Ventura Bengoechea
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 13,         Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: AFTUW                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: Water supply (85%);Central government administration (15%)
Theme: Urban services and housing for the poor (60%);Water resource management
(30%);Infrastructure services for private sector development (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             50
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
                                                                         0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                          Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project’s two principal development objectives are to: (i) significantly increase
access to the piped water system in Ghana’ urban centers, with an emphasis on improving
access, affordability and service reliability to the urban poor; and (ii) restoring long term
financial stability, viability and sustainability of the GWCL. The projects development
outcomes are: (i) improved reliability and financial viability of selected urban water
utilities; and (ii) increased access to piped water networks in selected urban areas.
  Under the additional financing, the PDO will remain unchanged, except for some minor
proposed rewording for more clarity in the measurement of the outcome indicators. The
proposed new text is: The Project development objectives are to: (i) increase access to
affordable and reliable piped water supply in targeted urban centers with an emphasis on
the poor; and (ii) improve financial viability of the Ghana Water Company Ltd. (GWCL).

3. Project Description
The Project comprises the following four components:
 (a) Network Expansion and Rehabilitation (US$103.0 million). This component is
designed to support: (i) increasing the amount of treated water for sale; (ii) extending
service to low income areas; and (iii) rehabilitation of the existing network to reduce non-
revenue water. It also includes dam safety upgrades, meters, engineering and vehicles and
equipment for Ghana Water Company Limited (GWCL), Regional and District offices.
 (b) Public-Private Partnership Development (US$6.5 million). This component
supports the payment of the private operator under the proposed management contract
and technical and financial auditors to measure the operator's performance.
 (c) Capacity Building and Project Management (US$6.5 million). The largest
allocations in this component go for Training (US$2.0 million) and Technical Assistance
(US$2.5 million). The Training component is left un-specified because the Management
Contract Operator will propose a training plan once it is in place and can assess training
needs. Also included here are allocations for training in the GWCL Headquarters,
vehicles, office equipment, support for the PMU and ensuring environmental safeguards.
 (d) Policy Reform and Institutional Development (US$16.0 million). The major part
of this component is to finance the anticipated retrenchment program at the Ghana Water
Company Ltd as well as support to the Public Utilities Regulatory Commission.

  The proposed AF will provide funds to: (i) complete the original project activities that
have suffered from unanticipated cost overruns and financing gap (US$ 42 million); and
(ii) implement additional activities that would scale up the project’s impact. (US$ 8
million).

 The original activities that need to be completed include the rehabilitation and
expansion of water systems in the following urban areas: Aboso, Bogoso, Prestea, Elubo
and Axim (Western Region); Dunkwa-On-Offin and Breman Asikuma (Central Region);
Akim Oda, Akim Ofoase, Suhum, and Asamankese (Eastern Region); Kpando, Sovie,
Anfoega, Nkonya and Peki (Volta Region); Agona and New Edubiase (Ashanti Region);
Berekum (Brong-Ahafo Region); Tamale (Northern Region); Wa (Upper West Region);
and Bawku and Navrongo (Upper East Region). The additional activities include the
rehabilitation and expansion of the water distribution system of Winneba (Central
Region), which may also feed nearby communities such as: Apam, Ankamu,
Mamkoadze, Ansaful, Pomadze and Okyereko.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will be scattered nationwide with a rolling work program. Specific works will
deal with provision of piped water services and will be carried out in urban areas only.
The original investment program included the rehabilitation and expansion of water
supply systems in the ten regions. However, the works in the Brong Ahafo and Upper
East Regions could not be tendered due to lack of funds. The proposed AF will finance
these works and will cover the financing gap in the rest of the activities. The additional
activities in Winneba are of the same nature as the original activities.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Moses Yao Duphey (AFTEN)
   Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                    X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The key safeguard policy issues raised by the project are:

 a. The potential water quality and health risks of additional water supply causing
overloading of municipal water drainage and treatment and disposal systems;
 b. Ensuring that new infrastructure (e.g. transmission mains, distribution lines,
boreholes, power supply lines) are located in a environmentally safe places so as to avoid
or minimize adverse environmental and social effects;
 c. Managing construction activities to avoid or minimize adverse environmental and
social effects; and
 d. Compensating land owners/users for construction disturbances, and perhaps some
resettlements issues.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No adverse long-term impacts are anticitated.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Alternate routings of water transmission and distribution lines will be considered as and
when appropriate.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Prior to appraisal of the original project, the Borrower prepared an Environmental
Assessment and Management Plan (EMP) for the first package of civil works, a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the entire Project, and a Dam Safety Report
(DSR) focusing on the first year civil works. The consultant developed and delivered a
resettlement training plan for Project staff and consultants so they could prepare
resettlement plans (RPs). In accordance with OP 4.12 requirements and as indicated in
the RPF, appropriate RAPs or ARAPs were prepared for the identified specific sites for
project activities for both FYIP and for the ongoing SYIP. These RAPs and ARAPs have
been properly disclosed for the ongoing activities, including locally in the participating
regions and districts. Funds for compensation payments to FYIP PAPs were obtained
from MOFEP with delay due to lengthy budget process. To avoid delays in the future,
special arrangements to create an escrow account have been proposed as indicated below.
Implementation of the SYIP RAPs and ARAPs has started in the various regions.

 International Waterways: It is possible that the Project's civil works will precipitate
increased abstractions from all three of Ghana's international waterways:

 •      the Volta system (comprising the Red, Black and White Volta Rivers, the Dayi
River, the Tain River, Lake Volta, and the Volta river below the Lake Volta) which rises
in and/or borders all three border states (Cote d'Ivoire, Burkina Faso and Togo) and Mali;
 •      the South-Western River system (comprising the Bia, Tano, Ankobra and Pra
Rivers (rises in or borders Cote d'Ivoire); and
 •      the Coastal River System (comprising the Todzie River) which borders Togo.

 An analysis of the Project's expected incremental abstractions estimates that the Project
could increase total abstractions from all three international river basins by about 4.3
million cubic meters per year. For each river basin, incremental extractions under the
proposed Project would equal less than one half of one percent of total annual run-off.
These results were incorporated into an OP7.50 letter required for notification of the
other riparian states which was sent prior to Appraisal.

 Since the AF contributes to filling financing gaps and the new activities in Winneba
(Central Region) do not involve international waterways there is no requirement to send a
new notification.

 Since the project finances water supply systems that may draw directly from a reservoir
controlled by an existing dam, it is subject to the requirements established under OP/BP
4.37. The twenty two water supply systems financed by the project will be supplied from
groundwater, except four that will be supplied from small dams and three from large
dams. The small dams will be periodically inspected by qualified engineers and a post-
project plan will be prepared before end of implementation. The large dams are Barekese
Dam (15 m) in Kumasi, Weija Dam (16 m) in Western Accra, and Akosombo Dam (73
m) in the Volta Region. The Barekese and Weija dams were inspected by a team of
international experts as part of the ongoing dam rehabilitation component being financed
by NDF. As for Akosombo, the main source of hydropower in Ghana that was financed
by the WB, it is periodically inspected in accordance with policy requirements and the
last safety inspection was completed in 2011.
 Ghana has a relatively strong Environmental Protection Agency capable of reviewing
the adequacy of environmental and social assessments, and monitoring the
implementation of consequent recommendations and plans. The Ghana Water Company
has staff with similar capacity. The PMU is staffed with safeguards personnel qualified to
manage the preparation of EMPs and RAPs, with the support of regional GWCL staff,
during Project implementation. The PMU has adequate experience and knowledge for
ensuring safeguards due diligence and should be able to undertake the additional
responsibilities without any problem. The PMU’s performance has been rated
satisfactory in all respects. Safeguards compliance has been rated satisfactory except for
Involuntary Resettlement that is rated moderately satisfactory due to some delays with
the payment of compensation, which were mostly caused by delays in funds release by
MOFEP. Once implementation is completed, the rating will be raised to satisfactory.

 The Borrower conducted an extensive consultations program to inform the public about
the project and to identify their concerns with it. To date, these concerns have not
included safeguard issues. Results of the consultations undertaken by the consultant
during the preparation of the safeguards studies informed project implementation. For
Winneba where the actual sites for the pipelines and other related activities have not been
determined, the RPF for the original project have been updated to inform the new
activities. This was done by means of an addendum to the original RPF that was cleared
and disclosed in country and at the infoshop on 17 and 29 february 2012 respectively.
Preparation for site specific RAPs/ARAPs will commence as soon as designs for the
additional works have been completed and layout identified. The process for preparing
the RAPs/ARAPs for the new intervention areas have started. The RAPs/ARAPs will be
prepared through consultations, reviewed and cleared by the Bank and the GoG's EPA,
disclosed in country and at the World Bank's InfoShop. It is expected that the preparation
will be completed by April 2012.

 For the works in the Upper East and Brong Ahafo regions, to be undertaken with the
AF, the GoG has prepared EMPs. To avoid delays regarding implementation of
compensation payments, the GoG will establish an escrow account in the amount of
estimated compensation to be paid to PAPs during the next 12 months starting from
February 2012. The escrow account will be periodically replenished by the GoG as the
payments are made.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the Ministry of Works and Housing, the Ghana Water
Company, Limited and the municipalities and their residents the water supply systems
serve and benefit. GWCL launched a communications and consultation program on all
aspects of the project, including environmental and social safeguards issues. Safeguards
documents (EMPs, RPF, RAPs and DSR) have been disclosed according to Bank policy
through the InfoShop, World Bank headquarters, Washington DC and in Ghana, both
centrally and in the municipalities. The project will do additional consultations in the
regions that will benefit from these AF activities. Consultations will be held with
potential PAPs, District Assemblies, NGOs, traditional authorities among others using
participatory methods.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 04/30/2004
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/07/2004
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/07/2004
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 04/30/2004
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/07/2004
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/07/2004
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?             Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)         Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the         Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                           Yes
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts      N/A
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements        Yes
been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         Yes
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        Yes
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Ventura Bengoechea      03/01/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Moses Yao Duphey        02/29/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah    02/29/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   03/01/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Alexander E. Bakalian   03/01/2012
  Comments:
