                                                                              70288



                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             CONCEPT/APPRAISAL STAGE


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11 November 2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Ghana                            Project ID: P129726
                                          Additional Project ID (if any):N/A
Project Name: Sustainable Urban Local Government Capacity Building in Ghana
Task Team Leader: Andrea Zeman
Estimated Approval Date: November 11,     Estimated Completion Date: December 30,
2011                                      2013
Managing Unit: FEUCA                      Lending Instrument: Grant
Sector: Urban
Theme: Technical Assistance

Other financing amounts by source: CA Bill & Melinda Gates TF US$414,160



Environmental Category: C
Simplified Processing                   Simple [X ]                Repeater [ ]
Is this project transferred to the region         Yes [ ]                   No [X ]


B. Project Objectives [from Grant Proposal]:
The main objective of the Project is to enhance the strategic planning, governance and resource
mobilization capabilities of Ghana’s cities as a contribution to economic growth and urban
poverty reduction, as well as to strengthen and enlarge previous successful and on-going urban
development interventions. These capabilities must be enhanced to ensure equity, inclusiveness
and responsiveness to all sections of city populations, including women and men.

C. Project Description [from Grant Proposal]:
This capacity building project, which targets the local authorities of the eight jurisdictions that
comprise the Greater Accra Metropolitan Area, has five main components:

   1. Strengthening the primary actors within the local governments to lead and manage
      inclusive urban development. City leaders are experiencing significant challenges in the
      communities they lead. Those who are successful manage change through systematic
      strategic thinking, planning and measurement. Understanding the different frameworks
      and tools for conducting effective stakeholder outreach, making sense of changes in their
      operating environments and engaging in strategic planning can enhance a local
   government leader's ability to position the city in achieving desired goals and outcomes.
   The outcome of this training will be a city that thinks and acts strategically to achieve its
   long-term desired goals. The activities under this component are:
       a. Organise International Training of Trainers (ToT) programme in strategic
           leadership and management for ILGS staff;
       b. Sessions on Inclusivity in Strategic Leadership and City Management;
       c. Develop modules for Local Training in Strategic leadership & Management;
       d. Conduct training in Strategic leadership & Management;
       e. Conduct training in preparation of strategic plans;
       f. Conduct training on mainstreaming gender into strategic planning; and
       g. Conduct gender sensitive case studies on governance issues relating to public–
           private partnerships (PPPs).
2. Strengthening strategic, spatial and human settlement planning skills of local
   government staff. Strategic spatial and human planning should be process-oriented and
   should be based on consensus building among stakeholders as a means of integrating
   sectoral interventions. Key stakeholders will be equipped through training and coaching
   with the required skills to execute this agenda. The activities under this component are:
       a. Develop training materials in human settlement and spatial planning;
       b. Conduct onsite training on human settlement and spatial planning;
       c. Conduct case studies on “ A new governance paradigm for managing human
           settlements?;
       d. Conduct training in gender analysis of human and spatial settlement planning;
       e. Conduct training on mainstreaming gender in human and spatial settlement
           planning;
       f. Organise workshop on “Strategic spatial planning and Sustainable cities –
           Practices and Perspectives?;
       g. Provide coaching on the development of human and spatial settlement plans;
       h. Monitor process of development of gender-sensitive human and spatial settlement
           plans;
       i. Organise re-call sessions for experience-sharing sessions/practitioners' forum on
           gender dimensions and issues in urban spatial/ human settlements of local
           government;
       j. Organise workshop on dispute resolution in urban planning; and
       k. Organize workshop on “Citizen Participation in the Spatial Planning process?.
3. Strengthening skills of local government staff in the identification of and access to
   alternative financing mechanisms to ensure better service delivery. Local
   Government staff will be empowered to envision and attract new funding streams to
   finance service delivery through the sourcing of non-traditional revenue sources as can be
   found in public-private partnerships. The training will include supporting the local
   governments in the identification of a range of prospective local and international finance
   and development partners, including banks, real estate and infrastructure developers,
   sister-city partners, NGOs, bi-lateral and multi-lateral agencies. Activities under this
   component are:
       a. Conduct training on development of marketable investment proposals;
       b. Provide coaching to support the local authorities to develop marketable
           investment proposals; and
          c. Monitor process of development of marketable investment proposals by the local
              authorities.
   4. Strengthening capacity of local government to develop responsive and accountable
      local governance. The development of social accountability involves improved
      government practices, enhanced citizens’ awareness and participation, increased civil
      society influence and upgraded analytical and financial reporting capacity. Local
      government authorities and other non-state actors will be imbued with the requisite
      capacity and skills to enhance effective participation and engagement with citizens.
      Activities under this component are:
          a. Conduct training on the development of Citizen Report Card;
          b. Monitor process of development of Citizen Report Card by local authorities;
          c. Organize workshop on Mechanisms and Applications of Social Accountability for
              public service delivery;
          d. Organize workshop on civic engagement, social accountability and the use of
              strategic communications;
          e. Organize workshop on gender and inclusive social accountability for public
              service delivery;
          f. Organize workshop on participatory local governance with traditional leaders;
              including queen-mothers and social organizations and local government officials;
          g. Organize interactive sessions between urban local government planners and
              stakeholders/beneficiaries (market women, female residents);
          h. Conduct training on Participatory Budgeting; and
          i. Conduct training in gender responsive budgeting.
   5. Strengthening coherent metropolis-wide responsiveness (in planning, service
      delivery and disaster management). The occurrence of metropolis-wide problems,
      such as flooding, service duplication and inter-utility interference, together with the
      strengthening of contiguous spatial development and its associated meshing of
      administrative boundaries within the greater metropolitan area require new approaches in
      planning, service delivery, disaster management and land management. Although some
      legislative instruments exist for joint arrangements, they are yet to be operationalised.
      This activity will focus on sensitizing key actors in the respective municipalities to an
      elevated, metropolitan-wide strategic outlook, and on seeking consensus on the
      mechanics of such joint initiatives towards the development of a forum that brings
      together such key actors to pursue the requisite joint actions. Successful experiences (and
      tools) in metropolitan planning, service delivery and disaster management will be drawn
      from for this activity. Activities under this component are:
          a. Organize learning visit to a country in the south Africa (Johannesburg)
               with similar fragmented administrative zones that has successfully developed the
              framework and approaches for strategic metropolis-wide interventions in
              planning, service delivery and disaster management; and
          b. Stakeholders in planning, service delivery and disaster management will be
              supported, through facilitated meetings, in the development of operational
              arrangements that enable the achievement of such metropolis-wide interventions.

The Project is a component of the Cities Alliance “Land, Services and Citizenship for the Urban
Poor? (LSC) program in Ghana, which aims to align urban development efforts at the national
government, local government and community levels and include the urban poor in planning and
decision-making processes.

The Project’s environmental and social impact will be temporary and negligible and will not
produce any irreversible environmental and social impact that could trigger safeguards policies.
The Project is a non-investment set of capacity building activities and is currently not linked to
any parallel or follow-up lending operations of the World Bank.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):

The Project will include training and coaching for the local governments of the Greater Accra
region, but does not include site specific interventions.

E. Identify Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

The Implementing Agency is the Institute of Local Government Studies, a public management
development institution under the Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development
established by an Act of Parliament in 2003, which has implemented a considerable number of
donor-funded technical assistance projects, including current projects of two Cities Alliance
members – AFD and GIZ.

Dr. Kwadwo Ohene Sarfoh, Dean of Consultancy and Advisory Services of ILGS will supervise
the project implementation.

Andrea Zeman, Urban Specialist, FEUCA, from the World Bank will supervise implementation.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialist:
Not Applicable: The project will provide technical assistance.
The project has been classified as OP/BP 4.01 “Category C? and therefore no Environmental
and Social Management Plan is required.

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                  Yes          No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                           X

Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                    X

Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                             X

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                        X

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                         X
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                                         Yes              No             TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                                            X

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                                       X

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                 X

Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                            X

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                     X

Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address                                                              X
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   ISDS: N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: N/A


IV. APPROVALS
    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Andrea Zeman                                                  11 Nov 2011
    Approved by:
    Cities Alliance Safeguards Focal               Phyllis Wanjiku Kibui                                         28 Nov 2011
    Point or Regional Safeguards
    Coordinator:
      Comments:
    Program Manager:                               William Cobbett                                               29 Nov 2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
