                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                         RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 04/30/2012                                    Report No.: AC5782
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Guatemala                           Project ID: P087106
Project Name: LAND ADMINISTRATION II APL
Task Team Leader: Enrique Pantoja
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 2,        Estimated Board Date: December 14, 2006
2006
Managing Unit: LCSAR                         Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                             Loan
Sector: Central government administration (66%);Sub-national government
administration (34%)
Theme: Land administration and management (25%);Rural markets (25%);Personal and
property rights (24%);Municipal governance and institution building (13%);Indigenous
peoples (13%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            62.3
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                       0.00
         Financing Gap                                                  0.00
                                                                        0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Land Administration Program's overarching objective is to (i) increase legal security
of land tenure and (ii) strengthen the legal and institutional framework for land registry
and cadastre services in the country. This is to be achieved through a participatory
process for conflict mitigation and resolution that includes indigenous and non-
indigenous communities.

 The project Development Objective (PDO) of Phase II of the Program is to foster the
process of achieving land tenure security in the Project Area through the provision of
efficient and accessible cadastral and land administration services.

3. Project Description
The Project is implemented by the Registry of Cadastral Information (RIC). The project
has four components: (a) cadastral and land regularization, (b) maintenance of cadastral
information and municipal services, (c) legal reforms and institutional strengthening, and
(d) project management and monitoring and evaluation.

 Component 1. The objective of this component is to modernize cadastral registry though
surveying and land regularization processes in 41 municipalities in eight departments
(The number of target municipalities was changed from 55 to 41 taking into account
increased costs and the project indicators adjusted accordingly. For more details, see
Restructuring Project Paper for the Guatemala Land Administration II Project, Report no.
54966-GT, June 26, 2010.) This component finances pre-fieldwork activities
(socioeconomic diagnostic, geodetic and mapping work necessary for field surveys),
communication campaigns, surveying of macro boundaries (inter-municipal boundaries,
communal lands, protected areas, and territorial reserves), and parcel-level surveying and
validation in urban and rural areas. As a result of these activities, RIC will issue cadastral
notifications to inform the beneficiaries and the Cadastral and General Property
Registries about the regular or irregular status of the parcels. A percentage of these
parcels could be eligible for titling and regularization.

 Component 2. The objective of this component is to support the establishment of
Municipal Cluster Offices in the Cadastral Zones, provide technical assistance to RIC for
the purpose of building capacity and maintaining an updated cadastre, and the provision
of technical assistance to selected municipalities in land administration services.

  Component 3. The objective of this component is to improve the legal framework in
Guatemala and strengthen the institutional capacity of the agencies involved in its
application. It finances (a) the formulation and promotion of legal and regulatory
instruments linked to the cadastral process; (b) the strengthening of the institutions
involved, including the training of their staff; and (c) the development of the
technological platform and implementation of an integrated cadastre-registry information
system.

 Component 4. This component covers the costs of the project Coordination Unit (within
RIC), monitoring and evaluation systems, including participatory evaluation mechanisms,
independent evaluations and audits, and inter-institutional coordination activities.

  The ISDS has been updated to reflect the triggering of the Involuntary Resettlement
Policy OP 4.12, which would be the Project’s Third Restructuring. This restructuring is
done as a precautionary measure to manage any restriction of access that could occur as a
result of the demarcation of protected areas’ external boundaries. As required, the
Borrower prepared a process framework to mitigate any restrictions on access to natural
resources in the unlikely scenario that such impacts occur. The systematic cadastral and
regularization activities financed by the project are largely outside the purview of OP
4.12 as set forth in footnote 8 of this policy regarding disputes between private parties in
land titling projects. Moreover, the Project does not include cadastral and regularization
activities within protected areas. This restructuring does not imply or demand changes in
the environmental management of the project.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project includes cadastral survey and regularization activities in 41 municipalities
located in the Departments of Alta Verapaz, Baja Verapaz, Chiquimula, Escuintla, Izabal,
Quiche, Sacatepequez, and Zacapa.

 The Social Assessment estimated that about 64% of population in the project area is
indigenous. The main indigenous groups are Q'eqchi, Poqomchi', Achi, Chorti,
Kaqchikel, Poqoman, and Garifuna. In these indigenous societies, communal lands
continue to play an important role in their collective identity, livelihood strategies, and
social capital. A communal land is the territorial space in which indigenous communities
and peasants share property, possession or usage rights. Based on the findings of the
Indigenous Peoples and Peasants Communal Land Assessment, the communal lands can
be broadly classified in three groups:

 (i)    Communal use: land and natural resources are used collectively, but the
community has no title or legal claim over the land;
 (ii) Communal possession: community has a historic or ancestral claim over the land,
but this claim is not registered in the Public Registry;
 (iii) Communal ownership: land is registered in the Public Registry as communal
property under the ownership of an indigenous community.

 Indigenous groups and peasants have different land use patterns within communal lands.
A typical pattern includes land plots for housing, agricultural production, forest
conservation, land held collectively for the exploitation of natural resources (i.e. forests
for the collection of fuel wood), and temporal land allocations to community members to
conduct a productive activity (trabajaderos). Some communal lands also include
archeological, religious and sacred sites for indigenous peoples.

 Guatemala is also a country of great biological diversity. The Environmental
Assessment identified a wide range of ecosystems and biodiversity systems in the project
area; some of which are already under conservation regimes. There are seven legally-
recognized protected areas in the Project area that are relevant to cadastral surveying
activities:

 1. Sierra de Las Minas (Biosphere Reserve, 240,803 ha, declared in 1990): This PA
extends across the departments of Baja Verapaz, Alta Verapaz, El Progreso, Izabal, and
Zacapa. There are a wide range of natural habitats within the reserve, including
Mesoamerica's largest cloud forests, as well as important mining sites. It is co-managed
by the Non Governmental Organization (NGO), Fundacion Defensores de la Naturaleza.

 2. Bocas del Polochic (Wildlife Reserve, 20,760 ha, declared in 1996): This PA is
located in the department of Izabal. It encompasses the Polochic river delta and includes
wetlands, flooded forests, and savannas as well as the shorelines of Lake Izabal. It is co-
managed by the NGO, Fundacion Defensores de la Naturaleza.
 3. Agua Volcano (Protected Area, 12,600 ha, declared in 1956): This PA is located in
the departments of Escuintla and Sacatepéquez. It includes a volcano that is currently
inactive but has the potential of producing debris flow that could inundate nearby
populated areas. It is managed by the national agency in charge of protected areas,
CONAP.

  4. Fuego Volcano (Protected Area, 12,150 ha, declared in 1956): This PA is located in
the departments of Escuintla, Sacatepéquez and Chimaltenango. It includes a volcano that
is currently active. It is managed by CONAP.

 5. Pacaya Volcano (National Park, 2,000 ha, declared in 1956): This PA is located in the
departments of Escuintla and Guatemala. This volcano had its most recent eruption in
May 2010. It is managed by CONAP.

 6. Quetzaltepeque Volcano (Protected Area, 1,072 ha, declared in 1956): This PA is
locanted in the department of Chiquimula, and includes an inactive volcano. It is
managed by CONAP.

  7. Biotopo del Quetzal (Protected Biotope, 1,022 ha, declared in 1977): This PA is
located in the department of Baja Verapaz. The reserve encompasses cloud forest, which
is the natural habitat of the quetzal. It is co-managed by the University of San Carlos.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Jason Jacques Paiement (LCSSO)
   Ms Tuuli Johanna Bernardini (LCSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                           X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES:
 The project was classified as a Category B, and an Environmental Assessment and
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) were prepared. The Environmental Assessment
identified areas of environmental importance in the project area, thereby triggering the
Natural Habitats and Forests policies.

 There is a range of potential environmental impacts (positive or negative) that could be
associated with increased land tenure security. On the positive side, safer property rights
can reduce the need to demonstrate possession through deforestation, and encourage
long-term land management and land use intensification. On the negative side, the project
could induce deforestation in anticipation of the cadastre, and, if land markets become
more dynamic, the project could lead to greater deforestation from increased economic
activity and encourage the sale of newly titled lands to migrate to frontier areas. It is
impossible to quantify a priori the combined effect of these indirect impacts, but overall
the project is expected to have a positive impact, especially through measures such as: (i)
the recognition and declaration of communal lands, particularly those managed by
indigenous peoples, that is expected to lead to conservation of forests and other natural
resources; (ii) the demarcation of protected areas is expected to help avoid creating
further tenure issues within these areas; and (iii) the EMP is expected to help enhance the
positive aspects of land tenure security and promote the monitoring of land use changes.

 The EMP is mainstreamed within the overall project (Components 1 and 2), rather than
being a separate component. The EMP provides for: (i) physical demarcation of the
external boundaries of buffer zones of protected areas; (ii) cadastral surveying of the
external boundaries of indigenous / peasant communal lands (which will be positive from
a forest conservation standpoint); (iii) geo-positioning of archaeological and other sites of
cultural significance; (iv) communication activities for environmental aspects to rural
project beneficiaries; and (v) promotion of land use impact monitoring.

  The project is expected to help demarcate 430 kilometers of protected areas' boundaries.
At least four of the seven protected areas relevant to the project are expected to be fully
demarcated. The physical demarcation of the protected areas’ external boundaries will be
coordinated with the cadastral surveying to ensure that no land regularization activities
take place within these areas under the Project. The protected areas will be demarcated
with permanent monuments and local communities will be consulted in the demarcation
of boundaries. The EMP includes measures to ensure that the negative environmental
impacts of the demarcation process are minimized, including the appropriate disposal of
any byproducts. The social communication strategy includes workshops with local
communities, organizations and authorities to disseminate information about to the
protected area and sustainable land use practices as outlined in the management plans
available in some protected areas. The Project, however, does not include preparation or
implementation of management plans.

 SOCIAL ISSUES:

 The Social Assessment estimated that indigenous peoples account for about 64% of the
population in the project area, thereby triggering OD 4.20 (the concept meeting review
was held before July 2005). Recognition of indigenous peoples' land rights is challenging
in Guatemala and the identification of their communal lands is of foremost importance
towards protecting these rights. The cadastral survey will systematically document claims
to communal lands. In some cases, the project may be able to assist the indigenous
communities in registering their lands as communal property in the Property Registry. In
consultation with indigenous peoples in the project area, the Borrower prepared an
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (IPDP) which describes culturally compatible
mechanisms for assuring that the project consults and benefits indigenous communities,
and measures to avoid and/or minimize adverse impacts on indigenous peoples,
particularly the risk that their land rights may not be protected during the cadastral
survey. The project has also prepared a social communication strategy to ensure that
information about the project is properly disseminated and that indigenous peoples and
peasants who most are illiterate and monolingual will be able to have enough information
to make a free and well informed decision regarding their lands. The communication
strategy is conducted in Spanish and in indigenous Mayan languages. The IPDP includes
specific activities, timeline, budget and responsibilities for ensuring that the rights of
indigenous peoples are respected and that they are properly informed and consulted
during the cadastral process.

  The procedures for the identification and delimitation of indigenous peoples' communal
lands are new in Guatemala, and RIC will be pioneering this activity. Many NGOs and
civil society stakeholders are interested in ensuring that the process is carried out
adequately. To ensure that their concerns are addressed, the project includes periodic
meetings with institutions and stakeholders from civil society. These meetings are
expected to contribute to identify concerns and other issues, and these inputs shall be
reflected in the implementation of relevant project activities. In addition, RIC has
established a Unit for Implementation of the Regulations for the Recognition and
Declaration of Communal Lands that includes the Project Coordinator, the Social
Specialist, and the Legal Advisor from the PCU.

 As noted above, the Project includes demarcation of the external boundaries of the
buffer zones of selected protected areas, which could result in the involuntary restriction
to access to natural resources. Accordingly, the Borrower prepared a Process Framework
describing the participatory process that would be followed to identify the eligibility
criteria of potentially affected people and the measures to assist these people to improve,
or at least maintain their livelihood, while maintaining the sustainability of the protected
area. The framework also describes conflict resolution mechanisms and the arrangements
to implement and monitor the process. The document is consistent with the technical
guidelines for demarcation of protected areas and the social communication strategy of
the project.

 OVERALL ISSUES:
 Compliance with safeguard policies triggered by the Project has been satisfactory to
date. The IPDP is being implemented as planned, supported by a communication
strategy. The EMP was mainstreamed into project activities and no negative
environmental effects have been identified thus far. The PCU includes an environmental
and a social specialist, and social facilitators.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Project activities are expected to result in more information available about the land
tenure situation in 41 municipalities. The technical and legal analyses will help to
determine if a land parcel is regular or irregular. For some type of irregularities, RIC will
be able to assist in the regularization. When the solution is outside the scope of RIC,
landowners will receive information about their situation and steps to follow. In order to
avoid any potential misunderstanding or misinformation that may raise concerns or
conflict, the project is conducting the following mitigating activities: (i) preparing and
implementing targeted dissemination campaigns in the languages spoken in the region;
(ii) providing training to RIC local staff, municipal officials, and cadastral technicians in
participatory methodologies; and (iii) encouraging the participation of marginalized
groups, such as women and the elderly, in the cadastral process.

  The process framework was prepared to help minimize and mitigate adverse impacts in
case any involuntary restrictions are identified during project implementation. The
Project does not include any cadastral survey or regularization within the protected areas,
nor does include the preparation or implementation of management plans. In the long
term, demarcation of protected areas could have an indirect effect on involuntary
restriction of access to the natural resources base if public agencies use this information
to impose new or more stringent restrictions.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The project is defining macro boundaries, such as protected areas, and identifying
indigenous and peasants’ communal lands in a coordinated manner with the parcel-based
field activities in adjacent areas. This sequence ensures that the cadastral survey is not
conducted in areas under special conservation or social regimes without following the
appropriate coordination and consultation mechanisms. RIC coordinates with CONAP
and the co-administrators of the protected areas for any activity involving protected areas
and with indigenous peoples' representatives for any activities involving their communal
lands. The project also minimizes adverse impacts by not conducting cadastral or
regularization activities within protected areas. RIC may conduct land use mapping
activities within communal areas upon the request of the concerned communities.

  Following the successful experience of Phase I, the project provides free and bilingual
paralegal assistance and technical staff working on cadastral surveying has received
training on key legal aspects of the cadastre, safeguards' policies, and conflict resolution
mechanisms. The cadastral surveying of indigenous communal lands will be conducted
with the participation of representatives of indigenous communities and organizations.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project's Operational Manual includes, inter alia, an IPDP, an Environmental
Management Plan (EMP), and a Process Framework. The IPDP and the Process
Framework provide the mechanisms to ensure project compliance with Bank's social and
environmental safeguard policies. The EMP is intended to enhance the project's positive
environmental impacts, as well as to prevent or mitigate any negative ones.

 RIC will implement a social communications campaign that will cover all stages of the
cadastral process. In alignment with the IPDP and the Specific Regulations for the
Recognition and Declaration of Communal Lands, the campaign will include measures to
ensure that indigenous peoples receive information in their own language and through
culturally appropriate means. RIC will deliver project information in Spanish and
indigenous languages, and technical staff working on the cadastral survey will either
speak the indigenous languages prominent in the region or have the aid of a translator.
Each of RIC’s zonal offices will have a social unit that will oversee the implementation
of the campaign. The social unit will be available to answer questions, assist with
requests (e.g. filing a request for the identification of communal lands), and attend
grievances. The social unit will also collaborate with CONAP to provide information
about natural resource management to people living in the borders of protected areas. In
addition, indigenous peoples will have the right to use their traditional conflict resolution
mechanisms.

 Consultation with indigenous peoples will be another key element of project
implementation. As part of the preparatory activities, RIC conducts detailed diagnostics
on each municipality identifying communal lands and the appropriate mechanisms for
consultation with the communities. Community leaders also can file requests for the
identification of communal lands in RIC’s zonal offices. Consistent with the IPDP and
the Specific Regulations for the Recognition and Declaration of Communal Lands,
community members must ratify any request for the identification of communal lands.

  Strong institutional capacity is necessary to effectively address safeguard issues. RIC,
the implementing agency, is a relatively new institution, and has experienced initial
difficulties with Project implementation. Implementation has improved following the first
project restructuring related with strengthening of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU).
The restructuring included providing the PCU with increased operational and
administrative autonomy, and addition of expertise in inter-institutional coordination,
communication and legal aspects. However, to continue mitigating institutional
weaknesses, in addition to regular strengthening activities, special attention has been
given to capacity building in (a) information, consultation and participation; and (b)
institutional and legal issues of Land Administration in Guatemala, including, inter alia,
(i) demarcation of protected areas; (ii) delimitation of indigenous and peasants communal
lands, and (iii) regular cadastral survey activities.

 Moreover, project implementation requires that RIC coordinates with other co-executing
agencies. Co-executing agencies need to develop a sense of project ownership if RIC
expects them to help in safeguards compliance and implementation in general. An Inter-
institutional Coordination Committee has been established to meet this end.

  In addition to the coordination at central level with co-executing agencies, the project
needs to coordinate with local governments, as well as local branches of RIC and co-
executing agencies. Municipalities and co-executing agencies have different capacity
levels. Coordination is fostered in the project through the participation agreements signed
by RIC with each co-executing agency and municipality. In addition to the Inter-
institutional Coordination Committee, coordination is being promoted through the
Technical Committee established in RIC and a dedicated project team in the zonal
offices. Also, an Operational Manual and Technical Guides have been prepared to guide
field activities. Developing a strong partnership with the municipality is a critical element
of the preparatory activities for cadastral surveying. To further mitigate risks to local-
level coordination, workshops are being organized to identify implementation problems
and measures to address them, including the participation of RIC, relevant co-executing
agencies and local government.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders identified in the assessments and consulted during project preparation
include:

 (i)    institutions and local organizations working in conflict resolution (Secretariat of
Agrarian Issues, National Fund for Peace, Human Rights Attorney's Office, social
pastoral unit of the Catholic Church, conflict resolution forums);
 (ii) national and local organizations (CNP-Tierras, CNOC, CONIC);
 (iii) national and local government authorities (mayors, municipal technical staff, local
development councils or COCODES, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Environment,
Protected Areas National Commission, Land Fund, Office of Territorial Reserves,
Institute of Archeology);
 (iv) gremial organizations and associations (producers' associations);
 (v) academic institutions and professionals involved on land issues (lawyers,
agronomist).

 Since 2005, the preparation of the project involved several consultations held with a
variety of actors, which included NGOs, indigenous peoples' leaders and communities
(national, Department and local level), government authorities and private sector. There
were three main stages for consultation: (i) preparation of the Environmental and Social
Assessments; (ii) preparation and dissemination of the IPDP; (iii) preparation and
dissemination of communal lands assessment; and (iv) preparation of the Specific
Regulations for the Recognition and Declaration of Communal Lands.

 The Environmental and Social Assessments were first consulted in three events held in
October 2005. These events were held in Coban for the stakeholders in the departments
of Alta and Baja Verapaz, in Rio Hondo for stakeholders in the departments of
Chiquimula, Izabal, and Zacapa, and in Guatemala City for stakeholders in the
departments of Guatemala, Escuintla, and Sacatepequez. A total of 135 people assisted to
these events. Copies of the EA (in Spanish) are available on request from all RIC offices
in Guatemala and at the Bank's InfoShop in Washington, DC.

 In compliance with OD 4.20, an IPDP was prepared. The IPDP was prepared following
a highly participatory process involving the direct consultation and participation of
indigenous peoples' leaders, organizations and communities. The content of the IPDP is
consistent with the provisions in ILO Convention 169 on land and natural resources and
the right to consultation and participation. A Diagnostic on Indigenous and Peasants
Communal Lands was prepared to initially identify the location of communal lands; their
governance structure, local forms of organization and economic activities developed in
these lands.

 More specifically, in 2006, the IPDP was consulted during two rounds with
representatives of indigenous communities, regional indigenous organizations,
indigenous women's organizations, spiritual leaders, elders' councils, peasant
cooperatives, COCODES, mayors and municipal technical staff.

 The objectives of the first round of consultation were to disseminate information about
the project, consult the first draft of the IPDP, and record participants' perceptions and
expectations about the project and IPDP. This round was held in September 2006 and
included seven events in the departments of Alta Verapaz, Baja Verapaz, Chiquimula,
Escuintla, and Sacatepequez. The IPDP was widely consulted with representatives of
indigenous organizations.

 The objective of the second round of consultation was to disseminate and consult with
indigenous peoples a revised version of the IPDP which included a strategy to mitigate
the negative impacts and risks identified during the first round. This round was held in
November and December 2006 and included six events in the Departments of Alta
Verapaz, Baja Verapaz, Chiquimula, Escuintla, and Sacatepequez. Findings of the IPDP
and SA were also disseminated and consulted at national, Departmental and local level.
This consultation process included actors such as indigenous peoples' leaders and
communities, academia, NGOs, government authorities, Congress, and private sector.

 The IPDP was updated in 2011 to ensure consistency with the legal framework,
especially the Regulations of RIC Law and the Specific Regulations for the Recognition
and Declaration of Communal Lands (see below), which have not been formally
approved in 2006. Copies of the IPDP (in Spanish) are available on request from all RIC
offices in Guatemala and at the RIC’s website and Bank's InfoShop in Washington, DC.

 In addition to the consultations for the IPDP, the Borrower also conducted consultations
while drafting the Specific Regulations for the Recognition and Declaration of
Communal Lands. RIC prepared the regulations with a team of social and legal experts,
which included the Maya Legal Association of Guatemala. The draft regulations were
consulted in nine events held during March 2007. These events included each of the
indigenous groups in the project area. The draft regulations were also sent to ILO for
their review to ensure that it was in compliance with Convention 169 as it was signed and
ratified by the Government of Guatemala. The final version of the regulations is available
in RIC's website.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  10/27/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              11/02/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               11/02/2006
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/14/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              01/14/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               01/25/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  10/30/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              11/02/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               11/02/2006
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of          No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other     N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?               Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential             Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                     Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed      Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   Yes
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           Yes
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        N/A
provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's          Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project      Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the              Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Enrique Pantoja            03/09/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Tuuli Johanna Bernardini   03/09/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr Jason Jacques Paiement     03/09/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan            03/09/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Ethel Sennhauser           03/09/2012
  Comments:
