                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/07/2011                                       Report No.: AC5652
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Guatemala                           Project ID: P055085
Project Name: SECOND RURAL AND MAIN ROADS PROJECT
Task Team Leader: Stephen Jeremy Brushett
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 13,        Estimated Board Date: May 6, 2003
2003
Managing Unit: LCSTR                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Roads and highways (90%);Sub-national government administration (10%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (67%);Participation and civic engagement
(33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            46.70
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      17.02
                                                                       17.02
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The overall goal of the Second Rural and Main Roads Project (SRMRP) is to reduce
poverty and build social cohesion by improving and maintaining access in rural areas to
markets, schools, health centers, and other social and economic infrastructure through
broadened community participation. By emphasizing beneficiary involvement, the
SRMRP will assure the local development decisions reflect the needs and priorities of
rural communities.

 The specific project development objectives of the SRMRP are:

 (i) Improve rural access on a sustainable basis by improving paths, rural roads,
secondary/departmental roads and main roads;

 (ii) Develop institutional capacity at the local and central level, for rural roads
management and strengthening stakeholder participation; and
 (iii) Generate employment in rural areas by developing an entrepreneurial culture using
cost-effective technologies, providing a demonstration effect through pilot programs, and
promoting spillover effects.

3. Project Description
The Project comprises four components as follows:

 Component 1: Rural Roads Program (US$20.3 million, including US$14.62 million
IBRD financing): The component would finance the rehabilitation of about 830
kilometers of rural roads in the MAMSOHUE and HUISTA mancomunidades of the
Huehuetenango department to restore year round transit and meet specific transport needs
of the local communities. This component would also support the development and
implementation of the following pilot projects: (i) road maintenance pilot; (ii) trails, paths
and footbridges; and (iii) labor intensive road rehabilitation works.

 Component 2: Main, Secondary/Departmental Roads Program (US$24.45 million,
including $17.35 million IBRD financing): This component comprises four sub-
components: (i) reconstruction of main roads; (ii) upgrading of unpaved secondary and
departmental roads; (iii) rehabilitation of unpaved departmental roads; and (iv) road
maintenance.

 Component 3: Support for Decentralized Rural Road Development (US$4.96 million,
including US$4.00 million IBRD financing): The component will support the extension
of sustainable arrangements and financing of local roads in rural areas developed under
the First Rural and Main Roads Project (ADIMAM mancomunidad in San Marcos
department pilot) to other departments. MAMSOHUE and HUISTA in Huehuetenango
department would each create a Road Technical Assistance Unit (UTAV) staffed
according to needs. Planning, programming and management of rural roads maintenance
would be contracted out to the private sector. To support the activities the component
would finance: (i) municipal capacity strengthening; (ii) technical assistance for project
implementation; and (iii) works supervision.

 Component 4: Support for Main/Departmental Roads (US$9.8 million, including
US$5.0 million IBRD financing). The component would finance operational costs and
equipment for the project coordination unit (COFINEX) during the project
implementation period, as well as engineering studies and final designs and works
supervision.

 Components 1 and 3 are managed by the Instituto de Fomento Municipal (INFOM), the
Municipal Development Institute. Components 2 and 4 are managed by the Direccion
General de Caminos (DGC), the General Directorate of Roads.

 The project was first restructured with an amendment to the loan agreement dated July
28, 2006. The selection of rural roads under Component 1 and of secondary and
departmental roads under Component 2 was amended so as to include the rehabilitation
of roads damaged by Hurricane Stan.
  The allocation of loan proceeds to components 1 and 2 was amended at the time of the
referenced first amendment as well as through a reallocation dated June 28, 2010. The
final revised allocations are respectively US$17.6 million and US$19.63 million.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project is being implemented in the departments of San Marcos and Huehuetenango
in the western part of Guatemala. The terrain is rugged and improving access often
involves dealing with steep gradients and curves with requirements for earth movement
and rock cuts. The project area is predominantly rural with about 70% of population
comprising indigenous groups mostly involved in agricultural and commercial activities.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Jose Vicente Zevallos (LCSSO)
   Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (LCSAR)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project entails the rehabilitation and improvement of existing roads in the
Huehuetenango and San Marcos departments. Some of the roads are secondary or
departmental and, as such, are under the authority of the DGC. The remaining roads are
rural roads managed by mancomunidades (associations of municipalities) with the
technical support of the Instituto de INFOM.

 The Environmental Assessment (EA) for this project (completed in 2002) did not
anticipate significant environmental impacts and, consequently, the project was classified
as Category #B#. According to the information available when the EA was prepared,
none of the roads included in the project required significant changes in road
characteristics such as width or alignment. The project#s impacts were projected to be
mostly positive. The project was expected to reduce rural poverty and build social
cohesion by improving and maintaining access in rural areas to markets, schools, health
centers, and other social and economic infrastructure through broadened community
participation.

 Three policies were triggered at the time of appraisal: OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental
Assessment, OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources, and OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous
Peoples. The latter policy was triggered because the project area is predominantly
populated by indigenous groups, representing about 70% of the population. The
indigenous population of western Guatemala is thus the primary beneficiary of the project
improvements.

 OP/BP 4.12 was not triggered in 2002 because the project was not expected to cause
involuntary resettlement. Information available at the time of appraisal indicated that
none of the road sub-projects required significant changes in width or alignment.
Nevertheless Section 3.10 of the Loan Agreement, dated October 24, 2004, provided for
Resettlement Action Plans to be prepared and carried out by the Borrower (through
DGC) and by INFOM, in the event of any displacement of persons as a result of sub-
projects.

 In July 2006, a first amendment to the Loan Agreement was introduced, which changed
the selection of roads in the Project Description to include both rural and
secondary/departmental roads damaged by Hurricane Stan. In August 2007, the final
designs for secondary/departmental roads in Huehuetenango (those originally selected
under the project) and in San Marcos (selected following the restructuring) were
completed. These designs involved the upgrading of the roads to national standards,
which required changes in width and alignment in some sections of the existing roads.
Bids were solicited and contracts signed on the basis of these designs.

 During November and December 2009, the Bank learned that significant displacement
of households had taken place in three sections of the secondary road improvements
being carried out by DGC in Huehuetenango (Santa Barbara, La Libertad, and Tohon-
Santiago Chimaltenango). This situation was a result of a combination of: (1) inclusion
in the final road design of the widening of some sections, which required excavations and
side cuts of rock or slope; (2) design changes; and (3) construction of new houses very
close to the existing road and, in some cases, encroaching the existing road, since designs
were finalized.

 Through DGC, the Government has subsequently identified 82 cases where dwellings
and other structures have been or will be affected to accommodate the final alignment of
the secondary road improvements in Huehuetenango and San Marcos. The Government
has also documented 157 cases where land has been taken to permit road construction,
but no dwellings or other buildings have been affected. Additional information on the
structures and land affected is provided in section II.A.4, subsection on Involuntary
Resettlement.
 In sum, the adverse social impacts of the project have been greater than initially
anticipated. However, the initial environmental classification of the project (Category B)
remains correct, given that the project has not had nor is expected to have any large-scale
adverse impacts that are irreversible or unprecedented.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Future activities to improve road conditions are not expected to have any significant
indirect or long-term adverse environmental and social impacts on the natural resources
or the people of the project area.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The final designs of each subproject took into account the location of dwellings and other
structures in relation to the existing road. Dwellings and other structures were avoided
when possible.

 Approximately 70% of the dwellings affected by the project were affected by a single
subproject (CA1-Santa Barbara, in the Aldea Chicol. This adverse impact, by far the most
important of this project, could have been avoided by a change in the original design of
the subproject, which was proposed by the supervision consultant to the community of
Chicol. However, the change was opposed by the majority of this community, as
represented by the Community Development Councils (Consejos Comunitarios de
Desarrollo or COCODES). The change proposed by the supervision consultant would
have excluded from the project the section of the road that affected the dwellings. The
COCODES and most of the community of Santa Barbara rejected this proposal because
the widening and paving of this section was in their interest.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental Assessment

  The main environmental impacts requiring mitigation during road construction are:
slope stabilization, prudent exploitation of borrow pits and material deposits, earthwork
management, disposal of hazardous and surplus materials, management of dust and noise,
and protection of road drainage and water sources. In order to assure adequate
environmental management during construction, for each subproject there has been
developed an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) in compliance of the national
legislation taking into account the Environmental Manual for Road Design and
Construction, developed by the DGC.

 In order to assure compliance with the required environmental measures, the
environmental specialist of the DGC, together with the staff of INFOM, has paid special
attention to the environmental aspects during supervision of works. The monthly
supervision reports prepared by construction supervisors include a section dedicated to
monitoring the implementation of the EMPs. No unanticipated environmental impacts
have arisen during project implementation.

 Physical Cultural Resources

 In regard to physical cultural resources, no specific adverse effects of the project have
been identified to date or are anticipated in the future. However, in the event of any
potential impact on archaeological sites or objects with cultural value, the Anthropology
and History Institute must to be informed and the contractor must carry out the actions
mandated by the Institute to protect such sites or objects.

 Indigenous Peoples

 To ensure that Indigenous Peoples within the project area of influence fully benefit from
the project and are adequately protected, a consultative process with communities was
carried out as part of the social analysis and assessment conducted during project
preparation. This assessment involved the use of surveys to better understand the specific
investment needs of the communities in the project area. In this manner, local
communities had an active role in selecting the works to be carried under the project, as
well as in determining the timing for implementation. The roads proposed by local
authorities and the communities were evaluated on technical grounds by DGC in the case
of secondary roads and by INFOM in the case of rural roads.

 A Social Management Plan, under the management of INFOM, was prepared during
project preparation to maximize the positive impacts of the project and to prevent and
mitigate potentially adverse impacts. As part of this Plan, INFOM disseminates
information on subproject characteristics, subproject status, and measures to address
adverse impacts through workshops and community assemblies. Presentations in Mam
Maya, Sipacapense Maya and other Mayan languages are made with the support of the
presidents of the Community Development Councils (Consejos Comunitarios de
Desarrollo or COCODES). A capacity building specialist is a member of the core
management team for the project, supported by two #promotores sociales# who are based
in each of the three mancomunidades that participate in the project. INFOM has also
developed public awareness campaigns. These activities are coordinated with the
mancomunidades, which assign qualified technical personnel to monitor and oversee the
implementation of the Plan.

 Involuntary Resettlement

  As indicated above, DGC and the supervising consultants have identified 82 cases
where dwellings and other structures have been or will be affected to accommodate the
final alignment of the secondary road improvements in Huehuetenango and San Marcos.
Of the 82 cases, 56 involve the total or partial loss of dwellings. In the remaining 26
cases, other types of structures were affected, such as fences, entrances and water
structures. Compensation has been or is being provided in the form of reconstruction of
dwellings and other structures at equivalent or better standards. In most cases (38) the
reconstruction is taking place on residual land of the affected properties; in 18 cases it is
taking place on land located in close proximity to the affected properties.
  In addition, DGC and the supervising consultants have documented 157 cases where
land has been taken to permit road construction, but no dwellings or other buildings have
been affected. In all of these cases, land was taken on the basis of agreements with the
affected landowners. In 87 cases, the local municipalities provided cash or in kind
compensation for the loss of land and/or crops or trees. In 63 cases, the landowners
agreed to allow the construction contractors to dump excavated soil on their land in
exchange for improvements that they requested on the residual land. A common practice
was to use excavated soil to fill and grade uneven sections of the properties affected. In
the 7 remaining cases there is no evidence of the compensation provided, if any.

 The various types of agreements signed by the land owners suggest that the
compensation provided is generally in line with Bank requirements. In some cases,
however, the forms of asset reposition or compensation provided are not well
documented, while in other cases there is evidence of non-compliance with Bank policy.

 In order to address documentation and non-compliance issues, DGC is implementing a
Corrective Action Plan (CAP), dated April 26, 2011, which is expected to be completed
at the end of 2011. A key component of the CAP is the development of a grievance
redress mechanism to ensure the delivery of replacement housing and other compensation
offered to affected families. The grievance redress mechanism is also likely to capture
cases that may have been missed by government efforts to document past resettlement.
In addition, as part of the CAP, DGC will implement a communications strategy to keep
the communities well informed about the progress in the reconstruction of affected
houses and of the civil works. In the CAP, DGC also commits to complete the
documentation of losses caused by the project, so that it can make the necessary
arrangements for ongoing constructions to be finalized and/or any missing compensation
to be provided to affected parties, thereby bringing the project#s asset reposition
measures in line with OP 4.12 and the project#s Resettlement Policy Framework (Marco
de Política de Reasentamiento) dated October 2004.

 The Bank will supervise the implementation of the CAP closely until its completion.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The process for replacing lost dwellings and other structures has been discussed and
agreed with affected families. Compensation for the loss of agricultural land is not well
documented in all cases. The CAP will document the extent to which the agreements
reached with affected people are in line with Bank requirements. Any non-compliance
will be addressed in consultation with the affected families. DGC has been advised by
the Bank to engage very closely with the affected communities until all pending issues
are resolved. The Bank will remain engaged through continued close supervision of
remedial actions.
 In the long term, the operation of the improved infrastructure requires active and
equitable involvement of beneficiary communities in the maintenance of the roads. In the
case of San Marcos, Comités Viales (Roads Committees) have already been formed and
are being equipped and trained under the project. A similar process is expected to be
followed in Huehuetenango after the completion of the ongoing works and beyond the
closing date of the project.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   11/15/2002
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                               10/25/2002
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                05/09/2003
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   10/27/2004
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                               05/25/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                05/23/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   04/10/2003
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                               04/10/2003
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                06/13/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
The above dates reflect the date that the PAD was approved by the board including
Annex 16.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?             Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  No
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        N/A
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                            Name                 Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Stephen Jeremy Brushett         05/31/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez   05/31/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Jose Vicente Zevallos           05/31/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan                 05/31/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Aurelio Menendez                06/01/2011
  Comments:
