                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/20/2012                                   Report No.: AC5677
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Guinea-Bissau                           Project ID: P114115
Project Name: Education for All - Fast Track Initiative Program
Task Team Leader: Geraldo Joao Martins
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 15,           Estimated Board Date: May 25, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: AFTED                             Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                 Loan
Sector: Primary education (80%);Secondary education (20%)
Theme: Education for all (100%)
SPF Amount (US$m):                0
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                         0.00
         Education for All - Fast Track Initiative                       12.00
                                                                         12.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                            Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                     Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to improve learning and teaching environment in
primary education in Guinea-Bissau.

3. Project Description
The project will consist of three components:

 Component 1: Increased Availability of Adequate School Infrastructure and Facilities
(US$7.3 million)
 This component has a single sub-component. It will support construction and equipment
of classrooms and related facilities (latrines). More specifically, it will support the
construction and equipment of about 200 classrooms (50 classrooms in year 1; 100
classrooms in year 2; and 50 classrooms in year 3) to help improve the coverage of
primary education, particularly in rural areas, and increase the proportion of schools
offering the full cycle of primary education (1-6 grades), and to reduce the number of
classrooms built with non-durable materials.
 Component 2: Increased Availability of Learning Resources (US$5.4 million)
  The aim of this component is to improve the quality of teaching in all three cycles of
primary education. This component will have two sub-components as follows:
  Sub-component 2.1 will support increased provision of teaching and learning materials
through: i) financing the costs of re-printing of textbooks for the first and second cycles
of primary education (about 280,000 students). Textbooks for these cycles already exist
and can be easily re-printed; ii) the provision of selected pedagogical materials to
primary schools, for which a list of eligible items have been established and approved
and iii) the review of curriculum of the first cycle of primary education; and
  Sub-component 2.2 which will support pre-service and in-service teacher training,
including the expansion of the capacity of teacher training schools through the
construction of three new teacher training schools in the North, East and South of the
country.
  Component 3: Strengthened Management Capacity (US$3.8 million)
  The aim of this component is to ensure normal and smooth functioning of the education
system, by strengthening the management capacity of the Ministry of Education and
communities.
  Sub-component 3.1 will support capacity development of central and decentralized
structures, by (a) better defining the role and functions of these structures especially those
related to fiduciary management; (b) recruiting approximately 60 young professionals to
fill vacancies in the MoE; (c) training key education staff at different levels; (d)
enhancing teacher management system focusing on the recruitment of contractual
teachers; and (e) improving the monitoring and evaluation functions of the MoE by
strengthening the Management Information System and establishing a learning
assessment system.
  Sub-component 3.2 will finance implementation of selected sector studies necessary for
the preparation of a fully-fledged 10 year Education Sector Plan (2014-2024), including
preparation of studies and strategies on pre-school education, inclusive education,
technical and vocational education strategy, HIV/AIDS policies and strategies, as well as
the development of students learning assessment system in primary education. The sub-
component will also support implementation of the communication strategy of the MoE.
  Sub-component 3.3 will cover the costs associated with management of the project.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will be implemented throughout the territory of Guinea-Bissau.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Bienvenu Rajaonson (AFTEN)
   Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                           X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                    X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                               X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                         X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                             X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                        X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                 X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The project anticipates the construction and
equipment of 400 classrooms and three teachers training schools. These foreseen
activities are expected to have before, during and after any works some potential social
and environmental impacts, which are sought to be minimal, site specific and
manageable. Given that the physical locations of these schools and training centers have
yet to be identified, the borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) which sets forth the basic principles and operational guidelines to be
followed when these locations are made known, during which time the Client will
prepare for each construction site a focused Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) or, if the impacts are minor and localized, Environmental and Social
Management Plans (ESMPs), with mitigation measures. The Bank safeguards team has
reviewed the ESMF and cleared the ESMF for public disclosure, both in-country and at
the InfoShop. The same process will be applied for each of the ESIAs and/or ESMPs
prepared by the Client.

  Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): The foreseen project activities (construction
of the 400 classrooms and the three teachers training centers) may likely disturb some
socially valuable cultural resources that may have a negative impact on the community.
The ESMF includes guidance on addressing “chance finds? and physical cultural
resources issues pertaining to the proj sites, and suggests the best way to minimize the
risks associated.

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): The project activities are expected to have
some potential social impacts such as land acquisition and/or loss of socio-economic
assets, which are sought to potentially result in physical relocation of some project
affected people (PAP) and/or loss of their source of livelihoods (socio-economic and
culturally valuable assets). Because the physical locations of these schools and teachers
training centers are still unknown, the client has prepared a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF), which set forth both the basic principles and guidelines to be followed
by the client prior and during the physical construction phases. Once the physical
locations of the schools and teachers training schools are known, the client will then
prepare a focused Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for each specific location to ensure
proper measures are being taken to mitigate any tangible IR issues that may rise. The
RPF has been disclosed both in country and in Bank’s InfoShop prior to project appraisal.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
N/A

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Though the client has gained some experience in implementing Bank funded project, its
institutional capacity on safeguard operational policies is still weak. However, as part of
the project implementation process, tangible steps will be taken to strengthen their
capacity, particularly through technical assistance and training. The project will support
training of stakeholders like the PIU, the National Environmental and Social Agency
(NESA/CAIA), the Institute of Biodiversity (IB), Regional Education Directorates (RED)
and members of the General Directorate of School Infrastructures (GDSI) on Bank
safeguard policies, particularly at the beginning of project implementation. Training
themes will include inter alia implementation and monitoring of environmental and social
management and reporting requirements. To ensure good and timely compliance with
Bank safeguard policies core requirements as well as effective implementation of
safeguard instruments, the project will have a Social and Environmental Focal Point
(SEFP) as part of the core team of the PIU to properly handle social and environmental
aspects of the project. The SEFP will work collaboratively with both the NESA/CAIA
and BI and arrange, for the environmental and social screening as well as the
environmental and social impact assessment of all sub-projects. The SEFP will also work
collaboratively with local service providers selected among the existing NGOs and
trained subsequently to ensure tangible monitoring of social and environmental aspects of
the project. Training workshops will be organized for all actors involved in the
implementation of safeguards policy upon project effectiveness.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Key Stakeholders are: PIU, National Environmental and Social Agency
(NESA/CAIA); Institute of Biodiversity (IB); Regional Education Directorates (RED5);
Members of the General Directorate of School Infrastructures (GDSI) and NGOs.
 Local public consultations as well as focus groups have been used as mechanisms for
consultation in addition to higher-level meetings to ensure a wide participation in the
development and understanding of the safeguards tools. The feedback and concerns
stemming from these consultative meetings have been reflected in the final safeguards
tools. The most important issues raised by the communities and Regional authorities were
issues of land donation and how these would be administered, availability of land and
identification of appropriate sites to avoid flooding and collapse of structures which has
been a huge problem in the past. Also important were the issue of weak institutional and
human resources capacity for implementation of the safeguard instruments. The Planned
national training workshops will benefit from the Bank’s expertise in both social and
environmental management and all actors will participate and benefit from these training
workshops to help enhance the national and regional capacities for environmental and
social management.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 04/13/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             04/13/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/13/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 04/13/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             04/13/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/13/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Geraldo Joao Martins    04/06/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Bienvenu Rajaonson      04/07/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna      04/07/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Serigne Omar Fye        04/07/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   03/20/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Peter Nicolas Materu    04/07/2011
  Comments:
