                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/20/2012                                     Report No.: AC6660
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P077317                 Original Project Name: Guinea Electricity
                                             Sector Efficiency Improvement
Country: Guinea                              Project ID: P129148
Project Name: Additional Financing - Electricity Sector Efficiency Enhancement Project
Task Team Leader: Moez Cherif
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 20, 2012 Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2012
Managing Unit: AFTEG                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (68%);Energy efficiency in power
sector (21%);Other Renewable Energy (11%)
Theme: City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (40%);Administrative and civil
service reform (20%);Regulation and competition policy (20%);Climate change (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             15
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
                                                                         0.00
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the Project is to support the Recipient in its efforts to improve the
technical, commercial and operational efficiency of its power sector through critical
investment support and capacity building.

3. Project Description
The Project has three components:

 •      Distribution Efficiency Improvement. The component reengineers core business
processes and deploys innovative technology solutions, such as pre-payment meters, in
order to improve service delivery to reduce technical and commercial losses in the
Kaloum area of Conakry;

 •    Rehabilitation of Critical Generation Facilities: Financing of critically required
equipment and spare parts and technical assistance for operations, to improve the
reliability and efficiency of the existing Garafiri hydroelectric plant and the Tombo
thermal power plant.

 •      Institutional Strengthening through Technical Assistance: Technical Assistance to
help improve commercial management of the powe utility and to implement an energy
efficiency program for the utility’s large customers. This component also supports a pilot
program to introduce energy efficient lamps.

  In order to provide the above support, the main content of the three project components
is:

 Component 1: Distribution Efficiency. The project supports investments in goods and
services related to implementation of the following initiatives:

 (a) distribution equipment, including underground cables, for reduction of technical
losses;
 (b) equipment for outage management center; and
 (c) electricity meters.

 These investments will strengthen the distribution infrastructure, improve quality of
supply and customer satisfaction, and reduce losses. Existing equipment will be replaced
by more efficient models in the project areas.

 Component 2: Efficiency Enhancement in Generation for rehabilitation of Tombo
thermal plant Unit III and spare parts for Garafiri hydropower facility. This will be in the
form of assistance for critically required equipment and spare parts. This support is
critical in view of the worsening generation capacity in Guinea. Efforts to improve power
availability would complement and reinforce the Government’s initiative to improve
commercial discipline and operational performance of EDG.

 Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Technical Assistance for Energy
Efficiency Gains and EDG Commercial Management. This component includes:

 •     Support for energy efficiency improvement and conservation:

 o      The project recognizes the need to sustain and scale up the efficiency gains that
will occur in the sector through these investments by promoting demand side
management (DSM) measures. Accordingly it would assist development of an
appropriate framework and institutional capacity for energy efficiency and conservation
programs;
 o      Purchase and distribution of high efficiency lamps; and
 •      Support for Commercial Management of EDG: This component will support
management effort to improve the company’s billing and collection performance through
the reorganization of the commercial function in EDG and training.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Component I will be implemented in Conakry, Guinea’s capital, in the Kaloum area.
Component II will be implemented in Garafiri at the site of the hydropower plant and at
the Tombo Thermal plant in Conakry.

  Under component I, existing distribution network will be rehabilitated with new
transformers, conductors, wires, underground cables, meters, etc. Existing equipment will
not be disposed of and will be used for distribution of electricity in less critical locations
not covered by the project.

 Under Component II, the project will mostly involve supply of critical spare parts for
replacement of existing/absent equipment in the two generation facilities (Garafiri
hydropower and Tombo thermal plants).

 Component III will provide technical assistance in terms of billing; customer data-bases,
demand and load forecast studies and energy efficiency programs. Used high efficiency
lamps and replaced incandescent lamps will be disposed of according to international
practice.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   ()

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                      X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Not applicable

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Not applicable
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Installation of equipment and distribution of spare parts will be done in accordance with
national and local laws and regulations.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Not applicable



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
  ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       N/A
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Moez Cherif                               03/20/2012
Environmental Specialist:
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Reynold Duncan                            03/20/2012
  Comments:
