                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/18/2013                                       Report No.: 75836
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Guinea                              Project ID: P145117
Project Name: Additional Financing to Productive Social Safety Nets Project
Task Team Leader: Fanta Toure
Estimated Appraisal Date:                    Estimated Board Date: July 31, 2013
Managing Unit: AFTSW                         Lending Instrument:
Sector: Other social services (100%)
Theme: Social safety nets (95%);Improving labor markets (5%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
         Free-standing TFs AFR Human Development                       2.00
                                                                       2.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
To provide income support to vulnerable groups and lay the foundations of a social safety
net strategy by testing some of the building blocks necessary for a larger system.

3. Project Description
This is an additional financing of $2 million to the original project of USD $25 million
which became effective in February 2013 and is a Specific Investment loan to be
implemented for five (5) years. The operation comprises three components: i) a labor
intensive public works program and life skills training in urban areas targeted at youth to
construct, rehabilitate and maintain critical urban infrastructure and create short-term
employment; ii) a pilot cash transfer to improve human capital in poor and food insecure
rural areas; iii) institutional and capacity building and project management aimed at
supporting the operational units of the program in the development of key elements of a
social protection strategy. The proposed additional financing focuses exclusively on
component 1.

 Component 1: Labor intensive public work program in urban areas with a focus on
youth and life skills trainings- (US$ 16.5 million funded by the original operation and $2
million funded by the proposed additional financing)
 This component has two sub-components: (i) temporary employment opportunities to
increase household's income while rehabilitating and creating community infrastructure;
and (ii) life skills development to reinforce basic life skills and workforce readiness
behavior to complement the experience acquired through participating in the LIPW.

  Sub-component 1.1: Temporary employment opportunities: This subcomponent aims to
temporarily increase the revenues of underemployed and unemployed in the country's
regional capitals. It provides temporary employment opportunities through labor
intensive public works to about 24,000 unskilled/low skilled people above the age of 18
in the eight regional capitals. The small and micro-projects will be drawn from local
municipal development plans, and selected in consultation with local populations in the
country's regional capitals. They are expected to include activities such as road
rehabilitation and maintenance, paving streets, paintings,
upgrading/rehabilitation/maintenance/construction of public and economic
infrastructures, gardening, sanitation, etc. In order to promote women's participation, a
quota of 30% of female participants will be observed. Further, the list of eligible micro
projects will be reviewed and updated to ensure that gender friendly activities are
included. An estimated 2.4 million person-days of labor (or 100 days of work per
beneficiary) will be created through the project.

 The proposed additional grant of US $ 2 million exclusively focuses on this sub-
component, and would raise the total component cost to US $18.5 million. The funds will
provide temporary employment opportunities to an additional 3,000 urban youth in the
country's capital Conakry, raising the number of beneficiaries for this component from
144,000 to 162,000 people. With this additional financing, the total number of people
employed through the project will increase from 30,000 under the original to 33,000, with
the person/days of work increasing from 2,240,000 to 2,700,000. The scaling up activities
will take place in Conakry, one of the areas of intervention of the original project with no
new areas added.

 Sub-component 1.2: Life skills trainings for youth: This subcomponent aims to provide
an estimated 5,000 youths with trainings in non-cognitive skills. The youth will be
selected among the LIPW beneficiaries based on demand, a minimum educational level
and regular attendance at the LIPW schemes. Training content will focus on topics such
as civic education, citizenship and democratic values, the rights and responsibilities of
workers, conflict resolution and national cohesion, hygiene and security in the workplace,
HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment, money management, team work, etc. The training
curriculum will be validated by a consultative commission with representation from the
private sector, civil society and training professionals. A total number of 100 training
sessions will be offered during the 5 years of project implementation. Each year, selected
LIPW beneficiaries will be organized in group of 50 people to attend 5-10 days trainings
after completion of the LIPW activities. Beneficiaries will receive a daily stipend during
the training.
 Component 2: Pilot cash transfer program to protect human capital- (US$ 5.5 million
only funded by the parent operation). The pilot cash transfer will have three
subcomponents: (i) design; (ii) pilot CT for nutrition and (iii) pilot CT for girl's
education.

  Subcomponent 2.1.: Design of the pilot project: This subcomponent aims to guarantee,
to the extent possible, the quality of the pilot cash transfer intervention. UNICEF, as the
only agency with the national network of local institutional infrastructures and the
technical capacity required to rapidly facilitate one of the first cash transfer interventions
for nutrition and education in the country will be contracted by the government for the
execution of this subcomponent. In addition, this sub-component will finance the
elaboration of a technical annex on targeting, beneficiary selection, registration and
payment methods for the pilot cash transfer, as a first step towards the establishment of
cash transfer systems.

 Subcomponent 2.2: Cash transfer for nutrition: This subcomponent aims to reduce the
malnutrition rate of targeted children. It will benefit at least 5,000 children aged 0-24
months that are affected by chronic malnutrition in the two regions with some of the
highest chronic malnutrition rates in the country (Kankan and Labe). The transfers will be
given to the mothers of the malnourished children, and will be made on a bi-monthly
basis. Nutritional training has been included in the package to maximize the impact of the
cash transfer on nutrition. Beneficiary and non-beneficiary households in targeted
communities will be trained in 8 essential family practices (EFP) on health, nutrition, and
sanitation.

  Subcomponent 2.3: Cash transfer for girls' education: This subcomponent aims to
increase the primary school completion rate among beneficiaries. The intervention will
target at least 5,000 girls in 5th and 6th grade in three regions where the achievement rate
of girls is among the lowest, namely Boké, Kankan and Labé. These regions also have the
lowest ratio of girls' enrollment rate of the poorest quintile over the same rate of the
richest quintile. Beneficiaries will be required to attend at least 80% of the sessions.
Supporting measures will be added to maximize the impact of the transfers on girls'
education. All households in the targeted villages will be sensitized to the importance of
girls' education.

 Component 3: Project coordination and institutional capacity building (US$ 3 million
only funded by the parent operation). Component 3 will ensure that the unit coordinating
project implementation, the Safety Nets Unit (Cellule Filets Sociaux -CFS) is operational,
and that it successfully and efficiently conducts supervision to ensure that the project is
implemented in conformity with key project documents including the Financing
Agreement, the procurement plan, and the project implementation manual. In addition,
this component will finance technical assistance including feasibility studies, institutional
capacity building and seminars and workshops in support of the work program of the
newly formed National Social Protection Group (NSPG).
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The LIPW will be implemented in the regional capitals of Conakry, Boke, Farannah,
Kankan, Kindia, Labe, Mamou, and Nzerekore. The additional funds provided will be
used in Conakry (one of the areas of intervention of the original project with no new
areas to be added).

 The pilot cash transfer project (covered under the parent operation) will be implemented
in rural areas in Boke, Kankan, and Labe.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Liba C. Strengerowski-Feldblyum (AFTN2)
   Ms Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (SDV)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The parent project is classified as Environmental Category B. The potential
environmental and social impacts of the LIPW will not be adverse, as they are likely to
be small-scale, site-specific and thus easily manageable. The AF will adopt the same
classification, and will not trigger any new policies. The scale-up activities will be the
same as those proposed under the original operation which have not yet been undertaken,
namely (a) road rehabilitation and maintenance of municipal roads; and potentially (b)
sanitation and drainage maintenance and rehabilitation; and (c) other activities to be
determined benefiting vulnerable communities, such as social and economic
infrastructure (such as rehabilitation of existing markets) and construction and
rehabilitation of public latrines. With regards to road rehabilitation and maintenance, the
specific activities undertaken would consist of: clearing and pruning of bush/tree
branches hanging onto roads, filling of potholes, cleaning of existing drainage
pipes/canals and culverts; clearing sand of roadways and road shoulders, road cleaning;
and creation and maintenance of public green spaces and gardens. The project can
generate positive social, economic, and environmental impacts. In spite of these potential
positive impacts, there is the also the recognition of potential negative impacts, which
calls for appropriate mitigation measures and institutional arrangements for their
implementation.

 The parent project triggers two safeguards policies: OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental
Assessment and OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. An Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the
parent operation have been prepared, reviewed, approved and disclosed in-country and at
the Infoshop. These instruments were disclosed in-country on April 9, 2012. The ESMF
was disclosed at the infoshop on April 30, 2012 and the RPF was disclosed at Infoshop
on May 2, 2012.

 The same instruments will apply for the AF and be used to guide the environmental and
social management of the project as soon as activities related with the execution of LIPW
begin. Thus far, there have been delays in implementation associated with effectiveness
delays for the loan. Therefore there has been no activities implemented under the labor
intensive public works component that are subject to the ESMF and the RPF. The general
environmental management clauses for civil works rehabilitation will be inserted into the
bidding documents and contracts. Detailed environmental assessments or Environmental
Management Plans and Resettlement Action Plans, as and when necessary, would be
carried out for all projects.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be small-scale, site-specific
and thus easily mitigated. There are no indirect or long term adverse impacts expected
during project implementation.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not relevant.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Since the location, size and magnitude of the LIPW micro-projects were not known, the
approach to safeguards was to develop an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to cover all activities to
be financed under the parent project. The same will apply for the AF. An environmental
consultant will be recruited to manage and oversee the environmental and social
management process, while providing institutional strengthening and on-the-job training
services throughout the project period. This consultant would work closely with the
implementing agency and other implementing entities to apply and strengthen the ESMF
and RPF procedures that will improve subproject quality and sustainability through
compliance with safeguards.
 The implementing agency is expected to use Bank screening procedures to identify,
assess, evaluate, mitigate and monitor the impact of the LIPW micro-projects on the
environment. These assessments will involve consultations with key stakeholders and
will inform the design of specific resettlement action plans and environment management
plans if necessary. Once the plans have been drafted, public consultations will be held
and community systems to handle grievances will be established. All key stakeholders
will be sensitized and trained on the mitigation measures.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders including government representatives, NGOs, civil society, community
representative, the media, and potential partners in micro-project implementation (the
local association of entrepreneurs), will participate in the public consultations process.
All the relevant bodies have been adequately informed of the Project. Concerns of the
communities and some details of consultations have been provided as Annexes
 in the ESMF and RPF.
 One of the key principles of this project from the outset was to foster participation of all
relevant stakeholders. This approach will be sustained throughout project
implementation. The environmental and social assessment studies, namely the ESMF and
RPF, were also carried out according to the same principle, using broad-based public
consultation approach, involving the above stakeholder groups. The objective was to
raise awareness of project activities and impacts and foster ownership on their part.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04/05/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  04/09/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   04/09/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04/05/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  04/09/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05/02/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          N/A
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name                             Date
Task Team Leader:                    Mr Azedine Ouerghi                               05/15/2013
Environmental Specialist:            Ms Liba C. Strengerowski-Feldblyum               05/14/2013
Social Development Specialist        Ms Paivi Koskinen-Lewis                          05/14/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                             06/13/2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                  Mr Peter Ivanov Pojarski                             06/19/2013
  Comments: Acting SM on 06/19/2013

  Note: ISDS has already been cleared by RSC on 06/19/2013. It is being re-submitted for disclosure
  to Infoshop.
