                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/03/2011                                    Report No.: AC5684
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Haiti                               Project ID: P124134
Project Name: Education for All Project in Support of the Second Phase of the Education
for All Program
Task Team Leader: Peter Anthony Holland
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 15, 2011 Estimated Board Date: October 27, 2011
Managing Unit: LCSHE                         Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                             Loan
Sector: Primary education (100%)
Theme: Education for all (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             70.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The PDO for APG 2 is to support the GoH’s national strategy for rebuilding the education
system through the implementation of sustainable programs to improve access,
particularly of under-served populations, and quality of primary education, and to
strengthen institutional capacity.

3. Project Description
The Project would co-finance the implementation of the Government’s Operational Plan
for Education (OPE) Component 1 aims to improve access and learning through i)
enhancing the government’s tuition waiver program, ii) supporting rural communities in
delivering education services, and iii) supporting the government’s school health and
nutrition program. Component 2 would improve pedagogic approaches through
supporting the Government’s accelerated teacher training program, training community
instructors, and modernizing distance education programs. Component 3 aims to
strengthen the institutional capacities of the MENFP and local authorities, with a focus on
the administrative office of the MENFP, the creation of the ONAPE. the integration of
local authorities in the education system, and the increasing of accountability throughout
the system, especially at the community level. Component 4 would support increased
capacity on the part of the Ministry to implement the Project.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project would be implemented nationally, focusing on the most remote areas in the
country. The geographic access to these parts is typically very difficult, with few roads
of any kind. It is not uncommon that footpaths through the mountains are the only
access, requiring several hours of travel. Project sites for school construction will be at
the community level where small-scale construction activities would take place on land
that will be donated by communities or municipalities. Only land away from physical
cultural resources and critical natural habitats will be considered for school construction.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Valerie Hickey (ENV)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The suite of potential adverse impacts will be small-scale in time and space related to
construction impacts and cooking fuel during operation. The existing ESMF focuses on
how to address construction-type impacts (what kind of training and protective gear
workers would receive; how waste, noise and dust would be managed, etc.). Any sites
requiring involuntary resettlement or that affect critical natural habitats, forests or
physical cultural resources will be screened out by MENFP#s local offices during the
approval process of community projects. Given the use of charbon for cooking as the
regular community contribution to the school health and nutrition program, OP/BP 4.04
(Natural Habitats) has also been triggered. The project will work with CIDA to identify
alternative energy sources for school cooking. The results of this work will feed into the
ESMF, which will then describe good practice for mitigating any potential adverse
impacts from these new sources and manage residual impacts arising from them. The
ESMF also includes a budget for safeguard actions and a snapshot of the institutional
arrangements for screening sites, developing mitigation actions, implementing these
actions and supervising adherence to them. The DGS will supervise the implementation
of the ESMF at each site. The ESMF will be disclosed and consulted upon prior to the
start of project activities in each community.

  The project will not support activities that result in involuntary resettlement as defined
under OP 4.12. However, despite population dispersion, rural density is high and scarcity
of available land for school construction within community settlements may be a
challenge, since land is intensively used for agricultural purposes. Communities will be
trained through the Grassroots Management Training (GMT) program to, among other
things, identify available and suitable public land that can be used for new school
construction, or available and suitable private land that can be voluntarily donated by the
community for the construction of new school. The project’s Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) includes guidance and a screening sheet to document
land ownership and the voluntary nature of land donations, where relevant.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The team does not expect any potential indirect and long term impacts given the limited
scale of the investments. Any potential for these types of impact would be screened-out
during the site-identification phase as described in the Environmental and Social
Management Framework.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Site-identification will follow the standards set out in the project’s Environmental and
Social Management Framework, which will screen out sites that impact physical cultural
resources or critical natural habitat, or sites that require involuntary resettlement.
Alternative sites will also be found in the event that preliminary identification of a site
reveals the need for pest management prior to construction.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Since the exact location of schools will not be known before project implementation, as
per OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), an Environmental and Social Framework
(ESMF) is required to outline how sites will be selected, and how potential adverse
environmental impacts at these sites will be identified, minimized, mitigated and
managed. This ESMF has been prepared by the DGS based on a previous framework
prepared by FAES and MENFP.

 FAES, who has ample experience preparing, implementing and supervising safeguard
actions under other Bank projects, will provide training to DGS in the implementation
and supervision of the ESMF. In addition, a consultant with experience in safeguards will
be recruited to build capacity in the DGS and develop internal systems necessary to build
safeguards capacity as an operational skill within the DGS.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the community members likely to benefit from the Project,
including the out-of-school children, their parents, and the potential community
instructors to be trained, as well as the larger community that would participate in the
management of the Project activities at the community level. Several visits have been
conducted to these areas to better understand the needs of the target population, and to
tailor the design of the operation. In total, about 20 communities in five departments
have been visited.

 The DGS will disclose a summary of the ESMF in each community in which school
construction will occur, in appropriate form and language, and host consultations on the
proposed procedures prior to site-identification, site-preparation and construction. The
ESMF will also be available on the DGS and Ministry of Education website.

 Second, there are several actors within the Ministry of Education that are stakeholders in
the Project, including the inspectors responsible for visiting the communities and
following-up on Project implementation, the Ministry staff in the decentralized offices,
and the staff located in Port-au-Prince. The visits to the communities also included
extensive consultations with the staff from the departmental education offices in the 5
departments visited. At the central level, several actors at the director and director-
general levels within the Ministry have participated in the Project preparation.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 07/19/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             07/27/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              08/03/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   No
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name      Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Peter Anthony Holland   07/20/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Valerie Hickey          07/20/2011
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan         07/22/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Chingboon Lee           07/22/2011
  Comments:
