                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                   APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/28/2012                                                             Report No.: AC5594
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Haiti                                Project ID: P121690
Project Name: Household Development Agent Pilot- Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Francesca Lamanna
Estimated Appraisal Date: N/A                 Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: LCSHS-DPT                      Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Other social services (50%); Health (35%); Pre-primary education (15%)
Theme: Nutrition and food security (50%); Child health (25%); Other human
development (25%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
         Rapid Social Response Program                                 1.50
                                                                       1.50
Environmental Category: B
Simplified Processing                         Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives

1.      The development objective of the HDA pilot is to test and learn lessons from a
new mechanism (i) to improve family health and nutrition practices, and (ii) strengthen
capacity to deliver social services directly to families in the pilot area.1 To do so, the pilot
will employ a three-pronged strategy: (i) provide nutrition and health related education to
beneficiary families and improve their awareness of the availability of social programs
and services; (ii) provide basic commodities and select services directly to the families;
and (iii) strengthen management and monitoring of the access to social services to
families.

2.      The achievement of the development objective of the pilot will be measured by
the following key performance indicators: (i) increase in percentage of children treated
for diarrhea with oral rehydration salts (ORS); (ii) decrease in percentage of children 6-
24 months with anemia; (iii) increase in percentage of children under one immunized for

1
  The selection of the area of intervention is based on poverty, nutrition and operational criteria (i.e., presence of other
WB financed projects, other donors and NGO activities, and NGOs agreement to collaborate on the implementation of
the pilot).
DPT3/Penta; and (iv) percentage of children who are weighed according to their age
group. The results framework for the proposed pilot is attached in Annex 1.

3. Project Description

3.      To achieve the development objective, the proposed HDA pilot will support the
following three components: (i) provision of social services to beneficiary families by
HDAs under the supervision of social workers (SW); (ii) institutional strengthening in
delivering social services to the poor; and (iii) project coordination, monitoring and
evaluation.

Component 1: Provision of Services to Families

4.      The objective of this component is to ensure provision of social services to
families. To this end, this component will finance the payment of the HDAs and SWs and
necessary supplies. The household development agent will be responsible for
contractually agreed number of families in and will visit them regularly with the aim to
improve information and awareness on health, nutrition and household hygiene and
sanitation, provide a package of basic commodities and services and where possible refer
families to other existing relevant social services and programs run by government,
donors, NGOs or private sector. Certain basic commodities will be provided directly to
families depending on their needs, such as micro nutrient powders, iron supplements and
de-worming tablets in home visits or community gathering. Some of the commodities
distributed to families by the HDA will be financed and procured by implementing
partners (i.e. mosquito nets and vaccinations by UNICEF) while the HDAs will be
responsible for the delivery and the proper use of the commodity. A memorandum of
understanding will be signed with implementing partners on the provision and
distribution of such commodities according to an agreed calendar. Additional supplies
needed by HDA and SW, such as transportation and communication needs (mobile
phones), training toolkits and a modular practical training itself which include the basic
tools to assess family needs, office supplies, monitoring cards and behavior change
education materials (posters, pictures) will be financed by this component. NGOs with
extensive experience with community agents will be contracted to manage the
information and service provision, under the supervision of FAES and where no NGOs
with relevant experience are identified FAES would directly execute the project.

5.     The principal expected results to measure progress of this component include the
number of HDA and SW trained in the new curriculum, the number of children 6-24
months receiving micronutrient powders, and the number of beneficiary families sleeping
under long lasting insecticide treated bed nets.

Component 2: Institutional strengthening for delivery of social services to families

6.     Funds for this component will be used to strengthen institutional capacity at all
government levels, including central, departmental, municipal, and community, to better
organize, manage, and deliver services to families. To achieve this, the pilot would
finance the following; (a) development of a platform and tools for sharing information on
the inventory of social services and programs among key stakeholders in the pilot area;
(b) the organization of workshops at the community, municipality and department levels
to identify strategies for strengthening service provision, coordination capacity of
government, donors and NGOs to prevent gaps in services, and community cohesion and
participation at local level; and (c) the strengthening of central coordination and support
capacity to provide overall guidance for the HDA initiative and enhance government
capacity to provide services to the vulnerable. During the implementation of the pilot, a
multisectoral Steering Committee chaired by the Minister of Finance which includes
decision-makers from key line ministries and representatives of United Nations agencies,
the World Bank and NGOs will be established to provide strategic guidance to the HDA
initiative. Prior to the scale-up of the pilot into the national HDA program, a centralized
social protection unit will be created, under a multi-sectorial minister, responsible for
tracking social initiatives, providing guidance, developing standards and policies,
providing technical support, and monitoring and evaluating to social initiatives in Haiti.
This unit will gradually replace the steering committee.

7.      The principal expected results to measure progress of this component include the
creation of a computerized dynamic inventory of social services and programs and the
number of NGOs updating and using it in the pilot area.


Component 3: Project Coordination, Management, and Monitoring and Evaluation

8.     This component will finance costs related to project coordination and
management, including the functioning of the Steering Committee and the Technical
Working Group, the supervision of the selection process for HDA and SW and the
supervision of the development of a training curriculum for the HDA and SWs. The
component will also support the supervision of the training, procurement, financial
management, internal auditing and program oversight. Furthermore, this component will
finance the development of a monitoring and evaluation mechanism for the initiative.

9.      Monitoring will be designed to facilitate learning and allow adjustments to the
project and will benefit from the creation of a management information system. More
specifically on management information system, this component will finance the creation
of a registry of beneficiaries in the pilot area to track beneficiaries and their
vulnerabilities. The information will be collected by the HDA with the support of the SW
during family visits and the information then inputted into a registry database. The
beneficiary registry will be available to different actors (government, donors, NGOs)
operating in the pilot area for use when planning their interventions. A common set of
output indicators will be regularly monitored and evaluated. An impact evaluation for the
pilot will be conducted at the end of implementation. The aim of the impact evaluation
will be to assess the cost-effectiveness of the HDA model on families’ wellbeing,
specifically, in phase one, on health and nutrition status. Funds have been pre-allocated
for collecting the baseline survey and to prepare the design of the impact evaluation. The
team is looking already into resources to finance the impact evaluation endline and
analysis itself.

10.     The principal expected results of this component are that the project is
implemented in a timely manner in accordance with procurement and financial
procedures, a beneficiary registry is operational and reports are submitted on time from
the regional to the central office.

Additional Financing:

11.     The proposed additional financing Grant, in the amount of US$1.5 million, will
provide additional financing to the Household Development Agent Project (P121690,
TF097793). The development objectives of the project remains to test and learn lessons
from a new mechanism (i) to improve family health and nutrition practices, and (ii)
strengthen the capacity to deliver social services directly to families in the pilot area. To
do so, the project: (i) facilitates access to basic social services (health, nutrition,
education, livelihoods); (ii) promotes positive behavioral change to beneficiary families;
(iii) provides basic commodities and select services directly to the families; and (iv)
strengthens management and monitoring of social services with a view to increase
efficiency.

12.     The Additional financing will serve to both scale up and deepen HDA activities
with existing beneficiary families. The RSR additional financing Grant will focus on: (i)
extending the implementation period of the project and scaling up operations in the
territory; (ii) providing support to the most vulnerable families; and (iii) facilitating data
collection, analysis and monitoring and evaluation for the initiative. The impact of the
additional financing will benefit from the fact that all methodological and operational
tools for the HDA are in an advanced stage of preparation.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis

The additional financing of the pilot Project will be implemented in the same
municipalities in the Central Department in Haiti.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                            Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                       X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                           X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                    X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                               X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                         X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                   X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                             X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                        X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                 X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

Given that the activities financed under the Additional Financing Grant remain
unchanged, the environmental assessment considered for the original Grant continues to
be applicable under the Additional Financing.

The safeguards issues under the original Grant and applicable to the Additional Financing
are described below.

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The project will trigger OP/BP 4.01. The main environmental issue under component 1:
Service Provision to Families of the proposed project is associated with the medical
waste for the immunization activities.

The outbreak of HIV/AIDS has added urgency and priority to the issue of injection
safety and with the adoption of mass campaign to raise coverage and the utilization of
community health workers as vaccines providers (UNICEF, World Health Organization
and more recently the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization) have worked
very closely with the industry, which has developed a type of needle which cannot be
detached from the syringe, that disable itself after the plunger is raised and depressed
once utilized.

The Household Development Agent (HDA) Project will adopt a healthcare waste
management plan that employs international best practice in using and discarding
syringes and where required improve the present country safety mechanisms trough close
supervision of the agent responsible for the immunization by the supervising social
worker, who will also interact with the entities responsible for the provision and
maintenance of incineration installation.
We are noting that there is a change in Environmental Category from C to B to correct
previous ISDS mis-categorized for this project.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

Under component 1 the project will finance the vaccination of children in the pilot
area.The risk presented by the multiple uses of unsterile needles and syringes and the
possible medical waste created by syringes has been a major public health concern since
the beginning of the Expanded Program of Immunization (EPI) in 1975. The project will
prepare and disclose a healthcare waste management plan that explains how syringes will
be used and carefully disposed using international best practice.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

Under this project individual vaccinators at the end of the day work will return the (a)
unused vaccines which have been carried to the field in a cold box, (b) the unused
syringes and (c) the bio safety box to the health unit equipped with cold chain and
incinerators. The full bio safety boxes are incinerated at the health unit level. The Haiti
Health Ministry has been assisted in establishing and maintaining incineration capacity
by PAHO/WHO and Jon Snow International.

The Household Development Agent (HDA) Project will adopt and where required
improve the present safety mechanisms trough close supervision of the agent responsible
for the immunization by the supervising social worker, who will also interact with the
entities responsible for the provision and maintenance of incineration installation.
The social worker, a new cadre supported by the project will provide close supervision to
the work of the agents that vaccinate; particularly the quality, coverage and safety of the
immunization which will be considered as an important element in designing the agent
remuneration based on performance.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

In Haiti a number of public and private stakeholders have been highly involved in
vaccinations efforts in Haiti over the past decades and have developed a number of
mechanisms to handling medical waste. The pilot will use agents and social workers to
reach poor and marginalized families to ensure that families are informed about the
environmental risks associated to medical waste.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  09/17/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              11/17/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               01/06/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Francesca Lamanna                            11/30/2012
Environmental Specialist:
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Glenn Morgan                                 01/10/2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mansoora Rashid                              12/18/2012
  Comments:
