                      PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID)
                                APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                           Report No.: 71637
 Project Name                 AF Infrastructure & Institutions Emergency Recovery
 Region                       LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN
 Country                      Haiti
 Sector                       Central government administration (34%); Solid waste
                              management (17%); Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways
                              (26%); Aviation (15%); Public administration- Transportation
                              (8%)
 Project ID                   P130749
 Parent Project ID            P120895
 Borrower(s)                  GOVERNMENT OF HAITI
 Implementing Agency
                              Ministere des Travaux Publics, des Transports et des
                              Communications (MTPTC)
                              Unite Centrale d'Execution, Rue Wilson
                              Port au Prince
                              Haiti
                              Tel: (509) 3446-3165
                              garijean@gmail.com
 Environment Category         [X] A [ ] B [ ] C [ ] FI [ ] TBD (to be determined)
 Date PID Prepared            July 26, 2012
 Date of Appraisal            July 19, 2012
 Authorization
 Date of Board Approval       September 25, 2012

1. Country and Sector Background

Country Context

Two and a half years after a massive earthquake ravaged the country substantial reconstruction
efforts continue to be needed for Haiti to achieve palpable improvements in the lives of its
citizens. As emergency response and early reconstruction activities are phased out, Haiti and its
partners are realizing the urgency of planning for the medium-term and building institutions that
can sustainably deliver investments and services to people across the country. Responding to
shorter term imperatives while pursuing medium term objectives is a critical challenge for the
Government and donors alike.

Reconstruction continues to be needed. The earthquake struck near Port au Prince on January
12, 2010 was devastating. It killed 230,000 people, injured another 300,000, displaced
approximately 1.5 million, and is estimated to have wiped out a decade in poverty gains. Port-
au-Prince was severely hit as were the cities of Carrefour, Léogâne, Petit Goave, Cabaret, Grand
Goave, Gressier and Jacmel. The massive destruction of infrastructure (including public
buildings, schools, hospitals, housing, electricity, water, and telecommunications) - much of it
critical because of the centralized nature of the economy- disrupted the entire country. As a
result, poverty and social conditions significantly worsened for many Haitians. The March 2010
Post-Disaster Needs Assessment evaluated damages and losses at US$7.9 billion, or 120 percent
of GDP, and reconstruction needs at US$11.3 billion.

The earthquake deepened many of Haiti’s existing challenges. Haiti was already the poorest
country in Latin America and the Caribbean and among the poorest in the world before the
earthquake. Over half of the population of 10 million lived in absolute poverty (less than USD1
per day) and 78 percent lived on less than USD2 a day. Around 4.5 million Haitians were
estimated to be destitute. Haiti’s income inequality is among the highest in the Latin America
and Caribbean region, with a Gini coefficient of 0.65, versus 0.50 on average for the rest of the
region. In the years preceding the earthquake, the country faced a sharp rise in basic food and
fuel prices (riots brought down the government in 2008), exceptionally difficult weather
conditions (four consecutive hurricanes in 2008 which caused a loss of 15% of GDP), and a
decline in remittances and in international trade due to the global economic crisis.

Rebuilding was hampered by a lengthy political transition. The post-earthquake period coincided
with the launch of Presidential and legislative elections (in November 2010). A drawn out
electoral process was concluded in May 2011 with the swearing in of President Michel Joseph
Martelly. This marked the first peaceful handover of democratic power to a candidate of the
opposition in Haiti’s history. However, while President Martelly received a strong majority of
votes cast, the opposition retained a majority in both houses of Parliament. This delayed the
nomination of new Prime Minister Gary Conille to October 2011, and contributed to his
resignation five months later, in February 2012. After much negotiation with Parliament, a
second Prime Minister, Mr. Laurent Lamothe, was nominated in April 2012. Relationships with
Parliament appear to have seen some improvement, though elections to replenish one third of the
Senate remain to be held. Mr. Lamothe’s Government has underlined its intention to work “vite
et bien? and to substantially accelerate government-led efforts for reconstruction. Recent actions
of the President and his Government have included the nomination of officials to long vacant
positions such as the Head of the Supreme Court, the holding of high level meetings with donors
outlining the expectations of Government and the contributions of donors in critical sectors, and
the broadcasting of Council of Ministers meetings as well as their relocation to various
secondary cities. Underlining Haiti’s geographical proximity to large markets and potential for
growth, the Government has set middle income country status for Haiti as a goal for 2030.

Though the Haitian economy has resumed growing over the past two years driven by
construction, manufacturing, and services, much remains to be done. The macroeconomic
outlook for FY 2012–15 is expected to be favorable thanks to substantial externally financed
investments in reconstruction. There is real potential for Haiti to reach an average of 4.5 percent
growth over the next decade. The economic revitalization of traditional sectors such agriculture,
textile, and tourism and the emergence of new economic activities such as light manufacturing,
assembly, new agricultural products and agro-industry could significantly impact growth and
support Haiti’s move toward longer term development over the next decade. However, in order
to achieve and sustain high levels of growth, institutional frameworks (insurance, credit,
movable collateral) and infrastructure (electricity, ports, and roads) are needed for private
investment to increase. Transparency and accountability in public financial management also
need to be enhanced, and public investment efficiency and the quality of sector policy improved.
Sectoral and Institutional Context

Haiti’s long history of political instability has considerably weakened the institutions and
governance mechanisms, which contributes to serious fiscal, regulatory and planning constraints.
Given the constraints, the Government of Haiti (GoH) faces challenges in the development of
strategic policies and programs, coordination across line ministries, and implementation of
monitoring and evaluation tools to successfully execute a comprehensive development program.
Lack of institutional and absorptive capacity leads the GoH to engage in short-term, reactive
planning and actions rather than developing long-term strategies and programs. The January
2010 earthquake further deepened the existing governance challenges by severely diminishing
already weak government capacity.

Countries that have experienced major natural disasters need assistance to institutions and
government systems in order to support critical reforms aimed at quickly restoring the main
functions of the state. Institution building is a gradual and difficult process and is a precondition
for lasting change in Haiti, and can only be achieved with strong and sustained commitment from
Government and donors. Despite recent results in the last several years, weaknesses in economic
governance and public sector management remain significant and undermine the process of
sustained economic growth and poverty reduction in Haiti. In the context of reconstruction and
post reconstruction recovery, institutional and policy reforms and improving efficiency,
transparency and accountability of public resource use are key aspects of long-term economic
growth and a foundation for maximizing the current aid momentum, which is expected to decline
to pre-earthquake levels in the medium-term. The proposed AF would continue to support
Haiti's key institutions and build institutional capacity and public financial management systems
to improve the tracking of public expenditures, public procurement, public sector and enterprise
management, investment planning, human resource management and establishing a culture of
transparency and accountability that reduces corruption.

The infrastructure sector remains a major bottleneck to Haiti’s social and economic
development. With about 80 percent of the country’s traffic being by land, Haiti has a very
limited road network of about 3,400 km, including 700 km of national roads, 1,500 km of
departmental roads, and 1,200 km of rural roads. Due to lack of maintenance, the side of the
officially registered tertiary network has decreased by more than half over the period between
1991 and 2004. The Bank has been supporting the transport and infrastructure sectors since
2006, and has focused on critical spot interventions since the earthquake. Each of these
investments has aimed at increasing the resilience of the system in key damaged and vulnerable
areas. This has ensured continued access and generated significant positive impacts. The
proposed AF would continue this same approach to foster economic growth and further enhance
the resilience of the more travelled road network to natural hazards.

2. Objectives

The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support early sustainable recovery efforts from
the effects of the Emergency, through selected interventions aiming at contributing to rebuilding
key institutions and infrastructure.
3. Rationale for Bank Involvement

The January 12, 2010 earthquake resulted in devastating losses for Haiti, killing 220,000 people,
wounding 300,000, and destroyed an estimated 115,000 houses, forcing some 1.3 million people
to seek shelter in temporary camps, 300,000 of whom remain to date. Despite some measurable
progress Haiti remains rooted in the post-earthquake reconstruction phase. Haiti’s key
development challenge, as identified in the Interim Strategy Note (ISN) CY12 (Report no.
65112) discussed by the Board on November 1, 2011, is to sustain high growth and reduce
poverty in the medium-term. As such, the Bank has designed its response to emphasize
economic governance and public financial management, and investing in efficient infrastructure
development.

The Government of Haiti (GoH) requested an AF for the IIERP under the IDA 16 allocation. The
proposed AF would support the scaling up of a well-performing project to enhance its
development impact, and finance modified project activities in support of public sector reform,
and continued investments in the transport and infrastructure sectors.

The proposed AF is the most suitable financing instrument to support the government of Haiti in
a timely manner. The government’s development program aims to improve infrastructure,
develop growth industries, and addresses governance as one of its main themes. The outcomes
made by this operation represent a window of opportunity to consolidate and sustain previous
achievements and support the government program.

The proposed AF would complement other synergies among ongoing Bank emergency response
operations, such as the Disaster Risk Management and Reconstruction Project (P126346), the
Port-au-Prince Neighborhood Housing Reconstruction Project (P125805), the Emergency Bridge
Reconstruction and Vulnerability Reduction Project (P114292) and the Transport and Territorial
Development Project (P095523) (Table 2). Additional project activities would also complement
the proposed Jobs Creation and Growth Project (P123974).

The proposed AF would also complement ongoing operations supported by the GoH and other
donors, such as debris removal, neighborhood and housing rehabilitation, urban planning, and
rehabilitation of airport infrastructure, as well as economic recovery through the development of
the tourism industry in the North Department.

                                Table 1: Complementary Bank-Financed Projects
Title                                   Project Number   Date of Approval       Date of Closing
Transport and Territorial               P095523          April 11, 2006         July 30, 2013
Development Project
Emergency Bridge Reconstruction         P114292          November 18, 2008      June 30, 2013
and Vulnerability Reduction Project
Port-au-Prince Neighborhood             P125805          May 4, 2011            June 30, 2015
Housing Reconstruction Project
Disaster Risk Management and            P126346          November 3, 2011       December 30, 2016
Reconstruction Project
Proposed Jobs Creation and Growth       P123974          December 2012          January 19, 2016
Project                                                                         (TBC)
4. Description

The achievement of the PDO is supported by the following three project components:

Component 1 – Restoring Key Economic and Financial Functions of the Recipient,
providing support pertinent to: (a) enable the reinstatement of MEF’s basic functions, such as,
inter alia, budget formulation, execution and reporting; and (b) carry out activities to assist in
fully re-establishing, including through relocation or physical structure rehabilitation, and
thereafter operationalizing, through, inter alia, provision of goods and equipment and technical
assistance, key financial management, control and expenditure institutions of the Recipient.

Component 2 – Emergency Rehabilitation of Selected Public Infrastructure, supporting: (a)
rehabilitation or reconstruction activities of key institutional and transport infrastructure through
the piloting of sound social and environmental practices; and all related studies and supervision
activities; (b) strategic studies related, inter alia, to infrastructure reconstruction based on
specific infrastructure designs intended to increase the resilience of rebuilt infrastructure.

Component 3 – Institutional Support, Reconstruction Planning and Project Management,
providing support to: (a) restore the functioning capacity of key institutions of the Recipient’s
crisis governance framework; (b) carry out planning activities for the short, medium and long-
term reconstruction phases; (c) carry out institutional strengthening activities; (d) finance Project
management activities; (e) establish and operate an engineering clearinghouse in MTPTEC to
manage the technical knowledge deriving from assessments carried out by national and
international institutions and thereafter to disseminate good engineering practices and innovative
solutions; and (f) assist the Recipient with preliminary basic recovery activities.

Additional Financing

The following components represent the expanded and additional activities for the proposed AF,
to be added to the original IIERP:

Component 1: Restoring Key Economic and Financial Functions of the Recipient (US$ 12
million). This public sector and governance component would utilize additional financing to
provide support pertinent to, inter alia: (i) strengthening of the Recipient’s public financial
management systems, including, inter alia, budget preparation, execution, monitoring and
control, and the government’s revenue mobilization capacity; (ii) strengthening accountability
and efficiency through supporting the fiscal and corporate reporting, including, inter alia, the
government’s financial management systems; (iii) reinforcing equity and responsibility,
including inter alia, supporting the modernization of procurement systems and administrative
process; (iv) building transparency and participation capacity, including, inter alia, access to
information (e.g., audits of the Supreme Audit Institution) and support for anticorruption
activities of ULCC; and (v) strengthening the capacity of the existing UCP, located in the MEF,
to manage the overall component, in alignment with the additional activities.

Component 2: Emergency Rehabilitation of Selected Public Infrastructure (US$ 20.3 million)
Additional financing under this component would be used to support the carrying out of the
following additional activities, inter alia: (i) rehabilitating aviation safety infrastructure,
including communication infrastructure, air navigation infrastructure and runway lighting
infrastructure; (ii) continued operation of debris management sites through to ensure continuity
of ongoing debris removal operations, for 8 to 12 months until the closing of debris removal
operations by partner organizations; and (iii) supporting economic reconstruction by
rehabilitating existing roads including, inter alia, roads between Cap Haitien and Labadie, and
between Milot and Cap Haitien, both key roads for economic growth and tourism development.

Component 3: Institutional Support, Reconstruction Planning and Project Management (US$ 2.7
million). The proposed additional financing would involve the provision of support to the
Ministry of Public Works, Transport, Energy and Communications (MTPTEC) to continue, inter
alia: (i) restoring the functioning capacity of key institutions of the Recipient involved in the
reconstruction process; (ii) carrying out planned activities for the short-medium and long term
reconstruction phases; (iii) carrying out institutional strengthening activities; and (iv) financing
Project management activities.

5. Financing
                                                                                   ($m.)
Source:
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                   0
IDA Grant                                                                           35
                                                                       Total        35
6. Implementation

The institutional and implementation arrangements established for the original IIERP would
remain unchanged with the proposed AF being implemented by the Ministry of Public Works,
Transport, Energy and Communications, (MTPTEC) and the Ministry of Economy and Finance
(MEF), through their Project Implementing Units, the Unité Centrale d’Exécution (UCE-
MTPTEC) and the Unité de Coordination de Projet (UCP-MEF), respectively. Overall project
implementation would be coordinated by the UCE-MTPTEC. The UCE-MTPTEC has extensive
experience supporting the implementation of Bank-financed projects, and has been appraised to
have sufficient technical and human resources to continue to effectively support the coordination
of the proposed AF’s implementation. The unit currently has a Project Coordinator, a
Procurement Specialist, and a Financial Management Specialist, and may be augmented with
additional staff, if deemed necessary. In addition to coordinating the overall proposed AF, the
UCE-MTPTEC would be responsible for the implementation of Components 2, and 3.

The UCP-MEF would be responsible for the implementation of Component 1. This unit has
experience managing other Bank-financed projects and is experienced in Bank procedures.
Given the increase in funding and activities for Component 1 and the need to match the funding
increase with enhanced operational efficiency, UCP-MEF will be reinforced through increasing
its office management capacity, procurement and financial management expertise and staffing. It
is proposed that the Financial Inspectorate (IGF, part of MEF) provide strategic advice to the
UCP-MEF, given IGF’s overall mandate to provide audits and recommendations of all
government ministries and agencies.
The fiduciary arrangements will change slightly as the proposed AF would no longer require the
services of a fiduciary agent to manage financial management and procurement processes on
behalf of the Government. The management of fiduciary activities has now successfully
transferred back to Government agencies as of February 2012. The Bank would continue to
ensure that the proposed AF remains on track and will closely monitor financial management and
procurement implementation and arrangements.

7. Sustainability

As in the case of the original IIERP project, the sustainability of the activities to be financed by
the proposed AF must be assessed within the overall context of Haiti as a fragile state. Many of
these reconstruction activities are “one-time? undertakings, but respond to urgent reconstruction
needs. The proposed AF’s closing date would be June 30, 2016, and the additional time will
allow for the consolidation of the sustainability of the technical assistance program.

8. Lessons Learned from Past Operations in the Country/Sector

The proposed project design takes into account lessons learned from previous operations in Haiti
and from Bank-wide experience. Those include in particular the following:

Simplified objectives and scope limited to a few specific sectors: While needs are enormous in
many sectors other than transport and infrastructure, complex multi-sector operations are
difficult to implement, particularly under emergency procedures.

Use of reinforced existing implementing agencies: Building new institutional capacity in Haiti is
likely to create delays that are not compatible with the implementation of an reconstruction
operation.

Strong technical assistance package to accompany implementation and build capacity: The
proposed AF includes a comprehensive technical assistance package to address this issue.

Early engagement is a key to success. While there are risks associated with reconstruction
operations, potential rewards are also higher. The proposed AF intends to respond swiftly to the
needs expressed by the Government of Haiti.

Emergency operations should complement other Bank and donor assistance: Reconstruction
operations are typically part of a broader assistance package with a specific focus on swiftly
restoring key public services and rehabilitating key infrastructure. The proposed project
effectively complements the Bank’s portfolio. To maximize the proposed AF efficiency, it has
been prepared in close collaboration with other development partners.

9. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)

Although the identified infrastructure works are expected to have a limited environmental
impact, the original project was classified under Environmental Category A, because of the wide
ranging nature of activities needed, and the possible cumulative impacts, as well as a result of the
weak institutional capacity. The new activities under the proposed AF would not trigger any
new safeguard policies. There are also no new activities of a Category A nature proposed under
the proposed AF. The policies triggered under the proposed AF include: Environmental
Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP
4.11) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09) was
triggered under the original project as a precaution due to the project’s involvement in the pilot
Debris Processing Facility at Trutier. However, since there have been no pest issues associated
with the rubble processing, nor with any other activities of the original project and proposed AF,
approval was granted to remove OP/BP 4.09 from the list of policies triggered.

In response to the three first policies, an Environmental and Social Management Framework will
be drafted, and the fourth policy will lead to the adoption of a Resettlement Policy Framework.

An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Cultural Resources Plan
in place for the original project, including three Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for
Trutier1 and the rehabilitation of Route Nationale 2, and Route Nationale 42, respectively. These
documents are currently disclosed in the Infoshop website. The ESMF will be updated to
include the new activities financed under the additional financing. Of particular note is the
rehabilitation of the road between Milot and Cap Haitian and between Cap Haitian and Labadie,
for which two new EMPs will be prepared. The minor works at the Airport do not pose a serious
safeguard risk, however, disposal methods (recycling, selling, landfilling) for the old airport
equipment will need to be assessed to ensure the safe and appropriate disposal of these
equipment. For these new investments, there would need to be thorough community
consultations, as well as a site-specific assessment of the impact of the new works. The UCE-
MTPTEC would contract a consultant or firm to ensure the inclusion of these new works in the
ESMF as well as to generate the two new EMPs for the each of the road works between Labadie
and Cap Haitian, and Millot and Cap Haitien, and a smaller EMP for the Airport that focuses on
waste disposal alternatives. The Government has already completed an EIA for the road
between Cap Haitian and Labadie. This document will be updated to include a management
plan. All the documents associated with the safeguards instruments would be made available to
all concerned agencies as well as disclosed in public areas and on appropriate Government and
other websites.

OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement would continue to be triggered under the AF, as there
might be a small number of people along the road between Cap Haitian and Labadie who could
be affected under the policy, with impacts being limited to loss of economic or shade trees, or
temporary loss of livelihood for small scale entrepreneurs. No land acquisition is expected. It is
unlikely that there would be any loss of economic or shade trees given that the activities are
limited to the rehabilitation of an existing road, but in the event that this occurs, affected parties
would be compensated according to the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The consultant
or firm contracted for the update of the ESMF and generation of EMPs would also be responsible
for carrying out a census of affected people and developing an Abbreviated Resettlement Action
Plan (RAP) along the same principles that were used for the RAPs under the original project.


1
    EMP for Trutier disclosed March 8, 2011
2
    EMPs for both RN2 and RN 4 disclosed September 1, 2010.
10. Contact point

Contact: Pierre Xavier Bonneau
Title: Senior Infrastructure Specialist
Tel: 5727+231
Fax:
Email: pbonneau@worldbank.org
Location: Port-au-Prince, Haiti (IBRD)

11. For more information contact:

       The InfoShop
       The World Bank
       1818 H Street, NW
       Washington, D.C. 20433
       Telephone: (202) 458-4500
       Fax: (202) 522-1500
       Email: pic@worldbank.org
       Web: http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop
