                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/05/2011                                    Report No.: AC6481
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Haiti                                Project ID: P126744
Project Name: Relaunching Agriculture
Task Team Leader: Diego Arias Carballo
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 8, 2011      Estimated Board Date: October 4, 2011
Managing Unit: LCSAR                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (70%);Animal production (30%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (70%);Rural policies and institutions (30%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             40.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
         Global Agriculture and Food Security Program                   10.00
                                                                        10.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed development objective is to increase access to agriculture extension
services and training on animal and plant health to small farmers in priority regions and
to strengthen the MARNDR#s capacity to further define and implement the National
Agriculture Extension Strategy (PDVA) and to provide rapid agriculture emergency
response.

3. Project Description
1.       The proposed project includes three components: (1) Strengthening of the role of
the MARNDR in agricultural support services provision; (2) Strengthening of local
agricultural support and extension service provision; (3) Emergency Response; and (4)
Project management. The project components are complimentary to the activities
proposed by the IADB under the GAFSP funding for Haiti and complement ongoing
activities under the Bank-financed RESEPAG I project, which is currently under Bank
supervision, as well as ongoing activities under the NAIP that are financed by other
donors.

 A.    Project components
 Component 1: Strengthening the role of the MARNDR in agricultural support services
provision (US$ 10 million)

 This component will strengthen the role of the MARNDR as the leader of Haiti#s
agricultural innovation system. Activities under this component will also reinforce and
build capacity within the MARNDR to lead, guide and bring coherence to agricultural
sector development and investments in animal and plant health control and protection, to
facilitate flows of information and technology among people and organizations, and to
promote the interaction and participation among sector actors. This will be achieved
through the strengthening of: (a) MARNDR#s capacity to plan and coordinate
agricultural extension and training services provision; (b) the agricultural sector#s
information systems; and (c) MARNDR#s sanitary and phystosanitary (SPS) control and
protection capacity.

 Component 2: Market support for local agricultural extension and innovation services
(US$ 37 million)

  The component will strengthen local provision of, and access to agricultural support and
extension services. Activities under this component will accompany the farmer-level
agriculture technologies and inputs promoted by the MARNDR (and financed by the
parallel GAFSP operation supervised by the IADB) by increasing the capacity of public,
private and civil society (NGO) local service providers to deliver and serve the needs of
their clients. In addition, this component will stimulate innovation and response capacity
in agricultural services. This will take place by making resources available through the
establishment of a competitive agriculture innovation and extension market support
facility (MSF). The MSF will facilitate and co-finance the implementation of actions that
respond to specific emerging agriculture extension opportunities and problems related to
adaptive research, the establishment of organizational or support mechanisms for farmer
organizations, and post-harvest agri-business processes. The MSF will provide co-
financing resources (matching grants) to: (i) reinforce the capacity of public, private and
civil society local service providers for promoting the adoption of priority technologies
and improved inputs; (ii) undertake applied research in agriculture supply chains not
targeted by the public research programs (such as sugar cane, cocoa, vetiver, etc.); (iii)
strengthen producer-based organizations to better respond to farmer needs and allow for
increase level of technology transfer; and (iv) to provide technical assistance for post-
harvest and agri-business technology improvements (in coordination with the
MARNDR#s rural supply chain project - DEFI). The MSF will seek to allocate funds to
new opportunities that arise during implementation as well as special allocations to
provide effective and efficient food response in the case of emergencies (natural
disasters).

 Component 3: Agriculture Risk and Emergency Response Contingent Reserve
(unfunded)
 Following the high likelihood of an adverse natural disaster or food crisis affecting the
agriculture sector of Haiti during the execution period of the project, this component
would allow the GoH to request the World Bank to re-categorize financing and/or use
funds from the unallocated category to cover early recovery and rehabilitation costs
related to the agriculture sector subject to the publication of a United Nations (UN) Flash
Appeal in response to a major natural disaster or the declaration of a national emergency
by the Haiti National Food Security Commission (CNSA). Disbursements are to be made
against a positive list of critical imports, or a farmer subsidy scheme agreed with the
Bank, or the procurement of goods, works, and consultant services required to support the
needs of the GoH

 Component 4: Project Management and Administration (US$ 3 million).

 Project execution will be under the same team executing RESEPAG I, which is under
the responsibility of the Direction General (DG) of MARNDR.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Project activities will be targeted towards small and medium producers in the regions
specified in the NAIP, giving priority to the South, South East, North and North-Eastern
regions of the country which count with innovation and extension systems of limited
capacity. Precise project locations will not be identified until project implementation.
Nonetheless, because these regions host natural resources that produce important
ecosystem services that support the agricultural sector, activities in areas that host these
natural resources or protected areas, will be screened ineligible under the project#s
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). No involuntary resettlement
will occur under the project and any resettlement will be screened-out of potential sub-
project activities in Component 3.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Valerie Hickey (ENV)
   Ms Barbara Coello (LCSAR)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                          X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
This project focuses on expanding access to agriculture extension services and promoting
environmentally-friendly investments and practices in agriculture. It will have a positive
impact on the agricultural environment, resource use and surrounding landscape. The
project will not support any activities that have large-scale, significant or irreversible
adverse impacts on the environment. For this reason the project is proposed as a Category
B because its suite of potential adverse impacts on the environment are easily identified,
mitigated and managed. The project triggers the following safeguard policies:
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP 4.04), Forests (OP 4.36)
and Pest Management (OP 4.09). Because exact investments will only be identified
during project implementation, and many of these investments will complement those
investments made under RESEPAG I and the Avian Influenza Control and Human
Influenza Emergency Preparedness and Control project (PRECONIA), the project has
updated and expanded the existing Environmental and Social Framework (ESMF) that is
in place for the RESEPAG I and PRECONIA projects to identify and manage the suite of
potential adverse impacts under this project.

 Four types of impacts are foreseen under this project, arising from:

  a.    Civil works: some construction impacts will be associated with the rehabilitation
of existing Research and Extension Centers, the Biosafety Laboratory, and Vocational
Training facilities. No new facilities will be supported under this project. These impacts
(e.g. noise, construction waste, etc.) will be limited in time and space, and actions to
minimize and mitigate them are included in the project#s Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF).
  b.    Waste management: adverse activities may arise during SPS activities that
involve the handling and use of testing material and the disposal of animal carcasses,
some of which may host diseases. The ESMF has adopted procedures outlined under the
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) developed for the PRECONIA project, to
minimize, mitigate and manage these potential impacts.
  c.    Occupational health and safety: during both construction and extension services,
the project will expose workers to a variety of potential safety hazards. As such, the
ESMF was updated to include actions and training programs to safeguard workers. In
terms of biosafety measures, once investments are determined, the EMP will be following
OIE standards for biosafety and WHO standards for workplace health practices.
  d.    Pest management: the ESMF will outline procedures to minimize, mitigate and
manage the potential impacts from the storage and application of pesticides.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
There is no potential for indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area. Conversely, the ESMF and the capacity building provided to
the Environmental Cell in MARDNR will boost the ability and the toolkit of the ministry
to steer future agricultural activities in the project area to optimize environmental
outcomes.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Screening procedures outlined in the ESMF will assist MARNDR to avoid supporting
activities or extension services that would adversely affect areas that host natural habitats.
Similarly, the screening procedure will rule out support for pesticides that fall under
Categories I or II of the WHO Recommended Classification of Pesticides by Hazard
(2005).

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In addition to the elements of the ESMF which will address the above-mentioned
impacts, the ESMF will also identify when additional Environmental Management Plans
(EMPs) are necessary and will include a screening procedure to screen out projects that
will negatively impact critical natural habitats; (ii) adversely affect the management of
natural forests; or (iii) lead to an increase in the use of, or the storage, application or
handling of, pesticides in Categories I and II of the WHO Recommended Classification
of Pesticides by Hazard (2005). In terms of biosafety measures, once investments are
determined, the EMP will be following OIE standards for biosafety and WHO standards
for workplace health practices. An integrated pest management plan with supporting
guidelines is also in the ESMF to manage potential adverse impacts arising from the
extension and applied research services. As a result, and coupled with a project design
that emphasizes the adoption of environmentally-friendly new technologies and others
that favor increased productivity over simple land expansion, the project will have a
positive impact on natural habitats and the management of forests in the project#s area of
influence.

 MARNDR has prior experience implementing projects financed by the World Bank
(and by the IDB and IFAD) and managing the requisite safeguard actions. To strengthen
their capacity, MARNDR has created an Environmental Cell within the Ministry to
manage environmental risks within the agricultural sector more broadly. The project is
supporting the development and operationalization of this Cell. As a result, the
preparation, implementation and oversight of safeguard actions will be done by the Cell
during project implementation.

  To assist this Cell, the ESMF includes indicators to monitor compliance as well as a
training and dissemination program to build capacity within the Cell and to build a
constituency for environmental awareness in the agricultural sector more broadly. The
Bank will perform an environmental compliance audit during its mid-term review to
identify opportunities to enhance environmental outcomes and better manage adverse
impacts.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The rural population depending on the Agricultural sector for their livelihood is estimated
at around 5 million. This population, and particularly those who live and work in the
regions supported by this Project (but not only that segment of the agricultural
population), are the main affected people. Among this population, the project will pay
special attention to women. Studies from RESEPAG I show that while women undertake
a large part of agricultural activities and participate in many productive organizations,
they are disadvantaged compared with the men in terms of decision making, control over
resources, and access to economic benefits, based on illiteracy, lack of formal legal
documents in various areas (land ownership, identification). The proper targeting and
consultation of women among them are therefore important elements of the RESEPAG II
project, requiring a mainstreaming rather than a safeguarding approach.

 Other stakeholders include the extension service providers, both public and private, as
well as the general public who will benefit from improved agricultural output (in quantity
and quality), as well as from the reduced risk of disease transmission through improved
plant and animal safety.

 The ESMF and OM will be available through MARNDR#s website
(www.agriculture.gouv.ht) and through the World Bank website (www.infoshop.org).
MARNDR and its decentralized institutions (DDAs, BACs) will hold continue to
consultations with stakeholders in project areas, and the ESMF will continue to address
the comments and issues raised. Prior to the beginning of activities under Component 2,
MARNDR (through the DDAs and BACs) will have further consultations with project-
affected peoples within the project#s sphere of influence to inform them of the project,
opportunities to engage with it, potential adverse short-term impacts and how they will be
mitigated, and the grievance redress mechanism available to them should they need it.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 07/26/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             08/03/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              08/03/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 07/26/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             08/03/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              08/03/2011
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                 Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)             Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the             Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of          No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other     No
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                        Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                       Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or      Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   N/A
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           N/A
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        No
provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s          Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Diego Arias Carballo                      08/03/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Valerie Hickey                            08/03/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Barbara Coello                            08/03/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms Rachel Hannah Nadelman                    08/03/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Benjamin J. Schapiro                      08/05/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Marie-Helene Collion                      08/04/2011
  Comments:
