                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC6464


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/21/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Haiti                                 Project ID: P127203
Project Name: Haiti Rebuilding Energy Infrastructure and Access
Task Team Leader: Karen Bazex
Estimated Appraisal Date:                      Estimated Board Date: March 22, 2012
Managing Unit: LCSEG                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General energy sector (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (60%);Rural services and
infrastructure (35%);Other public sector governance (5%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):           100.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
                                                                         0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The objectives of the proposed Project are to strengthen energy policy and planning capacity and
expand access to reliable electricity services in urban and rural areas and to sustainable energy
for cooking.

 Project Beneficiaries
 The Project direct beneficiaries will be (i) Haiti s population, including existing energy
consumers (residential, commercial and industrial electricity users as well as charcoal
consumers) mostly in the capital, and new electricity customers both in cities and in rural areas,
and (ii) energy sector institutions, whose capacity will be strengthened.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed Project consists of three components, scheduled to be completed within a 5-year
period (March 2012- February 2017).

 Component 1: Institutional strengthening and governance enhancement (US$8 million). This
component would increase capacity and improve governance in the sector through capacity
building support to the main sector players: the Government, EDH, and consumers. It would
finance the provision of technical assistance (through consulting services, and training) and the
purchase of office equipment and related expenses to support to the implementation capacity of
both the Government and EDH. The proposed activities would contribute to a broader energy
sector Governance Enhancement Program to be discussed and agreed with the Authorities.

 1.1 Government: This sub-component would strengthen the Government#s oversight of the
energy sector by developing and staffing a #Direction de l#Energie# or a similar body to be
agreed with the Government. It would help this entity gain capacity and empowerment to
perform the following key functions: (i) definition of an energy policy, and supervision of its
implementation; (ii) development of a planning capacity (through, among others, the elaboration
and periodical updating of Master Plans); (iii) establishment of a monitoring framework for the
sector#s operational and financial performance, including the creation of an energy information
system; and (iv) development and enforcement of a regulatory framework to promote efficiency
and accountability as well as to attract the private sector and other actors to implement the action
plans. Finally, thee activity would support the Direction in establishing two specialized entities,
the household energy and rural electricity units. These activities will be carried out in
coordination with the ongoing 2011-2012 Energy Sector Management Assistance Program
(ESMAP) financed Technical Assistance for the Strategic Development of the Energy Sector.

  1.2. EDH. This second sub-component would enhance the performance of EDH#s management
by improving the utility#s financial and operational capacity, focusing on service quality
improvement and loss reduction actions. Support will be provided through the provision of
technical assistance, the preparation of technical studies and the acquisition of office equipment.
These activities will be implemented in close coordination with the operations improvement
contract and complement ongoing efforts to reduce losses (notably non-technical) under the
PREPSEL project (US$11 million IDA-financed grant, 2006-2013). Specific emphasis will be
put on the need to substantially improve the quality of operational management and increasing
transparency in the flow of information within EDH, at the technical, commercial and financial
levels.

 1.3. Consumers and civil society. This third sub-component would strengthen the capacity of
other key stakeholders in the electricity sector, notably consumers and civil society. It would
include financing for outreach activities and public dissemination campaigns to be carried out to
familiarize consumers and civil society with Government#s energy program and increase
consumer awareness of energy related issues. This component would be carried out in
partnership with relevant players in the respective areas (e.g. EDH, household energy and rural
electrification units, BME, etc.).

 Component 2: Grid rehabilitation and expansion in the metropolitan area (US$ 40 million).
This component would rehabilitate and expand the infrastructure to serve more customers and
improve the quality of electricity services in the metropolitan area, through: (i) the rehabilitation
and expansion of the transmission network; and (ii) the rehabilitation and expansion of the power
distribution network. Interventions will focus on areas where rights of way already exist. Some
specific activities and areas will be identified before appraisal, and would include, among others,
rehabilitation of distribution feeders, rehabilitation and upgrades of substations, construction of
new transmission feeders and switch station, and extension of transmission and distribution
grids. The activity would finance the purchase and installation of corresponding equipment to
rehabilitate 80,000 existing connections and establish 30,000 new connections are (10% of
existing connections). It is anticipated that IDB and USAID would also finance related
investments under their respective energy sector support programs.

 Component 3: Energy access expansion (US$ 52 million). This component would increase
connections to electricity outside of Port au Prince and access to more efficient and healthier
cooking appliances throughout Haiti through:
 3.1. Enhancing grid-based access for electricity services in secondary urban, peri urban and
rural areas. This activity would establish new connections in urban, peri urban and rural areas,
including in and around secondary centres such as Cap Haïtien, Gonaïve and Petit Goâve,
through a limited number of large scale contracts for grid densification and extension
investments. The sub component will finance the purchase and installation of equipment to help
EDH connect 30,000 new consumers in these secondary urban areas. IDB and USAID are also
expected to provide additional financing needed in this area, as part of their respective
operations. Activities will be coordinated with the World Bank, including with the objective of
harmonizing safeguards procedures.

 3.2. Increasing rural access to electricity. Under the supervision of the MTPTC, this sub-
component would establish new connections in rural areas not served by EDH, combining grid
extension and off-grid solutions, including through the short/medium term acquisition and
deployment of solar photovoltaic (PV) systems. The sub component will finance the purchase
and installation of equipment and the provision of maintenance services to ensure sustainable
access. Approximately 10,000 new connections are expected to be achieved by private sector
operators through this activity. This component will be implemented in coordination with the
activities developed under Component 1.1(iii) (capacity building support to the Government for
rural electrification), which seek to support the Government in the definition and implementation
of a rural access policy.

 3.3. Increasing sustainable access to energy for cooking. This activity would implement
measures to increase energy efficiency in cooking and sustainable access energy resources
through the deployment of certified improved cooking stoves and the introduction of sustainable
community-based wood management initiatives. This sub component would be managed by the
MTPTC, in collaboration with the Ministry of the Environment, and implemented in
coordination with the activities developed under sub component 1.1 (capacity building support to
the Government for household energy), which seek to support the Government in the definition
and implementation of a household energy policy. About 200-300,000 households and 5-10,000
small enterprises should gain access to more energy efficient cooking through this component.

D. Project location (if known)
The project geographical scope is Haiti: (a) activities to be carried out under the capacity
building component 1 are expected to benefit the country as a whole, (b) grid rehabilitation and
densification activities under component 2 and the promotion and dissemination of improved
cooking stoves will be carried out in the capital Port au Prince and its surroundings, (c) grid
densification and extension investments will be carried out in secondary urban centers and rural
areas surrounding them, and (d) rural electrification activities will be carried out throughout the
country, with the specific locations to be determined during Project preparation and
implementation

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
There are two main implementing entities involved in the proposed Project, which will be
responsible for safeguards oversight:
  a.    The utility EDH, which will manage the grid extension and rehabilitation activities
(Components 2 and 3.1. for a total of US$74 million). EDH, although not familiar with the
World Bank safeguards, has had experience with other multilaterals# safeguard policies,
particularly those of the Inter American Development Bank (IDB). Under IDB#s Distribution
Rehabilitation Project, an assessment of the environment capacity of EDH was completed;
subsequently an environment unit was created within EDH with 3 environmental specialists and
offices for the unit were built. Although the staffing number is adequate, it has become clear that
lack of technical capacity and financing has stifled the ability of this staff to carry out effective
environmental management. In terms of social safeguards, capacity is almost nonexistent. EDH
has one staff responsible for relationships with marginal areas (#bidonvilles#), mostly managing
commercial aspects. To overcome this, the project is in the process of acquiring trust fund
financing that will be used to build the capacity of this unit prior to project implementation. The
funding will be used for staff training, equipment and operational costs associated with managing
the project.

  b.     The MTPTC (or any entity designated by the Government to supervise the energy sector)
will manage off-grid electricity and household energy activities (Components 3.2. and 3.3, for a
total of US$ 18 million.). Under this component, investments in solar PV panels and improved
charcoal stoves will be carried out. The MTPTC has experience with the implementation of
environmental safeguards of the World Bank through the implementation of various Bank-
financed projects, in particular the Haiti Infrastructure and Institutions Emergency Project
(P120895), currently under implementation. However, the energy sector management unit of the
MTPTC, which would be directly in charge of Project activities, does not have specific
experience in environmental management. Options to address this deficiency include either
training this unit or seconding staff from other parts of MTPTC that already have experience
with the implementation of environmental safeguards.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Nyaneba E. Nkrumah (LCSEN)
   Mr Fabio Pittaluga (LCSSO)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No        TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
    In this project, grid rehabilitation and extension, expansion of the power transmission
network and grid densification activities could potentially have negative environmental and/or
social impacts. Negative environmental impacts may be related to waste/debris removal and
disposal, worker and fire safety, soil removal and erosion, increased levels of dust and noise, oil
spill or leakage from machinery or transformers, etc. Social impacts may include land acquisition
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes          No          TBD
and minor resettlement. Despite this, the environmental and social impact of the project is
expected to be limited, as EDH indicated that one of the defining criteria for the identification of
grid extensions and rehabilitations works will be the use of existing rights of ways and public
roads. Length of grid extensions lines is not expected to be greater than 20kms. EDH will also
work in coordination with urban planning authorities to ensure that social impacts are well
assessed and limited.
       Given that this project is not being prepared under O.P. 8.0 and some work sites will be
known only during Project implementation, an ESMF will be completed prior to appraisal. For
those activities which will be defined during preparation, an Environmental Management Plan
(EMP) will be prepared in accordance with Bank policies. Any site specific issues, such as
project location characteristics, or any unique site specific measure to be taken in order to
minimize any negative environmental impact would be prepared as an addendum (e.g., if
Emergency Preparedness and Response Plans are necessary). The ESMF and EMP will be
disclosed prior to appraisal. Both documents prepared for individual sub projects will describe
measures that will be put into place to ensure safe disposal of any potential hazardous materials
from the demolition of existing transmission lines, discarded transformers or other hazardous
materials associated with transmission or distribution. The ESMF will detail the type of training
and capacity building that EDH and MTPTC will undergo to ensure that there is adequate
monitoring, reporting and supervision.
       Lack of capacity in the MTPTC and EDH to manage environmental and social safeguards is
an important constraint and the Project will provide capacity building support to address this
issue, through the organization of workshops and the hiring of a consultant to support MTPTC
and EDH in the implementation of safeguards policies. Capacity building will also be provided
during Project preparation; in particular, a workshop will be carried out in Port au Prince to
introduce MTPTC and EDH to Bank safeguard policies, with the support of the Bank social and
environmental units under trust fund financing. In addition, the consultants who will be hired to
help the Government prepare the safeguards documents during preparation will work in
collaboration with MTPTC and EDH, providing training as needed.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                    X
     The Project is not expected to impact critical natural habitats. However, because the sites are
still unknown at the concept stage, it will be determined by appraisal whether or not natural
habitats will be impacted. The ESMF will also include screening procedures to ensure that grid
extension and rehabilitation activities will not involve unprecedented degradation or conversion
of critical natural habitats. An effort will also be made to ensure that non-critical habitats are not
impacted by the project.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                X
     Given the massive scale of deforestation in Haiti, there are very few pockets of any forestry
remaining and the project will not intervene in these areas.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                        X
     The team will assess whether herbicide or other chemical control measures are used to
control vegetarian growth in the transmission ROWs and ensure that any measure used is in
compliance with OP4.09.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                            X
     It is expected that the proposed project will not involve any sites with archeological,
paleontological, historical, religious or other area of unique natural value as defined under the
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes          No         TBD
policy. However, as part of the general EMSF to be developed for the project, chance finds
procedures would be included.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                    X
    There is no indication of the presence of indigenous people as defined under OP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                  X
    The grid and power transmission extension and rehabilitation works may cause displacement
of farms, and/or people, although this is expected to be minor. A Resettlement Policy Framework
(RPF), laying out the applicable policies and guidelines, and Resettlement Action Plans (for
specific activities identified before appraisal) will be prepared to assess potential impacts and
disclosed prior to appraisal.
     The RPF will include: (i) principles, review of policy regulations; (ii) institutional
arrangements, roles and competences; (iii) consultations disclosure and grievance redress
mechanisms; (iv) monitoring and reporting process. All relevant safeguards policies and
guidelines will be discussed with the Ministry of Public Works and EDH (Implementing
Entities) during planning and implementation. The RPF will be discussed with the Borrower
during Appraisal and finalized during the Appraisal Mission.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                        X
    N/A
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                   X
    N/A
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                            X
    N/A


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 09/06/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   EMF/EMP # Appraisal
     RPF/RAP # Appraisal




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Ms Karen Bazex             07/19/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Francis V. Fragano      07/20/2011
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Mr Chandra Shekhar Sinha   07/21/2011
   Comments:
