                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                           APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA121

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:              12-Mar-2013
:
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                     Haiti                 Project ID:               P123974
    Project Name:                Haiti Business Development and Investment Project (P123974)
    Task Team Leader:            Juan Buchenau Hoth
    Estimated Appraisal Date: 13-Mar-2013              Estimated Board Date: 21-May-2013
    Managing Unit:               LCSPF                 Lending Instrument:       Specific Investment
                                                                                 Loan
    Sector:                      General industry and trade sector (60%), Agro-industry, marketing, and
                                 trade (40%)
    Theme:                       Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (40%), Regulation and
                                 competition policy (30%), Trade facilitation and market access (30% )
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00               No
    (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                 Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:       20.00                    Total Bank Financing:      20.00
    Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:             0.00
        Financing Source                                                                         Amount
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                             0.00
        IDA Grant                                                                                    20.00
        Total                                                                                        20.00
    Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project? No
    Is this a Transferred        No
    project?


    2. Current Project Development Objectives
    The Project Development Objective is to assist the Republic of Haiti in improving the conditions for
    private sector investment and inclusive growth. This will be done at the national level by supporting
    the government in updating and improving the legal and regulatory frameworks that govern business
activities, both within and beyond the Doing Business topics, and through institutional strengthening
activities for implementing agencies that will also help update and streamline relevant procedures. To
facilitate private sector investment, the government will update the IEZ law and build capacity in its
implementing agencies, while preparatory work will assess the feasibility of up to two IEZs. Business
Development Services (BDS) will support MSMEs providing goods and services to firms operating in
agribusiness and apparel-focused IEZs, as well as to the tourism industry in the North, as part of a
strategy to promote a more inclusive model of economic growth.

3. Project Description
Component 1 – Business environment and Investment Generation (US$ 10 million)

This component will provide support to improve the Haitian business environment, to promote local
and foreign investments.

1.1. Business Environment Reform: The Project will contribute to the design and implementation of
economy wide business environment reforms to increase private sector growth. It will provide
consultant services and goods to:
 (i) develop and implement a detailed action plan to improve the business environment building on the
Doing Business Reform Memorandum presented to the Haitian authorities by end of 2011,
(ii) provide technical and human resources support to the CPRA,
(iii) prioritize reforms, in consultation with the private sector, and categorize by short and
medium-term feasibility, (iv) support the drafting of reforms included in the plan, with a focus
on—but not limited to—legal reforms, investments for secured lending, a new insolvency framework,
and a framework fostering competition with focus on sector-specific constraints in tourism and
agribusiness.

1.2. Investment Generation: The Project will support economy-wide investment generation reforms to
attract foreign and local investments (in garments, light manufacturing, agribusiness and tourism). It
will not directly finance these businesses but will rather support associated regulatory reforms. It will
provide consultant services to:
(i) help develop a legal, regulatory and institutional framework for IEZs,
(ii) assess the feasibility for up to two new IEZs,
(iii) develop investment facilitation and promotion mechanisms into IEZs and for tourism, and
(iv) design and implement a one-stop-shop mechanism for investments in IEZs, with a pilot at one of
the country’s IEZs.

Component 2 –Business Development Services for MSMEs (US$ 7 million)

1.3      Business Development Services (BDS): The objective of the Component is to integrate
MSMEs into the manufacturing value chain and to build MSME capacity to serve the tourism value
chain as well as to supply IEZs supported by the Project with goods and services, thus contributing to
a more inclusive model of development. It will support:
(i) an assessment to characterize MSMEs in selected municipalities, (ii) a tourism value chain analysis
as background information for the formulation and implementation of improvement projects for
specific MSMEs, and
(iii) matching grants to eligible Haitian MSMEs to finance training, small fixed assets and technical
assistance . This activity complements and is closely coordinated with two IADB projects to foster
MSMEs.

Component 3 – Project implementation, evaluation and monitoring (US$ 2.5 million)
The Project will be implemented by the (l’Unité Coordination du Projets, UCP) at the Ministry of
Economy and Finance (MEF) and this will be turned over to MCI to manage. This component will
finance goods, operating costs, and services needed to ensure effective Project implementation,
supervision, and financial management, as well as needed expenses to ensure proper monitoring and
supervision as described in section IV B below. Following the Bank’s assessments and
recommendations, this component will strengthen management capacity in the areas of management,
procurement, and financial management. In addition, the Project will support some of the institutions
and agencies involved in the different Project activities, especially in the early stages of the activities
described above.

Component 4 – Risk and emergency response contingency reserve (US$ 0.5 million )

This component will support public and private entities involved in the Project if a natural hazard or
man-made disaster occurs. Given that this Project area is exposed to several hazards, particularly
geotechnical (earthqu akes, tsunamis, soil liquefaction, landslides), hydro-meteorological
(wind/hurricanes, cyclone, raz de maree), and climate-change effects (sea level rise, coastal erosion),
the government may request a re-allocation of Project funds to support response efforts, including
reconstruction of public and private buildings. A similar approach will be adopted to deal with
man-made disasters. This component will support the carrying out of emergency recovery and
rehabilitation sub-projects or the implementation of a subsidy scheme for eligible beneficiaries
affected by the emergency. Additional funds may also be made available through this window for the
same purpose.

If this component is triggered, all expenditures and safeguards will be in accordance with BP/OP 8.00
and will be appraised, reviewed, and found to be acceptable to the Bank before any disbursement is
made. If not disbursed 12 months before the closing date, the currently allocated amount of US$1
million can be made available to finance activities under the other Project components.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The investment in MSME's will take place in the North of the country for tourism related ventures.
This investment will be coordinated with another Bank project on tourism development in the North.
Other investments in MSMEs will occur around the sites of IEZs. The precise location of these IEZs
are not known at this time.        A technical screening process, which included possible environmental
and social impacts, performed by the IFC and the IFC/CIC, identified seven high performing sites
from an original long list of 65 sites. These sites are Ganthier, Laffiteau, Corail (NABATEC), West
Indies Free Zone, Fort-Liberté, Cap Haïtien, and Park Hispaniola. The screening process analyzed
the seven sites’ strengths and weaknesses in terms of the Project requirements for successful
development into an IEZ, under a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) approach and based on commercial
principles and development and operation by the private sector. At the request of the government a
second, complementary site screening will take place to reinforce existing analyses.
Using IFC/CIC resources from the Haiti Income Generation (IG) Phase III Project, the IFC/CIC will
conduct 10 new site assessments, then narrow the selection down to one or two top sites.These
preliminary assessments will be followed by more detailed due diligence studies and specific market
demand assessment for the selected site(s). In addition, a comprehensive feasibility study, and
environmental and social (E&S) assessment will be conducted at the selected site(s).            The social
assessment will include, inter alia, an assessment of land use and occupation, as well as other key
social issues relevant to site selection. One of the sites is likely to be in the center of the country.
Based on positive results of the preliminary studies, the Project will support the completion of two
detailed feasibility studies. After the feasibility studies are complete and two sites finally identified,
the project will focus on providing matching grants to MSMEs in those vicinities.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Nyaneba E. Nkrumah ( LCSEN )
Peter F. B. A. Lafere ( LCSSO )

6. Safeguard Policies                        Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01          Yes              The Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
                                                              4.01) policy is triggered due to: The
                                                              Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
                                                              policy is triggered due to: (i) the need to
                                                              include environmental and social criteria
                                                              into the proposed improvements to the
                                                              legal, regulatory and institutional
                                                              framework for IEZ under Component 1; (ii)
                                                              the need to conduct environmental and
                                                              social assessments as part of the feasibility
                                                              studies associated with the proposed IEZ
                                                              sites under Component 1; and (iii) the
                                                              potential for adverse environmental impacts
                                                              under the matching grants packages
                                                              supported under Component 2.

                                                              Based on the scope of the project
                                                              activities, the project is given an
                                                              environmental risk category B. The risk
                                                              category is based on the understanding that
                                                              the project will only finance technical
                                                              assistance for legal reform and feasibility
                                                              studies under Component 1 and that the
                                                              type of investments proposed under the
                                                              matching grants scheme will exclude
                                                              investments which have any significant
                                                              environmental or social impacts.


                                                              Component 1: Under this component the
                                                              project will support the development of a
                                                              legal, regulatory and institutional
                                                              framework for IEZs. The formulation of
                                                              this framework provides an excellent
                                                              opportunity to ensure that environmental
                                                              and social considerations are explicitly
                                                              included as part of any legal and regulatory
                                                              reforms. The project will ensure that, as
                                                              appropriate, environmental and social
                                                              measures are included as part of the
                                                              over-arching legal and regulatory
frameowrk guiding the development of
IEZs.

Based on previous operational experience in
Haiti, it is recognized that the development
of IEZs can pose numerous environmental
and social risks. While the project will not
finance the implementation of any
infrastructure or services associated with the
implementation of an IEZ, various potential
social and environmental issues will be
taken into account during the feasibility
analysis for a proposed IEZ. The
feasibility analysis will take into account the
potential environmental impacts and risks
associated with the development of an IEZ
and associated industrial or commercial
activities proposed for the area including
land capability, suitability of the site with
respect to basic resource availability such as
water for industrial activities, potential risks
associated with air or water pollution from
proposed works, potential social impacts,
possible need for land acquisition or
physical displacement of people, impacts of
associated works beyond the boundaries of
the IEZ itself and other relevant social and
environmental considerations for different
phases of the project including design,
construction, and operational phases. The
findings of this assessment will be
documented in a feasibility level EIA.The
TOR for the feasibility that has been
prepared and disclosed under this project
preparation includes specific reference to
these issues.

The feasibility assessment will also include
a social assessment of the current situation
and an evaluation of possible social
benefits, costs and risks associated with
proposed activities including, but not
limited to, livelihood impacts; current land
use and occupation, resettlement and land
acquisition, gender impacts or impacts on
vulnerable social groups; labor conditions,
regional capacity and development plans for
the influx of new populations- including
infrastructure and social services in the area
to receive this influx; identification of key
stakeholders in the area; and any other
relevant lessons learned from other
industrial parks in Haiti.

The environmental and social assessments
to be carried out under the project will also
provide appropriate opportunities for
meaningful consultations with key
stakeholders in the project area.

Once the feasibility of the first pilot IEZ is
confirmed, the Project will coordinate, with
the government, the search for options for
financing key offsite and onsite
infrastructure. However, this will not take
place under the feasibility study. The
government may request funding through
this project in the form of an additional
financing or another IDA project, in order to
ensure continuity to the work carried out
during Phase I of the Project. The Bank's
environmental and social specialists during
implementation, as well as the IFC
specialists, will review and clear the TOR
and the study to ensure that it contains good
environmental and social due diligence .

Component 2: This component will provide
matching grants to MSMEs to finance
training, small fixed assets and technical
assistance. Potential beneficiaries will be
identified in the assessments that will be
carried out in selected municipalities,
however, based on field visits during the
pre-appraisal mission, it is expected that
potential beneficiaries include artisans,
seamstresses, carpenters, welders, painters,
food vendors, bakers, among others. The
matching grant mechanism will include
selection criteria to promote social
inclusion, women entrepreneurs and the
empl oyment of women. Investments
which would normally be considered as
A-type investments will not be eligible for
project financing.

An ESMF was prepared for the project for
two main purposes: (i) to screen project
activities that are currently still undefined
under the project and (ii) to detail the
process for screening MSMEs. The
screening determines which activities are
eligible for Bank financing, the type of
environmental and social analysis, and the
safeguard instruments (e.g., EIA or EMP)
required for each activity or cluster of
activities.

These instruments will be developed prior
to construction and alternatives fully
considered to minimize any social or
environmental risk. The ESMF includes: (i)
eligibility criteria and a process for
subproject screening and for determining
the appropriate safeguard instrument to
apply to each subproject; (ii) standard
environmental management plans for
common subproject types; (iii) a matrix of
potential impacts and mitigation measures;
(iv) a monitoring and evaluation section for
determining responsibilities for supervising
the implementation of any mitigation
measures; (iv) implementation
arrangements for safeguards; (v) cost
implications; (vi) capacity building required
to ensure implementation and supervision of
the ESMF.

Within the ESMF is another screening tool
that pertains to the MSMEs. This tool is
important because an assessment has to be
made as to whether the MSME will likely
have a negative environmental impact.
While this impact is likely to be small, there
is the potential for these MSMEs to
generate waste that is not disposed of
properly, or there may be worker safety
issues, or issues related to construction of
shops, etc. The screening tool will also
screen out MSMEs that have the potential to
significantly impact the environment such
as MSMEs that use a lot of wood or scarce
natural resources, MSMEs that may operate
in natural habitat areas, etc. It will require
MSMEs to put specific environmental detail
in their grant proposals such as

i.     Description of the project, its
geographic location, description of any
important natural resources in the vicinity
(such as forests, wetlands, rivers, lakes,
etc.), the project’s background,
categorization, compliance status with the
existing Environmental and Social local
legislation, compliance with the
environmental and social requirements set
out in this ESMF, Environmental and Social
programs, public consultation, existing or
potential liabilities, potential environmental
and social financial and reputational risks;
ii.       Description of any Environmental
and Social mitigation measures and
monitoring programs to be implemented;
description of the health and safety
measures and programs to be implemented;
description of emergency/contingency
procedures to be implemented; description
of environmental, health and safety
responsibilities; and estimated cost and time
schedule to implement each individual
measures;
iii.      Include details of an environmental
action plan to mitigate any impacts, if
required.
Projects will be categorized based on their
environmental risk. All A category projects
will be excluded. For grants that are
considered Category B projects where the
Environmental specialist identifies
moderate Environmental and Social issues
during the ex-ante screening process, further
review will be required prior to and during
implementation. This may involve a
combination of desk review and a physical
site visit as appropriate to:

i.       Review the adequacy of any
Environmental and Social impact
assessments or analyses undertaken
(including public consultation, disclosure
and any resulting action plan);
ii.      Review compliance with any
Environmental and Social contractual
requirements associated with the original
grant agreement;
iii.     Review the adequacy of any
environmental and social management
mitigation measures taken to address the
identified issues;
iv.      Confirm compliance with
                                    applicable local Environmental and Social
                                    regulations;
                                    v.        Determine if the client has a history
                                    of outstanding Environmental and Social
                                    liabilities;
                                    vi.       Determine whether further
                                    assessment, consultation, and disclosure is
                                    necessary;
                                    vii.      Determine Environmental and
                                    Social requirements to be included in the
                                    grant agreements, including corrective
                                    measures as necessary.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The policy is triggered because the
                                    environmental impact assessment studies
                                    for the IEZs will evaluate the potential
                                    impacts and risks at each proposed site with
                                    regard to critical or other natural habitats as
                                    defined under the policy. The EIA would
                                    document any potential risks and impacts
                                    with respect to natural habitats; would
                                    propose additional work to be carried out in
                                    subsequent environmental analysis; and
                                    would propose appropriate management and
                                    mitigation measures that would be
                                    consistent with policy requirements.

                                    Under Component 2 the project will not
                                    finance matching grants that affect natural
                                    habitats as defined under the policy. The
                                    ESMF will include screening criteria to
                                    ensure that any matching grant to an MSME
                                    that is thought to impact these areas will not
                                    be eligible for financing.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   The policy is triggered because the
                                    environmental impact assessment studies
                                    for the IEZs will evaluate the potential
                                    impacts and risks at each proposed site with
                                    regard to the quality or management of
                                    forests. The EIA would document any
                                    potential risks and impacts with respect to
                                    forests; would propose additional analysis
                                    to be carried out under subsequent
                                    environmental studies; and would define
                                    appropriate management and mitigation
                                    measures that would be consistent with
                                    policy requirements.

                                    Under Component 2 the project will not
                                             finance matching grants that affect the
                                             quality or management of forests as defined
                                             under the policy. The ESMF will include
                                             screening criteria to ensure that any
                                             matching grant to an MSME that is thought
                                             to impact these areas will not be eligible for
                                             financing. This policy is not triggered
                                             because the project will not intervene in
                                             forest areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09               No     The policy is not triggered because the
                                             project will not finance the procurement of
                                             pesticides nor will it lead to the increased
                                             use of pesticides in the project area.
                                             Activities or studies that could involve the
                                             agribusiness sector would consider aspects
                                             of pest management, pesticide use, as well
                                             as protection of worker and consumer health
                                             and safety within the context of value chain
                                             assessments and quality and management of
                                             produce for export or internal markets if
                                             included within the project components.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes   The policy is triggered because the
                                             environmental and social impact assessment
                                             studies for the IEZs will evaluate the
                                             potential impacts and risks at each proposed
                                             site with regard to the quality or
                                             management of Physical Cultural Resources
                                             (PCR). The EIA would document any
                                             potential risks; would propose additional
                                             analytical work to be carried out; would
                                             identify impacts with respect to PCR and
                                             would propose appropriate management and
                                             mitigation measures that would be
                                             consistent with policy requirements.

                                             Under Component 2there will be no
                                             substantial civil works (i.e construction of
                                             roads that are likely to go beyond the
                                             subsurface strata. The ESMF will include
                                             screening procedures to ensure that proposal
                                             which impacts PCR will not be eligible for
                                             financing. The ESMF will include
                                             procedures for chance finds.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No     The policy is not triggered since there are
                                             no indigenous people as defined under the
                                             policy present in the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes    The policy is triggered given the likelihood
                                             that IEZ development would involve the
                                             acquisition of land, possibly involving the
                                                      use of eminent domain, and may lead to
                                                      economic displacement of people living at
                                                      or near the site.The feasibility studies for up
                                                      to two new IEZs under the Investment
                                                      Generation sub-component will include an
                                                      assessment of current land use and
                                                      occupation in addition to confirmation of
                                                      land titles of these sites. The
                                                      environmental and social assessment would
                                                      document any potential risks and impacts
                                                      with respect to involuntary resettlement;
                                                      would define the need for future detailed
                                                      preparation work for RAP or other
                                                      resettlement instruments and would propose
                                                      appropriate management measures that
                                                      would be consistent with the policy
                                                      requirements.

                                                      If a site is identified for further development
                                                      into an IEZ, the investment of this
                                                      development will not occur under this
                                                      project, but is likely to be supported with
                                                      additional financing. At that point in time,
                                                      the OP/BP 4.12 will be triggered for the AF
                                                      and a RAP or other resettlement instrument
                                                      as relevant will be prepared and
                                                      implemented as per Bank requirements.

                                                      A screening tool will be used in the
                                                      selection of MSME to ensure that MSME
                                                      projects that would involve resettlement are
                                                      not selected.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37               No            The policy is not triggered since project will
                                                      not invest in dams nor will any project
                                                      activities rely on the operations of existing
                                                      dams.
Projects on International Waterways     No            The policy is not triggered since project
OP/BP 7.50                                            activities will not affect any known
                                                      International Waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60   No            The policy is not triggered since project
                                                      activities will not affect any known disputed
                                                      areas.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Based on experience from other IEZ investments in Haiti, numerous environmental and social issues
are likely to be associated with the development and implementation of IEZs. In some cases, these
issues may be locally sensitive and may have impacts and risks both within and beyond the boundaries
of the IEZ. Since the IEZs may require considerable additional investments in supporting
infrastructure it is important to consider a range of risks and impacts as part of the feasibility stage
analysis.

As part of the feasibility assessment of proposed IEZs the project will support the execution of
environmental and social impact assessments to evaluate the potential risks associated with each site
and to formulate mitigation and management measures consistent with each of the applicable
safeguard policies.

For the MSME matching grants initiatives, the safeguard implications are not considered significant
or irreversible. There are no infrastructure works to be financed and construction, in the form or
renovations or setting up small shops, is limited to component 2, under MSME matching grants. A
screening tool will be used in the selection of MSME which will ensure that environmentally sensitive
projects (Category A) or projects involving resettlement are not selected.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The project focuses on nurturing private sector investments by improving regional infrastructure in
growth poles. As a result, the project will undertake feasibility studies for the creation of an
integrated economic zone (IEZ) in the center of the country and one other location. While there are
no immediate negative environmental or social impacts associated with these studies themselves, the
studies will identify the potential environmental and social risks and impacts associated with the
development of proposed sites. The feasibility study will assess environmental and social risks to the
sites and, based on these and other factors, two potential IEZ sites will be chosen. Once chosen
however, it is anticipated that an investments will be made to support the creation of an IEZ. This will
occur within the scope of the current project but may be supported at a later point in time through
other financing sources or possibly through the use of additional financing. At that point in time, a
project specific EIA and social assessments will need to be commissioned. If land is required using
eminent domain or other involuntary resettlement mechanisms, , a Resettlement Action Plan will need
to be commissioned for the additional financing.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The IFC/Bank joint component on IEZs considered a total of approximately 70 sites to determine the
best site for the IEZ before selecting Ganthier, which is relatively close to port au prince (1 hour) as a
possible IEZ. Further consultations with Government and the community on land and other issues
finally resulted in a joint consensus that Ganthier was not an ideal site for the project. Environmental
and social screening and consultations during preparation were therefore very important in terms of
shaping the project and ruling out alternatives that could have serious adverse impacts. The project has
now set up a process whereby further feasibility and other studies would inform the selection of two
alternative sites, one of which is likely to be in the center of the country. These studies will include
environmental and social assessments of the proposed sites.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Borrower capacity is weak in Haiti in terms of environmental management. MEF is the executing
counterpart, coordinating the activities of all involved public and private entities. An existing PIU
under this ministry - the UCP - will be responsible for the project’s safeguard supervision. UCP will
recruit a part time environmental specialist who will manage the safeguards aspects, particularly in
relation to the MSME screening. This person will be responsible for the environmental aspects of the
project. It is likely that if the MSMEs begin in the Northern tourist areas that the specialist will work
from the North as needed to ensure that screening of MSMEs is done adequately.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholder consultation is a very important aspect of this project. Local populations and the
international community (IUCN, UN, NGOs, UNESCO etc.) as well as various branches of
Government have been consulted in the preparation of the project and the ESMF. Thefeedback
garnered over the consultation process was important in modifying the project's design. One issue to
pay attention to is that the project seeks to improve policies and processes on IEZs across the country
and this is a process that needs careful consideration and reflection to generate the necessary
consensus among government authorities and other stakeholders. Also, the project has now set up a
process whereby further feasibility and other studies would inform the selection of two alternative
sites, one of which is likely to be in the center of the country. These studies will include
environmental and social assessments of the proposed sites. It is therefore essential that a
consultation and communication plan embedded in the TOR for the feasibility study to ensure that all
stakeholders have an opportunity to discuss the merits and demerits of each site studied and to
participate in the decision process of the final selection of a new IEZ site.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    06-Mar-2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 12-Mar-2013
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Haiti                                                                          12-Mar-2013
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to InfoShop
"In country" Disclosure
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ X ]        No [   ]   NA [   ]

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager       Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
(SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in      Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or              Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural              Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [ X ]        No [   ]   NA [   ]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
Sector Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and    Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it     Yes [   ]   No [ X ]   NA [   ]
include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ X ]        No [   ]   NA [   ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [ X ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional             Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in       Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [ X ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [ X ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:              Name: Juan Buchenau Hoth
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards            Name: Glenn Morgan                         Date: 03/12/2013
Coordinator:
Sector Manager:                Name: P.S. Srinivas                        Date: 03/12/2013
