71663
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/01/2012                    Report No.:
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P120895           Original Project Name: Infrastructure &
Institutions Emergency Recovery
Country: Haiti                         Project ID: P130749
Project Name: AF Infrastructure & Institutions Emergency Recovery
Task Team Leader: Pierre Xavier Bonneau
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 9, 2012 Estimated Board Date: September 25, 2012
Managing Unit: LCSTR                   Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery
Loan
Sector: Central government administration (34%); Solid waste management (17%);
Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (26%);Aviation (15%); Public
administration- Transportation (8%)
Theme: Other public sector governance (42%); Rural services and infrastructure (26%);
Natural disaster management (17%); Other urban development (15%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):        0
IDA Amount (US$m.):        35
GEF Amount (US$m.):         0
PCF Amount (US$m,):         0
Other financing amounts by source:
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                      0.00
0.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                  Simple [X].       Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) Yes [X] No []
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)
2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) remains the same as for the original project:
to support early sustainable recovery efforts from the effects of the Emergency, through
selected interventions aiming at contributing to rebuilding key institutions and
infrastructure.
3. Original Project Description
The achievement of the PDO is supported by the following three project components:
Component 1 - Restoring Key Economic and Financial Functions of the Recipient,
providing support pertinent to: (a) enable the reinstatement of MEF's basic functions,
such as, inter alia, budget formulation, execution and reporting; and (b) carry out
I


﻿activities to assist in fully re-establishing, including through relocation or physical
structure rehabilitation, and thereafter operationalizing, through, inter alia, provision of
goods and equipment and technical assistance, key financial management, control and
expenditure institutions of the Recipient.
Component 2 - Emergency Rehabilitation of Selected Public Infrastructure,
supporting: (a) rehabilitation or reconstruction activities of key institutional and transport
infrastructure through the piloting of sound social and environmental practices; and all
related studies and supervision activities; (b) strategic studies related, inter alia, to
infrastructure reconstruction based on specific infrastructure designs intended to increase
the resilience of rebuilt infrastructure.
Component 3 - Institutional Support, Reconstruction Planning and Project
Management, providing support to: (a)' restore the functioning capacity of key
institutions of the Recipient's crisis governance framework; (b) carry out planning
activities for the short, medium and long-term reconstruction phases; (c) carry out
institutional strengthening activities; (d) finance Project management activities; (e)
establish and operate an engineering clearinghouse in MTPTEC to manage the technical
knowledge deriving from assessments carried out by national and international
institutions and thereafter to disseminate good engineering practices and innovative
solutions; and (f) assist the Recipient with preliminary basic recovery activities.
Additional Financing Description
The following components represent the expanded and additional activities for the
proposed AF, to be added to the original IIERP:
Component 1: Restoring Key Economic and Financial Functions of the Recipient (US$
12 million). This public sector and governance component would utilize additional
financing to provide support pertinent to, inter alia: (i) strengthen accountability and
efficiency of the Recipient through the strengthening of public financial management
systems, including, inter alia, budget preparation, execution, monitoring and cohtrol,
revenue mobilization capacity; public accounting; and supporting internal and external
audit of government expenditures; (ii); strengthen transparency and participation
capacity, including, inter alia, access to information and support for anticorruption
activities of the ULCC; (iii) reinforce equity and responsibility, including inter alia,
supporting the modernization of the Recipient's procurement systems and administrative
process, and (iv) strengthen the governance and institutional capacity of the Recipient by,
inter alia, carrying out studies or conducting training activities on the following areas:
public investment, minerals extraction, energy and commerce.
Component 2: Emergency Rehabilitation of Selected Public Infrastructure (US$ 20.3
million) Additional financing under this component would be used to provide support
pertinent to, inter alia: (i) the acquisition of aviation safety equipment and the provision
of related trainings and installation works at the Port-au-Prince Toussaint Louverture
International Airport, including, inter alia, communications, air navigation, and lighting
2


﻿equipments; (ii) finance the operation of the debris processing facility located in Truitier,
Port-au-Prince, to ensure continuity of ongoing debris removal activities and finance
selected works (such as installing weight truck station, solar lighting, and offices) and the
acquisition of equipment to improve management of the site, including inter alia,
preparation works to install a truck weigh station, solar lighting, fences, safety
equipment, and construction of new offices, and; and (iii) rehabilitate the following
existing roads : (a) the road between Cap Haitien and Labadie, and (b) the road between
Milot and Cap Haitien.
Component 3: Institutional Support, Reconstruction Planning and Project Management
(US$ 2.7 million). The proposed additional financing would involve the provision of
support to the Ministry of Public Works, Transport, Energy and Communications
(MTPTEC) to continues inter alia: (i) restore the functioning capacity of key institutions
of the Recipient's crisis governance framework; (ii) carry out planning activities for the
short, medium and long-term reconstruction phases; (iii) carry out institutional
strengthening activities to include, inter alia: finance training, reconstruction urban
planning, capacity building in project management, construction supervision, quality
assurance, monitoring and reporting, procurement support, and safeguards compliance
and streamlining; (iv) finance Project management activities; (v) establish and operate an
engineering clearinghouse in MTPTC to manage the technical knowledge deriving from
assessments carried out in the Recipient's territory by national and international
institutions and thereafter to disseminate good engineering practices and innovative
solutions; (vi) assist the Recipient with preliminary basic recovery activities essential to
mitigate the Emergency and prepare for restoration activities considered under this
Financing; (vii) finance the provision of technical assistance, the rehabilitation and
construction of the MTPTC offices, and the acquisition of equipment and software for
MTPTC key services; and (viii) provide technical assistance, training and equipment to
manage the Recipient's geographic information system and database.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The original project mostly focuses on the Port au Prince metropolitan area and along the
Port au Prince - L6ogane - Jacmel transport corridor.
The additional financing will include rehabilitation road works on the Labadie-Cormier-
Cap Haitian-Milot corridor, specifically on the routes from Labadie to Cap Hatien and
from Cap Haitien to Milot in North Department of Haiti. The additional financing will
also support continued rubble removal and processing of debris at the Trutier Debris
Processing Facility. The additional financing also aims to strengthen Haiti's public
sector governance and public financial management systems and initiate activities to
enhance transparency and reduce corruption, which would not have any safeguard
implications.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
3


﻿Peter Lafere, Social Development Specialist (LCSSO)
Nyaneba Nkrumah, Environmental Specialist (LCSEN)
6. Safeguards Policies Triggered
Safeguard Policies Triggered                     Yes      No        TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)            X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                    X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)         X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)            X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)      .            X
Environmental Category: A
The new and modified activities proposed by the additional financing do not trigger any
new safeguard policies. There are also no new activities of a Category A nature proposed
tinder the AF. However, the project still remains a Category A because of continued
financing of the Trutier Debris Processing Facility under the additional financing. The
policies triggered under the additional financing include: Environmental Assessment
(OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)
and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09) was
triggered under the original project as a precaution because of the project's involvement
in the landfill at Trutier, but no Pest Management Plan was prepared. However, since
there have been no pest issues associated with rubble processing, nor with the AF phase
activities of the project, the policy is not triggered under the AF phase.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) policy was triggered under the original project
as a result of the earthquake rubble which was being collected from around Port au Prince
and processed at Trutier Debris Processing Facility. Given that this rubble could contain
materials of cultural significance, it was important to trigger this OP. However, to date,
no material of cultural significance has been found. Beyond Trutier, the Physical
Cultural Resources policy is not expected to be relevant in other additional activities
because there will be no sub-surface excavation during the road works, nor any activities
to expand the road that could potentially unearth material of cultural significance.
Nevertheless, the EMPs will provide provisions and guidelines for handling chance finds
of cultural significance, in the event that anything is discovered.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) policy was also triggered undef the original project as a
precautionary measure. Although it remains triggered for the AF, it is unlikely that the
project will have any impact on the natural habitat given that the road works under the
4


﻿AF will focus on the rehabilitation of the existing road and there will be no sub-surface
excavation, or extension or widening of the roadway.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project
Original Project
Haiti has an extremely fragile environment, and the damage caused by the earthquake to
the physical and social environment has been extensive. Following the earthquake,
immediate environmental concerns included debris management including hazardous
waste and release of polluting substances. These continue to remain issues of concern as
debris removal activities are still underway in the country, and are expected to continue
for the next 8-12 months. There is hardly any forest cover left in the country, and the
terrain is steep with unstable slopes. The need for fuel may lead to further deforestation
as people cut down the remaining trees, and the potential damage to aquifers and
groundwater is high.   Given the need for urgent siting and construction of new
infrastructure, there is also a risk of inadequate capacity or time to undertake the required
environmental and impact assessments.
On the environment side, the safeguard issues are related to waste and debris
management, air pollution control issues from debris processing at Trutier, worker safety
issues, and issues related to erosion control.
On the social side, the injuries and loss of life, as well as destroyed housing and
economic assets, have affected poor and rich alike. The poor are however particularly
vulnerable, and many are still dependent on assistance are likely to remain so for a
considerable time. Their vulnerability to further shocks, whether economic or physical
such as rains or hurricanes, speak to the continued need of the reconstruction effort.
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) guiding principles was
prepared and disclosed and Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) and Resettlement
Action Plans (RAPs) for debris processing, canal cleaning, bridge, and road works were
prepared and cleared by the Bank for the subprojects financed under the original project.
Table 1 outlines the safeguards management instruments in detail. The documents are
currently disclosed on the Infoshop website and locally on the Ministry of Public Works,
Transport, Energy and Communications (MTPTEC). Specifically, the EMPs and the
Rapid Social Assessment and ongoing Community Relations Program for Trutier will
continue to apply under the AF. The same procedures and principles that were used to
prepare the EMPs and RAPs for the roads projects under the original project will be used
to generate new EMPs, and as necessary, RAPs, for the new road works financed under
the AF. A new EMP that focuses on waste disposal of old airport equipment will also be
generated under the AF. The purchase of equipment and other activities financed to
5


﻿upgrade the aviation safety equipment will not require any land acquisition nor will these
activities introduce any social impacts requiring mitigation.
Table 1: Origi al Project Safeguard Documents
Project/Subproject                Safeguard Document                    Date Disclosed
7   Infrastructure & Institutions    Environmental and Social Management   April 23, 2010
Emergency Recovery Original Project  Framework - Base Principles
2   Emergency works - Route Nationale 4  Environmental Management Plan     March 18, 2010
3   Rehabilitation Works - Route     Environmental Management Plan         March 18, 2010
Nationale 4                       Resettlement Action Plan              August 6, 2012
4   Rehabilitation Works - Route     Environmental Management Plan inclusive  March 18, 2010
Nationale 2                       of Rivere Fauch6 Bridge
Resettlement Action Plan              April 26, 2011
5   Reconstruction of Rivere Fauch6  Resettlement Action Plan              October 18, 2011
Bridge along RN2
6   Canal Cleaning - Canal de Bois de  Environmental Management Plan       March 18, 2010
Chaine .                          Resettlement Action Plan              May 18, 2010
7   Trutier Debris Processing Facility  EIA and Environment Management Plan  March 17, 2011
Baseline Census and Rapid Social      March 10, 2011
Assessment
Baseline Environmental Site Assessment  April 25, 2011
Report -                                             I
Safeguard Implementation under the Original Project
At the Trutier Debris Processing Facility, the project has recruited an operator to operate
the day-to-day activities of the landfill. Environmental supervision is undertaken by an
internationally recruited firm, while social supervision is undertaken by a social specialist
in the Uniti Centrale d'Exicution (Project Coordination Unit) Within the Ministry of
Public Works, Transport, Energy and Communications (UCE-MTPTEC). For the other
works supported under the project, the UCE-MTPTEC, provides both environmental and
social supervision. Currently one social specialist and one environmental specialist
support this project.
The implementation of environmental safeguards under the original project has been
satisfactory. There are several reasons for this which could serve as a positive lesson for
other projects: (i) the environment supervision team has a highly competent and technical
team; (ii) the team operates from the Trutier Debris Processing Facility and therefore is in
hourly contact with the landfill operator; (iii) issues regarding on-site air pollution,
worker safety, etc, are therefore immediately flagged and the Bank's intervention, where
needed, is quickly requested. Each morning, the supervision team provides safety drills
for the operators and workers since this poses the highest risk. In addition, several times
a day, air quality is monitored for a range of pollutants and particulates. While some
pollutants can be evaluated on site, more complex analyses are done in Canada each
week and returned to Haiti, at which point mitigation measures are put in place. The
Bank's supervision of environmental issues and assessment of the air quality at Trutier
6


﻿shows that currently the health risk from the earthquake rubble is minimal. The
supervision team  is in turn supervised by the UCE-MTPTEC; but that level of
supervision is relatively weak, and the UCE-MTPTEC environment specialist depends
largely on the internationally recruited environment firm to provide technical expertise.
This is largely because the environmental specialist also supervises a large number of
IADB projects in addition to the Bank projects. While this does not affect the
supervision at Trutier because of the international expertise already in place, this poses
more of an issue for the road works, which rely on the UCE-MTPTEC to provide the
necessary environmental supervision. To resolve this issue, the project will be recruiting
another environment specialist to work at the UCE-MTPTEC.
The implementation and supervision of the .social safeguards under the original project
has been satisfactory. The implementation of the RAPs for the Canal de Bois de Chaine
(Canal Cleaning) and Route Nationale 4 (RN4) were completed and were well received
by the affected population. Under the Canal subproject, 83 internally displaced people
who were living in tents needed to be temporarily moved in order to allow for the urgent
canal cleaning works to take place. These people were offered either an opportunity to
participate in a cash for work program or were offered compensation to leave the site
temporarily. Under RN4, 44 people were affected and offered compensation under the
RAP.
The implementation of the RAPs for Route Nationale 2 (RN2) and Rivere Fauchd Bridge
are underway and will be completed shortly.
At the Truitier Debris Processing Facility, the rapid social assessment carried out for the
site analyzed the socio-economic profile of the surrounding communities. No physical
resettlement was necessary and the project investments did not limit access to ongoing
waste-picking activities. Furthermore, the company, per the bidding document
requirements, hired local community members to assist in the site operation and has
financed a range of community outreach activities.
All subprojects resulted in temporary labor opportunities for the local population - both
for men and women. Upon completion of all RAPs, an ex-post evaluation of project
affected people is carried out by a third party monitor.
Implementation was carried out by a social specialist within the UCE-MTPTEC who
recently left but will be replaced -soon. An additional social specialist will be hired and
trained to support the additional workload. These social specialists are specifically
tasked with the preparation, coordination of the implementation and supervision of all
RAPs required by the Project. Lessons to continually improve safeguards management
have been raised and addressed through ongoing project implementation support.
Safeguards under the Additional Financing
For the AF, the supervision set up will continue as under the original project. For the
other activities supported under the AF, specifically the road rehabilitation works, and the
7


﻿aviation safety equipment installation activities at the airport, the UCE-MTPTEC will
continue to provide supervision support for environmental and social safeguards. The
UCE-MTPTEC will recruit two additional specialists, one social and one environmental,
to supplement the existing team, given the expanded activities.
Trutier Debris Processing Facility
The activities at the Trutier Debris Processing Facility will be inside the existing fenced
perimeter and will not introduce any additional environmental or social impacts in terms
of resettlement, access or land acquisition, and therefore no additional mitigation
measures or instruments are required. The ongoing environmental management and
social programs will continue to be operationally supported under the AF and supervised
under the existing framework and with the existing safeguards instruments.
Road Rehabilitation Works
For the road rehabilitation investments, there will need to be thorough community
consultations, as well as a site-specific assessment of the social and environmental impact
of the road rehabilitation works. EMPs and RAPs, as necessary, will be prepared prior to
the start of the works.
Labadie to Cap Haitien: The road from Labadie to Cap Haitien will involve surface
rehabilitation (paving, sidewalk, road safety equipment) under the AF for which an EMP
will be prepared. To date, an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) exists for the road
between Cap Haitian and Labadie, and will be updated according to Bank Safeguards
policies in advance of the commencement of works. No land acquisition is expected to be
necessary for the rehabilitation of this road segment. Social impacts related to road
safety and the influx of construction workers may exist but are expected to be limited
given the low density population along the road corridor. These impacts will also be
addressed through the EMP that will be developed along the same principles of the EMPs
of activities under the original project. Depending on the technical specifications
required for rehabilitation of the road, there is a possibility of minor deviations of the
current route. If necessary, an abbreviated RAP will be prepared along the same
principles and procedures of the RAPs that guided the construction of the RN2 and RN4
under the original project. Procedures for chance finds of physical cultural resources will
be included in the EMP.
Cap Haitien to Milot: The road from Cap Haitien to Milot will be involve surface
rehabilitation (paving, sidewalk, road safety equipment) under the AF for which an EMP
will be prepared along the same principles of the EMPs that guide RN2 and RN4 under
the original project. Social impacts related to road safety will be limited will be
addressed through the EMP. This road segment has been screened for potential
resettlement impacts and it has been determined that these will not exist given the scope
the works, where all rehabilitation activities will remain within the existing paved area
and no realignment activities will occur. This EMP will also contain procedures to guide
chance finds of physical cultural resources.
8


﻿Aviation Safety Equipment
The minor equipment installation works at the Airport do not pose any social safeguards
risks. However, disp6sal methods (recycling, selling, landfilling) for the old airport
equipment will need to be assessed to ensure the safe and appropriate disposal of this
equipment. An EMP that focuses on waste disposal alternatives will be developed.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area
The rehabilitation works under the AF would restore and improve the situation that
prevailed before the disaster, as well as contribute to job creation and economic growth in
conjunction with further planned investments in the North Growth pole. Activities
included in the project would contribute to improving resilience to disasters and reduce
vulnerability.
No long term negative impacts are anticipated; however, relevant screening and
assessment procedures will be used to guide the identification and mitigation of short-
term potential adverse impacts.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts
Under the original project an analysis of alternatives was undertaken as part of the
process for creating the Trutier Debris Processing Facility EIA to ensure that all options
were considered to identify and minimize adverse impacts. In particular, the project
examined different sites for rubble removal and processing. Under the AF, the works will
continue at the Trutier Debris Processing Facility. The road rehabilitation works under
the AF were selected to complement the investment that will take place under the
proposed Haiti Jobs Creation and Growth Project, which focuses on increasing tourism in
the North Department, with the proposed roads serving as a catalytic investment.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower tb address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described
Government capacity to coordinate and manage safeguards issues remains low, and as
with other project activities, the implementation capacity will therefore have to be built
up gradually in phases. Under the original project, two staff (environment and social)
were recruited. Under the AF, an additional two specialists (environment and social) will
be recruited to be able to adequately supervise the environmental and social aspects of the
project. For the Trutier Debris Processing Facility, an internationally recognized firm was
recruited to conduct on-site supervision. Given that Haiti does not have the expertise to
manage the high environmental risks (air and water pollution, etc) that come with
managing such a debris site, their expertise has been welcomed in Haiti and the continued
high caliber of management that such a firm brings, is also expected in the AF financed
9


﻿works at Trutier. For the other works, specifically the road rehabilitation works and
aviation safety equipment installation activities, the UCE-MTPTEC will continue to
provide supervision. Increasing the number of the social and environment staff will
ensure that there is environmental and social due. diligence taking place in the North
Department. This staff will continue to benefit from the joint environment and social
training offered jointly by the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) and the World
Bank.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people
The key stakeholders in this project include: (i) tourists who will benefit from improved
access to key sites, (ii) local entrepreneurs that work in the tourism sector, (iii) aviation
authorities, (iv) the general population of Port Au Prince that will benefit from the
ongoing operation of the landfill, and (iv) local communities and governments in the
vicinity of the infrastructure works that could benefit from temporary employment
opportunities or whom will need to be engaged to address any adverse impacts. For the
original project, initial consultations and discussions about environmental and social
management, including safeguards, were conducted with key Government agencies,
including directly with the Minister for Reconstruction. Discussions and agreement on
principle have also been held with some international agencies, including the United
Nations Office of Project Services (UNOPS). The IADB and the World Bank continue to
have discussions agreeing to coordinate safeguards aspects, and several workshops to
strengthen local environmental and social capacity have occurred. This collaboration will'
continue, with a concerted effort to coordinate and consult among key stakeholder
agencies and local populations. The original project established, as part of each RAP, a
grievance redress mechanism to address outstanding issues or claims by affected peoples.
If a RAP is necessary under the AF a commensurate mechanism will be established.
Under the AF, preparation of the EMPs and RAPs (if necessary) will reflect consultations
with affected- and concerned groups, particularly along the new routes to be financed.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
As noted above, many of the key documents have already been prepared
and disclosed at the Infoshop. The AF is processed under OP 8.00 as an
emergency operation, and preparation of impact assessments and
safeguards instruments, along with disclosure of documents, will be done
following Board approval. Completion and disclosure of the safeguards
instruments required under the AF (EMPs, RAPs) are expected within 2-4
months after the project has been approved.
In country disclosure of the original safeguard documents was completed
in 2010 and 2011, as highlighted in Table 1 above. Part of the disclosure
process involved putting the documents on the Government website.
However, the website for these documents was dismantled and a new
website launched that do not contain these documents. For this reason,
the Government has re-disclosed the original and new documents on the
10


﻿new website.
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     No
Date of receipt by the Bank                                    March, 2010
Date of "in-country" disclosure                               July 31, 2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                 April 1,2010
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive   N/A
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     No
Date of receipt by the Bank                                        N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                                    N/A
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
The policy is not triggered, since Haiti does not have indigenous or
tribal populations. Impacts on vulnerable and marginal groups
were assessed as part of the social assessment process, and
addressed within the overall scope of the project.
Pest Management Plan:
No.
*If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as -part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
Procedures for addressing physical cultural resources were developed as part of the
overall Environmental and Social Management Framework, and disclosed.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDIS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.91 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?     Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)
review and approve the FA report?                                     Yes
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
credit/loan?                                                          Yes
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?            NA
Ap1l1121


﻿Is a separate PMP required?
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical CulturalResources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?       Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential
adverse impacts on cultural property?                                     Yes
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?                                No'
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector
Manager review the plan?                                                 N/A
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
OP 4.36 is not expected to be triggered under the project.
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's
Infoshop?                                                                 Yes
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?                                                    Yes
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?                                                                 Yes
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
cost?                                                                     Yes
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?  Yes
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?                                                                Yes
D. Approvals
'Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) were prepared under the Original Project and have been disclosed on
the Infoshop website. If RAPs are necessary under the AF, they will be prepared using the same principles.
12


﻿Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leaders:                Mr Pierre Bonneau
Environmental Specialist          Ms. Nyaneba Nkrumah
Social Development Specialist     Mr. Peter Lafere
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Mr. Glenn Morgan (signed by Francis
Fragano
Comments:
Sector Manager:                   Aurelio Menendez
Comments:
13


﻿e r - .


