                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: 63765


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/02/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Honduras                             Project ID: P110050
Project Name: Improving Public Sector Performance
Task Team Leader: Carolina Rendon
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 26,       Estimated Board Date: November 22, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: LCSPS                          Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance
                                              Loan
Sector: General public administration sector (100%)
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement
(40%);Administrative and civil service reform (20%);Other accountability/anti-
corruption (20%);Managing for development results (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):           15.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                       0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The objective of the project is to improve public sector performance by strengthening public
finance management systems and establishing a more efficient, effective and transparent public
procurement, human resource management and development of a results monitoring system.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed Improving Public Sector Performance (IPSP) (P110050) project builds on the
Poverty Reduction Strategy Technical Assistance Credit - PRSTAC (P083851) and will continue
and consolidate achievements from that project. It is also part of a broader donor coordination
effort for public sector reforms in Honduras, which is supported by the Inter-American
Development Bank (IADB) , the German Development Bank (KfW) and the World Bank. In that
sense, the IADB has approved financing of US$28.6 million through the Fiscal and Municipal
Management Consolidation Program (2032/BL-HO/HO-L1015) in the areas of customs
administration, the Central Bank, and the expansion of the integrated public financial
management system SIAFI to the municipal level. The KfW is currently preparing a project #10
million (approx. US$13 million) that will mainly support the Supreme Audit Institution
(Tribunal Superior de Cuentas). Furthermore, the IPSP will give technical assistance to the series
of the Fiscal Management DPCs in the area of human resource management.

 The overarching goal of the proposed project is to improve public sector performance through
enhanced transparency, efficiency and accountability in selected areas. Activities mainly
concentrate on improving processes in procurement and human resource management, as well as
supporting the upgrade of IT systems. These improvements are expected to directly influence
and enhance the use of public resources. Finally, enhanced monitoring systems will ensure the
alignment of budget execution with policy priorities and measure the advances of presidential
goals.

 Component 1: Strengthening and consolidating Financial Management Systems (US$5 million)

 The objective of this component is: (i) to upgrade the technological platform of the financial
management system, (ii) to develop and implement the linkages between SIAFI and the e-
procurement platform (HONDUCOMPRAS), and (iii) to strengthen the core public financial
management processes within SEFIN to achieve a fiscally sustainable wage bill. Latter will
support key aspects of human resources management included under the Fiscal Emergency
Recovery DPC.

 Although the current SIAFI system is relatively new (relaunched in 2006), and expert
assessments consistently agree that the conceptual model and functionalities are sound; the
system requires an improvement of its technological platform and user interfaces in order to
provide a more efficient processing and effective access to financial information. A Strategic
Plan has been elaborated by SEFIN identifying key actions and equipment necessary to update
SIAFI. Activities included under this component will build upon previous assessments of the
SIAFI conducted by IADB .

 In order to ensure adequate planning and budgeting, a better integration between
HONDUCOMPRAS and SIAFI is necessary so that all transactions registered in
HONDUCOMRAS are reflected and validated in the financial management system. The linkage
between these two systems will provide the Government with the required instruments for
ensuring that all procurement processes are initiated complying with financial and planning
resources. Preliminarily the need for three main interfaces has been identified: i) public
procurement advertisement, ii) contract signature, and iii) contract execution.

  Likewise the Government is taking important steps to contain the public sector wage bill, in
particular focusing on the education sector (which constitutes 66% of the public sector
workforce). The Government has conducted a payroll audit and # based on the audit#s findings #
is currently eliminating ghost workers and stopping incorrect payments. In addition, the
Government has strengthened controls over the payroll by processing salaries for teachers
through SIAFI and discontinuing the use of a parallel system which had weaker controls. Finally,
the government has kept a wage freeze for teachers for two years, and is expected to approve by
law the de-linking of teachers# pay adjustments from private sector minimum wage levels on a
permanent basis.
 However, several challenges remain in the Government#s objective to achieve a fiscally
sustainable wage bill. Payment for health sector contracts and temporary workers in the Public
Works Ministry are still processed manually, outside SIAFI, and lacking effective controls.
Payroll management is fragmented across the entire public sector; there are no internal controls
and external controls are weak. While another Bank investment loan will continue the control
efforts over the education sector to make them sustainable, the accuracy of the payroll for the
rest of the administration remains unknown.

 In the area of achieving a fiscally sustainable wage bill, the project will contribute to
strengthening control of personnel expenditures through the implementation of the following
payroll audits: (i) Transactions-based payroll audit for the Health Secretariat focusing on
contracted personnel and for Public Works Secretariat focusing on temporary personnel on
wages (jornales); and (ii) Process-based payroll audit for the entire central administration
institutions. Given the political sensitivity of these issues the project will also finance a
communications strategy to advice the Government on political economy aspects of the process.

 The estimated amount for this component is of US$5 million. Activities will be implemented by
the Ministry of Finance (SEFIN), closely coordinating between Modernization Unit (UDEM),
and the Public Procurement Office (ONCAE) and will include provision of equipment, training
and technical assistance.


 Component 2: Strengthening the Public Procurement System (US$5 million)

  The objective of this component is to strengthen and modernize the Honduran Public
Procurement System, in order to improve the quality of public expenditure through an efficient,
transparent and accountable system. The introduction of a more transparent and efficient
procurement system and in particular the use of framework agreements enjoys strong political
support and has been declared one of the Government#s core priorities.

  The public procurement platform HONDUCOMPRAS currently offers limited information on
government purchases, vendors and procedures, but has great potential to be the one-stop
nationwide portal for all public procurement processes, information, and transactions. A first step
towards this new role has been done by transferring the public procurement office ONCAE to the
Ministry of Finance (SEFIN). This will facilitate the planned linkage of procurement processes
with budget execution through an interface between HONDUCOMPRAS and the public
financial management system SIAFI.

 Furthermore, activities under this component will include the introduction of framework
agreements for standard goods purchased by the Government (such as paper, office supplies and
computer equipment). This is closely linked and dependent on upgrading SIAFI to link it with
HONDUCOMPRAS and to transform it into a transactional platform as mentioned in
Component 1 above.
 The transformation of HONDUCOMPRAS into a transactional portal will facilitate policy
analysis by providing information on the use of public funds (for example by identifying
mismatches of policies and spending priorities).
 This component of US$5 million will be implemented by ONCAE within the Ministry of
Finance, and has close links to the upgrading of SIAFI under Component 1. Support of the
preparation for the framework agreements to start the first phase with the next budget execution,
would be financed through a PPF and/or retroactive financing of the proposed project.

 Component 3: Developing and Institutionalizing a Results Monitoring System (US$4.2 million)

 The objective of this component is to re-introduce systems for monitoring and follow-up of
policy priorities and programs, in particular those related to presidential goals. The government
intends to re-establish a M&E platform that has been used before the political crisis and which at
that time, was been a state-of-the-art monitoring system of results-based management.

 The project would support the re-launching of the system, including potentially necessary
updates and adjustments, as well as training for the current staff. The agency in charge is the
Presidential Technical Support Unit (Unidad de Apoyo Tecnico Presidencial - UATP) in the
Secretary of the Presidency, which is primarily in charge of monitoring progress of the
presidential goals. These goals have been set through letter agreements with each minister and
enjoy top priority; in fact, they are called the #Imperdonables# # the unforgivable, if not
achieved. The M&E platform will also link several government entities involved in policy
implementation and execution, such as the Ministry of Planning, which is in charge of
monitoring goals on the macro level and the Ministry of Finance through the oversight of budget
execution.

 The gradual professionalization of key positions in priority sectors is crucial to improve public
sector performance. The Government has found it difficult to attract and retain qualified
personnel and to make progress towards the professionalization of the civil service. This issue
affects key areas of the administration such as the Department of Revenues and Customs, the
Property Institute and other institutions which in other countries are usually more
professionalized and protected from clientelism.

  The project seeks to support these objectives through the design of a Senior Management
career, including a merit-based selection and recruitment process with external validation of the
process. Technical assistance will be provided to the Secretary of the Presidency to design a
system for attracting and retaining qualified personnel and gradually moving towards a more
merit-based and less politicized public administration, building on previous successful but
isolated experiences and prioritizing key institutions It is expected that the project will finance
the implementation of pilots for recruitment of key positions in selected institutions of
Honduras#s central administration (for example, in the Department of Revenues and Customs;
Procurement; Property Institute; and the National Farming and Livestock Department) .

 Furthermore, this component will finance a transition strategy for the change of administration
in January 2013. This transition strategy would include an adequate hand-over of activities,
information and data, and will seek to minimize loss of institutional memory. This activity builds
on previous experiences where as result of high staff turn-over after a change in administration,
implementation has significantly slowed-down in Bank-financed projects.

 This component will be implemented through the Presidential Technical Support Unit (Unidad
de Apoyo Tecnico Presidencial - UATP) in the Secretary of the Presidency and will be financed
with US$4.2 million.

 Component 4: Project Coordination (US$0.8 million)
 This component will finance the following four areas: (i) hiring of a project coordinator to
oversee implementation of the project; (ii) the design and implementation of a monitoring and
evaluation system to monitor, track, and evaluate improvements through the results indicators of
the project, (iii) operating costs of the project implementation unit (UAP-SEFIN), and (iv) an
annual external audit of the project. The total of this component is US$0.8 million.

D. Project location (if known)
Tegucigalpa, Honduras

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Not Applicable

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes         No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                           X
    The project will ensure that all IT equipment that may be replaced or discarded will be
disposed of properly according to pertinent national regulations and/or World Bank Group
standards.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                   X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                            X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                       X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                        X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                 X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                     X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                         X


Environmental Category: C - Not Required

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 08/24/2011
B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Not safeguard-related studies will be needed under this operation.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Ms Carolina Rendon                                             07/21/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Glenn S. Morgan                                             08/02/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Alberto Leyton                                              07/21/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
