                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                      Report No.: ISDSA3914

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Jun-2013
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Jun-2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Honduras                          Project ID:    P144928
                                                        Parent         P115592
                                                        Project ID:
   Project Name:      Honduras Additional Financing Social Protection (P144928)
   Parent Project     Social Protection (P115592)
   Name:
   Task Team          Pablo Ariel Acosta
   Leader:
   Estimated          12-Jun-2013                       Estimated   08-Aug-2013
   Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
   Managing Unit:     LCSHS-DPT                         Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                        Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Other social services (78%), Public administration- Other social services (22%)
   Theme(s):         Social safety nets (100%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:          16.50               Total Bank Financing:         15.00
   Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                 0.00
     Financing Source                                                                        Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         1.50
     International Development Association (IDA)                                               15.00
     Total                                                                                     16.50
   Environmental C - Not Required
   Category:
   Is this a          No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)



                                              Page 1 of 6
   A. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   The revised PDO is to: (a) strengthen the institutional capacity of government’s institutions to
   manage the Bono 10,000 Program, by strengthening transparent mechanisms and instruments for
   targeting Program beneficiaries, monitoring compliance with Program co-responsibilities, and
   making payments to Program beneficiaries; (b) increase school attendance among students in
   grades 1 to 6, and the use of preventive health services among families participating in the
   Program in rural areas; and (c) improve the Recipient’s capacity to respond promptly and
   effectively to an eligible emergency.
 3. Project Description
To achieve these objectives, the project supports the implementation of two components: (i)
Institutional strengthening of the Bono 10,000 CCT program within the context of assisting the
government in developing an integrated social protection strategy; and (ii) Co-financing of
conditional cash transfers to moderate and extreme poor families with children 0 to 18 years old in
rural areas, conditional on the children's school attendance and regular health check-up.

Component 1. Institutional strengthening. The Bono 10,000 CCT program is implemented by the
Family Allowance Program (PRAF), under overall coordination of the Ministry of the Presidency
(MoP). The objective of this component is to support the improvement of the organizational and
technical capacity of PRAF and MoP to implement, monitor, and evaluate the CCT program as part
of the overall social protection framework. This component is divided into four sets of technical
assistance activities: (i) strengthening and improving operational and administrative systems of the
CCT program; (ii) enhancing the coordination, operation, and institutionalization of the CCT
program; (iii) improving accountability, monitoring and evaluation of the CCT program; and (iv)
developing a holistic social protection strategy to inform decision-making.

Component 2. Co-financing Conditional Cash Transfers. The objective of this component is to
improve human capital accumulation of children, aged 0-18 year old, in rural areas,
through co-financing a cash transfer to extremely poor families conditional on complying with the
regular use of health and education services and health monitoring for their children.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project is national in scope, though only finances transfers in rural areas.

 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSSO)

 6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/        No                The project does not finance any civil works or
 BP 4.01                                              other investments that have a geographic
                                                      footprint or other environmental implications.
                                                      The project is rated as an environmental risk
                                                      category C. No environmental safeguard
                                                      instrument is required since the project is not


                                              Page 2 of 6
                                                financing any sub-projects which require
                                                screening of potential issues.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              N/A. The AF will not finance any activities
                                                which affect natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              N/A. The Af will not finance any activity which
                                                affects the use, management or status of any
                                                forest areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09           No              N/A. The project will not finance any activities
                                                which require the use or procurement of
                                                pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              N/A. the AF will not finance any activities
BP 4.11                                         which could affect PCR as defined under the
                                                policy
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             Given the presence of indigenous peoples in the
                                                Project area, the Project triggers the Indigenous
                                                Peoples safeguards (OP/BP 4.10).

                                                To this effect, an Indigenous and Afro-Honduran
                                                Peoples Plan (IPP) has been prepared by the
                                                Recipient to seek broad community support for
                                                the Project, and to ensure the services rendered by
                                                the Project fully respect the dignity, human rights,
                                                and culture of indigenous and Afro-Honduran
                                                peoples. The Bono 10,000 coordinating unit in
                                                MoP worked closely with the
                                                National Program for Indigenous Education
                                                (PRONEEAAH) and the Program for Indigenous
                                                Health (PRONAE) in the elaboration of the IPP,
                                                to ensure indigenous peoples have access to the
                                                CCT, and to ensure effective program
                                                dissemination and supply of education and health
                                                services locally.The IPP was publicly disclosed in
                                                Honduras on May 10, 2010, and by the Bank in
                                                Infoshop, and disseminated appropriately among
                                                beneficiary communities.

                                                However, several delays affected the
                                                implementation of the IPP in the communities.
                                                With Bank assistance, the Government approved
                                                in January 2013 a protocol for the application of
                                                the IPP, which has also been published in the
                                                program website. PRAF and MoP has started to
                                                train its personnel, as well as indigenous
                                                community leaders, on the protocol to implement
                                                the IPP. The protocol is also been printed to
                                                distribute in communities.



                                        Page 3 of 6
                                                       Due to deficiencies in the program monitoring
                                                       system (MIS), the Government still needs to
                                                       inform the Bank how many indigenous
                                                       beneficiaries are in the Program, though the lists
                                                       of schools and health posts serving indigenous
                                                       peoples is available. The Government has hired a
                                                       consultancy to improve the MIS to produce
                                                       quarterly reports on program coverage of
                                                       indigenous population, which will become
                                                       publicly available. This consultancy is expected
                                                       to be ready by the second semester of 2013.

                                                       The Government will also finalize the impact
                                                       evaluation in the second semester of 2013, which
                                                       is expected to assess how the program influences
                                                       the use of education and health services in
                                                       indigenous communities.
   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No                N/A. The AF will not finance any activities
   4.12                                                requiring the acquisition of land or involuntary
                                                       resettlement.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No                N/A. The Af will not finance any dams nor will
                                                       any activity of the project rely on the
                                                       performance of an existing dam
   Projects on International           No                N/A. The project will not finance activities
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                which affect international waterways as deifne
                                                       dunder the policy.
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   N/A. No project activities are located in
   7.60                                                Disputed Areas as defined under the policy.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
     Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
      Like the parent project, the AF will not finance any civil works or support any legal or regulatory
     reform which has implications for environmental management. Thus, the AF remains rated as an
     environmental risk Category C. There is no land acquisition or involuntary resettlement involved
     in this program and none of the safeguard policies apply with the exception of OP 4.10 Indigenous
     Peoples since many of the project's beneficiaries are indigenous peoples as define under the policy.
     No large scale, significant or irreversible impacts are associated with this program.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
      No long term or indirect environmental impacts are associated with this program. Since IP
     communities are potential beneficiaries of the program the impacts are expected to be positive but
     the IPP will be designed in a manner which expects to improve and enhanceaccess of IPs to
     program services.


                                               Page 4 of 6
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
    Not relevant as this AF will continue activities identified under the parent project
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
    The borrower has prepared an IPP for the project and is reviewing and refining this document to
  improve its operational effectiveness and relevance to the overall program. See description in
  following section on OP 4.10.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    The original IPP has been approved a, consulted and disemminated to the affected communities.
  A protocol for its implmentation has been formualted which will be circulated and discussed. See
  following section on OP 4.10
B. Disclosure Requirements
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-May-2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Dec-2010
"In country" Disclosure
  Honduras                                                         06-Dec-2010
  Comments: First date of disclosure
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
 Indigenous Peoples?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Sector Manager review the plan?
 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
 Development Unit or Sector Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies


                                            Page 5 of 6
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Pablo Ariel Acosta
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                          Date: 02-Jun-2013
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Mansoora Rashid (SM)                           Date: 02-Jun-2013




                                             Page 6 of 6
