                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1372
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Oct-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Honduras                           Project ID:   P131094
                            Project Name:     Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)
                            Task Team         Enrique Pantoja
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         22-Oct-2012                        Estimated   18-Dec-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    LCSDU                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:           Flood protection (35%), Sub-national government administration (35%), Central
                                              government administration (20%), Telecommunications (1 0%)
                            Theme:            Natural disaster management (60%), Decentralization (20%), Other urban
                                              development (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 30.00
                              Total                                                                       30.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objectives (PDO) are to support Honduras (a) to continue strengthening its
                           capacity for integrated disaster risk management at the municipal and national level; and (b) to
                           improve its capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency.
                            3. Project Description
                           The Project will consist of the following five components: The PDOs will be achieved through the
                           following components: (1) Strengthening of National-level Capacities (US$2.20 million); (2)
                           Strengthening of Municipal and Community-level Capacities (US$2.90 million); (3) Implementation
                           of Mitigation Measures (US$13.05 million); (4) Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
                           (US$1.85 million); and (5) Contingency Emergency Component (US$ 10.0). The Project will be


                                                                      Page 1 of 12
                         implemented over a six-year period and will include, among others, floods, landslides, forest fires
                         and seismic risks. Details on project components and activities are as follows:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Strengthening of National-Level Capacities (US$2.2 million)

                         The objective of this component is to help consolidate the institutional and policy framework for
                         Disaster Risk Management (DRM) within the overall territorial and regional planning efforts of the
                         country. The component will comprise the following sub-components and activities:

                         1.1. Strengthening Territorial Planning Capacity by supporting the Ministry of Planning and External
                         Cooperation (SEPLAN) through: (a) provision of training, equipment and software for the General
                         Directorate of Territorial Planning (DGOT); (b) consolidation and connectivity of the National
                         Territorial Information System (SINIT) and the Territorial Planning Norms Registry (RENOT) under
                         the National Property Administration System (SINAP), in collaboration with the Property Institute
                         (IP); and (c) updating and promotion of a standardized methodology for territorial planning,
                         considering such fundamental aspects as disaster risk and environmental sustainability.

                         1.2. Strengthening Coordination and Promotion Capacity for Disaster Risk Management, by
                         supporting the Honduran Disaster Risk Management Agency (COPECO) through: (a) consolidation
                         of DRM policy and strategy, including, among else, assessments, policy analysis, training,
                         workshops, and South-South knowledge and experience exchanges; (b) promotion of a “culture of
                         prevention?, including the implementation of a Communication Strategy; (c) promotion of
                         transparency and accountability for DRM, including the implementation of an institutional grievance
                         redress mechanism linked to the Communication Strategy, and carrying out of at least two social
                         audits of relevant Project activities; and (d) consolidation of implementation capacity by (i)
                         designing and constructing offices for the Project within COPECO, (ii) building technical and
                         fiduciary capacity; and by (ii) providing computing and office equipment, mobile communications,
                         vehicles, and other support for the effective functioning of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.3. Strengthening Technical Quality Assurance and Environmental Sustainability Capacity, by
                         supporting COPECO through : (a) preparation of a Good Practice Environmental Code for Disaster
                         Risk Management; (b) updating and promotion of the National Construction Code, in collaboration
                         with relevant stakeholders such as the national associations of architects and engineers; (c)
                         establishment of an Environmental Management Unit within COPECO to process environmental
                         permits and licenses, and to promote integration of environmental sustainability concerns in DRM;
                         and (d) provision of technical assistance and studies in connection to climate change and
                         environmental sustainability.

                         1.4. Strengthening Disaster Risk Monitoring Capacity, by supporting COPECO through (a)
                         consolidation of Early Warning Systems for landslides and of the Metropolitan Wireless Network
                         (RMI); and (b) development of technical capacity and establishment of a seismic monitoring
                         network, in collaboration with the National Autonomous University of Honduras (UNAH); and by
                         supporting the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (SERNA) through (c) strengthening
                         of the General Directorate of Water Resources (DGRH), including among else, training for
                         hydrological and hydraulic modeling.


                         Component 2: Strengthening of Municipal and Local-Level Capacities (US$2.90 million)



                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                         The objective of this component is to support the strengthening of knowledge and information for
                         DRM at the municipal and community level, applying models and methodologies developed under
                         the Bank-financed Natural Disaster Mitigation Project (PMDN), which continue to be applied and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improved under the IDB-financed MITIGAR project. Activities under this component will help
                         implement participatory territorial plan ning processes, including risk and land use characterization
                         and institutionalization of municipal risk management. For the implementation of this component,
                         COPECO will work closely with the Association of Honduran Municipalities (AMHON) and the
                         participating municipalities. The component will include the following sub-components and
                         activities:

                         2.1. Establishment of municipal and local disaster risk management capacity, including (a)
                         organizing, training and equipping of municipal committees for emergency response (CODEMs) and
                         local committees for emergency response (CODELs) in the participating municipalities; (b)
                         strengthening of the Municipal Environmental Units; and (c) conducting of drill/ emergency
                         simulation exercises to monitor and evaluate local preparedness and response capacities.

                         2.2. Developing of territorial planning and characterization for local risk management, including (a)
                         the update, revision, and/or development of risk and land use characterization studies and territorial
                         planning in the participating municipalities, including the preparation of Municipal Risk
                         Management Plans (PMGRs), Municipal Emergency Plans (PEMs), and Municipal Land Use Plans
                         (PMOTs); and (b) the production and delivery of the information generated to the participating
                         municipalities and their incorporation into COPECO’s Integrated Disaster Risk Management and
                         Territorial Analysis System (SIGRET).

                         2.3. Institutionalizing local risk management, including (a) the validation of information and other
                         products generated by the Project at the municipal level, in accordance with the territorial planning
                         process under 2.2; and (b) outreach to local authorities, civil society and private sector associations,
                         as part of the Communication Strategy, to promote the Project and its sustainability through, inter
                         alia, workshops and other events.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2.4. Updating, enhancing and implementing local and regional Early Warning Systems, in line with
                         the needs identified through the Project.

                         Component 3: Implementation of Mitigation Measures (US$13.05 million)

                         The objective of this component is to reduce local vulnerability by supporting the implementation of
                         specific small structural and nonstructural measures as identified and prioritized through the
                         technical analysis and participatory process supported under Component 2. The Operations Manual
                         will establish criteria for municipal participation and describe the process for prioritization of
                         mitigation measures. Based on PMDN and ongoing experience, it is estimated that the financing
                         range of a mitigation measure will be between US$60,000.00 and US$200,000.00, and that between
                         one and two mitigation measures will be implemented in each municipality. These mitigation
                         measures may include, for example, small riverbank protection, drainage canal-bridges, rain water
                         drainage, micro-watershed management plans, and reforestation. The component will include the
                         following sub-components and activities:

                         3.1. Designing structural works and non-structural measures, including updates, revisions, and/or
                         preparation of designs at critical locations in the participating municipalities.



                                                                       Page 3 of 12
                         3.2. Implementing small structural mitigation works, including the supervision and construction of
                         prioritized works in participating municipalities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3.3. Implementing nonstructural measures, including the supervision and carrying out of prioritized
                         nonstructural measures in participating municipalities.

                         Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$1.85 million)

                         The objective of this component is to support Project management as well as the monitoring and
                         evaluation of its results. As such, it includes the following sub-components and activities:

                         4.1. Support Project Management, including (a) training and workshops; (b) technical assistance and
                         technical audits; (c) carrying out of the fiduciary aspects of the Project such as financial
                         management, audits, and procurement; (d) the establishment of the Project Coordination Committee;
                         and (e) the supervision of the communication and gender equity strategies, as well as environmental
                         management.

                         4.2. Support Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) of the Project, including, inter alia, (a) the integrated
                         M&E system covering financial and physical progress; (b) production of bi-annual Project progress
                         reports; (c) collection of baseline data to assess the Project's social, environmental, and economic
                         impacts, including gender-differentiated impacts; and (d) preparation of mid-term and final Project
                         evaluation reports.

                         Component 5: Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) Contingency Emergency Component (US$
                         10.0 million)

                         Providing immediate response to an eligible emergency, as needed. This component would finance a
                         positive list of critical imports. This component would finance public and private sector expenditures
                         on a positive list of goods, both domestic and imported, required for Honduras’ emergency recovery.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A specific Operations Manual will apply to this component, detailing financial management,
                         procurement, safeguard and any other arrangements to ensure that funds are disbursed in a rapid and
                         efficient manner following an eligible emergency.


                         Proposed Implementation Arrangements

                         The implementing agency will be COPECO, which was in charge of PMDN and is currently
                         implementing the IDB-financed MITIGAR project. A PCU will be established within COPECO
                         under a Coordinator with operational and administrative autonomy. The PCU will also include the
                         necessary technical, administrative, and procurement staff for the Project's effective implementation
                         and attention to social and environmental sustainability. The PCU will be strengthened with a Social-
                         Gender Specialist and an Environmental Specialist.

                         The Project will include SEPLAN, SERNA, and AMHON as co-executing agencies, with which
                         COPECO will sign individual agreements by component to promote coordination and collaboration.
                         These agencies will be part of the Project Coordinating Committee (PCC), which will be presided by
                         COPECO’s Minister-Commissioner or his delegate. The Ministry of Finance (SEFIN) and a
                         representative from the Regional Council of Sula Valley and the National Table for Promoting DRM
                         (MNIGRD) will also be invited to participate in the PCC. When necessary, the PCC will establish a

                                                                     Page 4 of 12
                         Technical-Operational Committee (TOC) to follow up on specific issues. Finally, COPECO will sign
                         individual, component-wise agreements with the Co-Executing Agencies to promote coordination
                         and collaboration.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project will also engage participation of collaborating agencies based on implementation needs,
                         including, inter alia, the Ministry of the Interior and Population (SEIP), the Ministry of Education
                         (SE), the National Autonomous University of Honduras (UNAH), the Flood Control Committee of
                         the Sula Valley (CCIVS), the Property Institute (IP), and the national associations of architects and
                         engineers (CAH and CICH). When necessary, a Memorandum of Understanding will be signed
                         between COPECO and a collaborating agency.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The population of Region 1 (Sula Valley) is estimated to be 2,033,702 in 2010 (or 25.3% of the
                         country's population), according to the Honduran National Statistical Institute (INE). The region
                         comprises 20 municipalities across four departments, including Cortés,whose total area is within
                         Region 1, as well as Atlántida, Santa Barbara and Yoro. The proposed Project’s beneficiaries are thus
                         concentrated mainly in Cortés (estimated population of 1,570,285), which includes among its 12
                         municipalities San Pedro Sula, the second largest Honduran city (population of 719,447). One
                         municipality of Atlántida, three of Santa Barbara and four of Yoro are included in Region 1. Under
                         PMDN, preparatory work was carried out in all but five of the region’s municipalities. Furthermore,
                         the Bank-financed Second Phase of the Land Administration Project (PATH II) has recently been
                         working with most of the municipalities in Cortés.

                         The Sula Valley is characterized by high vulnerability to natural disasters, while at the same time it
                         remains one of the most economically and demographically dynamic areas of the country. In respect
                         to hydrology, the area boasts two of the most important Honduran watersheds that both drain into the
                         Atlantic: the Ulúa and the Chamalecón river basins, making them areas subject to continuous
                         flooding mainly in the rainy season. Ulúa is 358 km long (not all of it in Region 1) and its river basin
Public Disclosure Copy




                         hosts almost 3 million inhabitants or 121 inhabitants per square kilometer. Average annual
                         precipitation amounts to 1,470 mm and flooding is common in Ulúa’s lower basin. The Chamalecón
                         river is 256 km long (most of it in Region 1), its river basin hosts almost 1.25 million inhabitants;
                         225 inhabitants per square kilometer, and annual average precipitation is about 1,327 mm. The
                         population of the two biggest cities by the Chamalecón, San Pedro Sula and Choloma, increased
                         thirteen-fold between 1988 and 2001. Every year, during the Atlantic hurricane season between May
                         and November, this region experiences flooding.

                         Deforestation resulting from logging and improper land use is soaring both at the national level and
                         within the Region 1. The annual deforestation rate was 2.5 percent between 1990 and 2005, and the
                         country’s forest cover has suffered a loss of 37 percent, reducing natural prevention capacity against
                         landslides. Other trends have intensified the disaster risk management challenges, including farming
                         of marginal lands, soil erosion due to haphazard development, and mining in environmentally
                         sensitive areas, for example uncontrolled material extraction from rivers. Most of the municipalities
                         of the Project area participated in PMDN that prepared a number of tools based on vulnerability
                         studies: geo-referenced graphic and numerical data bases on and mapping of critical flood and
                         landslide-prone locations, territorial development plans, and municipal information systems and
                         plans for risk management. This Project too will complete preparation of such necessary tools for all
                         of the participating municipalities.



                                                                      Page 5 of 12
                         The Social Assessment indicates that there are some Garifuna communities, mainly in the
                         municipality of Tela in Atlántida, and Lenca and Pech communities in other municipalities included
                         in the Project area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Jason Jacques Paiement (LCSSO)
                         Tuuli Johanna Bernardini (LCSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes               This policy is triggered to ensure adequate
                         BP 4.01                                            environmental management of the mitigation
                                                                            works that will be undertaken under Component
                                                                            3, as well as the planning and capacity building
                                                                            activities under Component 2., Project activities
                                                                            are in general expected to be relatively minor, and
                                                                            no negative large, significant or irreversible
                                                                            environmental impacts are anticipated. However,
                                                                            municipalities and other stakeholders could add
                                                                            co-financing to Project investments and thus
                                                                            increase their scope. All proposed investments
                                                                            will be screened by the Environmental Specialist
                                                                            of the Project, and any major investments will
                                                                            need to prepare a pertinent environmental
                                                                            assessment and apply for an environmental
                                                                            authorization from SERNA. No Category A
                                                                            investments will be supported by Project
                                                                            financing, and a negative list included in the
                                                                            Environmental and Social Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            Framework (ESMF) and the Financing
                                                                            Agreement will strengthen overall mitigation of
                                                                            negative social and environmental impacts.
                                                                            Overall, the proposed Project will promote
                                                                            environmental sustainability in the DRM sector
                                                                            by establishing appropriate practices within
                                                                            existing institutions, assure that risk reduction
                                                                            works are implemented in a sustainable manner,
                                                                            contemplate potential works on environmental
                                                                            restoration and prevent further environmental
                                                                            degradation. Honduras’ environmental
                                                                            management capacity will be strengthened
                                                                            through local preventive planning and capacity
                                                                            building directed to the Municipal Environmental
                                                                            Units. Since the exact locations and specific list
                                                                            of works is still unknown, an ESMF was prepared
                                                                            by the Borrower to serve as the proper safeguard
                                                                            instrument. The ESMF lays out the procedures
                                                                            and responsibilities for screening the activities
                                                                            proposed under Component 3 in order to (i)


                                                                    Page 6 of 12
                                                                         ensure that the proposed activities are eligible for
                                                                         Bank financing, and (ii) determine what, if any,
                                                                         further environmental and social analyses and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         instruments will be required before the activity
                                                                         can be implemented. The ESMF includes a
                                                                         description of these objectives, as well as a
                                                                         negative list of non-eligible investments. The
                                                                         negative list will be included in the Financing
                                                                         Agreement.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes            This policy is triggered because region-wide
                                                                         planning and DRM tools will encompass natural
                                                                         habitats such as the Merendon protected area in
                                                                         San Pedro Sula. All areas with a special
                                                                         environmental status will be recognized as such
                                                                         within different planning processes. The ESMF
                                                                         identifies such sites in the Project area that
                                                                         qualify as critical natural habitat as defined in OP
                                                                         4.04. The Project will not finance mitigation
                                                                         works that would impact a site like that, unless
                                                                         the works are consistent with approved
                                                                         management plans for such sites.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes            This policy is triggered because Project
                                                                         activities may be conducted in forest areas. The
                                                                         Sula Valley includes considerable forest land and
                                                                         there have been concerns about increased
                                                                         deforestation in El Progreso, Santa Rita, and El
                                                                         Negrito. Moreover, the Project may involve
                                                                         planning and mitigation measures that include the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         development of forest plantations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No             This policy is not triggered because Project
                                                                         activities will not involve purchase, use or storage
                                                                         of pesticides and will not support the procurement
                                                                         or use of, or lead to the increased use of, other
                                                                         agricultural chemicals.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes            This policy is triggered since the Project
                         BP 4.11                                         involves small structural works. These works
                                                                         might take place in locations that have not
                                                                         already been screened for physical cultural
                                                                         resources. The country's laws and procedures
                                                                         regarding physical cultural resources will be
                                                                         applied for addressing potential “chance finds?
                                                                         encountered during construction, and related
                                                                         procedures to be followed will be reflected in the
                                                                         ESMF and the Operational Manual. Finally, the
                                                                         negative list will include screening procedures to




                                                                 Page 7 of 12
                                                                        ensure that no works will affect known cultural
                                                                        sites.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes             This policy is triggered since some indigenous
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        and Afro-Honduran communities live within the
                                                                        Project area. The Social Assessment indicates that
                                                                        there are Garifuna communities, mainly in the
                                                                        municipality of Tela in Atlántida, and Lenca and
                                                                        Pech communities in other municipalities. The
                                                                        participatory methodology of the proposed
                                                                        Project for risk and vulnerability analysis as well
                                                                        as decision making will facilitate the inclusion of
                                                                        indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples. An
                                                                        Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF)
                                                                        based on a Social Analysis has been prepared.
                                                                        Overall, the IPPF includes specific guidance on
                                                                        how to engage effectively and pro-actively
                                                                        indigenous communities and procedures to be
                                                                        used for screening all activities identified post-
                                                                        Appraisal and ensuring that they maximize social
                                                                        benefits and avoid causing any potential large
                                                                        scale, significant and/or irreversible adverse
                                                                        impacts.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             This policy is triggered considering the potential
                         4.12                                           that some mitigation measures may affect some
                                                                        people physically or economically. A
                                                                        Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been
                                                                        prepared, although the probability of such cases
                                                                        occurring is considered low based on similar
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        previous Bank experience in Honduras (PMDN)
                                                                        and the relatively small scale of the proposed
                                                                        Project's mitigation works. The Project will not
                                                                        finance resettlement of population living in high
                                                                        risk areas. A negative list related to Component 3
                                                                        will be included in the Financing Agreement.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No              This policy is not triggered because Project
                                                                        activities will not involve construction of dams or
                                                                        depend on existing dams. The screening process
                                                                        developed as part of the ESMF explicitly
                                                                        excludes any works associated with dams of any
                                                                        size and type.
                         Projects on International        No              This policy is not triggered because Project
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                           activities will not be conducted in or influence
                                                                        international waterways. The rivers within the
                                                                        Project area are solely within Honduran territory.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No              This policy is not triggered because Project
                         7.60                                           activities will not be conducted in disputed areas.



                                                                Page 8 of 12
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                N/A
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                Honduras’ vulnerability to natural disasters seems to be on the rise. Between 1980 and 2010, over
                              15,000 people were killed and over 4 million were affected by disasters in Honduras, while
                              economic damage amounted to US$4.5 billion. As mentioned above, Project activities will most
                              likely be relatively minor and no negative large, significant or irreversible environmental impacts
                              are expected. On the contrary, the Project will support environmental sustainability in the DRM
                              sector by strengthening appropriate practices within existing institutions to promote integration of
                              an ecosystemic approach to vulnerability assessments and strengthening of communities’
                              resilience to natural disasters. In practice, the financed risk reduction works and capacity building
                              will follow an environmental restoration approach and aim at preventing future environmental
                              degradation. Environmental management capacity will be strengthened through local preventive
                              planning and capacity building directed especially to the Municipal Environmental Units. For
                              example, inappropriate solid waste management has been identified as a threat also to the long-
                              term viability of the disaster mitigation works, and related community outreach and capacity
                              building will be promoted at community and municipal levels to address the problem.

                              Additionally, to ensure that the Project will not engender indirect and/or long term social or
                              environmental impacts in the Project area, a negative list for mitigation investments under
                              Component 3 will be included in the Financing Agreement, as was the case under PMDN.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                               COPECO has experience with World Bank safeguards through support from the Bank-financed
                              Natural Disaster Mitigation Project (PMDN, P064913) which helped the country to build
                              institutional capacity in the sector. To ensure socio-environmental sustainability of theProject
                              investments and compliance with the country's environmental requirements and the Bank
                              safeguards, the PCU will include a Social/Gender Specialist and an Environmental Specialist. In
                              addition, the PCU will include a Communication Specialist who will coordinate his or her work
                              with these specialists. All required safeguard instruments (Environmental and Social Management
                              Framework/Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework/Resettlement Policy Framework) are
                              completed. A Communication Strategy and a Gender Equity Strategy will complement these
                              instruments. Moreover, an Environmental Management Unit will be created within COPECO to
                              facilitate smooth processing of environmental authorizations and promote overall
                              institutionalization of environmental management within COPECO. To ensure sustainability,
                              mitigation works will comply with the country's environmental requirements and World Bank
                              safeguards. Baseline data were collected and disaggregated by gender and social groups (including
                              indigenous peoples and Afro-Hondurans). Moreover, there will be a Communication Strategy and
                              a Gender Equity Strategy to provide further guidelines, though not exclusively for indigenous


                                                                        Page 9 of 12
                           peoples.

                           Finally, the Project will promote DRM transparency and accountability by supporting COPECO in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the establishment of an institutional grievance redress mechanism and by carrying out at least two
                           social audits of Project activities.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             A Social Assessment (SA) was carried out to analyze DRM-related issues, identify possible
                           social risks and impacts, and identify and characterize key stakeholders. The Social Assessment
                           collected primary data through interviews with key stakeholders, and focus group discussions with
                           male and female representatives of the following agencies: the twenty municipalities of Region 1,
                           COPECO (central agency and regional seat), CODEMs and CODELs, Technical Municipal Unit
                           (UTM), Municipal Women's’ Issues Offices, Organization for Ethnic Community Development
                           (ODECO), Transparency Commission, patronatos, Secretariat of Natural Resources and
                           Environment (SERNA) and especially its Office of Environmental Assessment and Control
                           (DECA), Honduran Social Investment Fund (FHIS), Cadastral Offices, Red Cross Associations
                           (Honduran, Italian, Spanish), NGOs (Medicos Mundi, National Table for Promoting DRM), faith-
                           based organizations (Commission on Menonite Social Action), local chambers of commerce and
                           industry, local teachers, and members of the police force and fire brigade.

                           The findings of the SA, including draft versions of the proposed safeguard instruments, were
                           discussed with interested stakeholders and potential beneficiaries during public consultation on
                           October 5, 2012. In accordance with the Bank's Information Disclosure Policy (BP 17.50), copies
                           of the IPPF and RFP have been made available to the public on the websites of both the Borrower
                           and the Bank. The project will promote transparency and accountability in disaster risk
                           management by supporting COPECO public information and grievance redress mechanism, and
                           by carrying out at least two social audits of relevant project activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           As mentioned above, a region-wide consultation event was organized aiming at a broad
                           participation of the Project stakeholders on October 5, 2012.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                        12-Oct-2012
                          Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    17-Oct-2012
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                     17-Oct-2012
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                        12-Oct-2012
                          Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    17-Oct-2012
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                     17-Oct-2012
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                        12-Oct-2012
                          Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    17-Oct-2012



                                                                    Page 10 of 12
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Oct-2012
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
                         ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?


                                                                    Page 11 of 12
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Enrique Pantoja
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Anna Wellenstein (SM)                     Date: 19-Oct-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
