                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/19/2011                                  Report No.: AC6285
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P082242                 Original Project Name: Nutrition and
                                             Social Protection project
Country: Honduras                            Project ID: P126158
Project Name: ADDITIONAL FINANCING FOR NUTRITION AND SOCIAL
PROTECTION PROJECT
Task Team Leader: Cornelia M. Tesliuc
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 9, 2011        Estimated Board Date: June 16, 2011
Managing Unit: LCSHS-DPT                     Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Vocational training (60%);Other social services (40%)
Theme: Social safety nets (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              3.60
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                        0.00
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
This is an Additional Financing Credit that will provide an amount of SDR2.3 million
(US$3.6 million equivalent) to the Republic of Honduras for the Nutrition and Social
Protection Project (P082242, Cr. 4097). The Additional Financing (AF) would fund
costs associated with: (i) the implementation of a new activity under the Component 1
(Institutional Strengthening of the Social Protection Framework for Children and Youth);
and (ii) a cost overrun for training activities under Component 3 (Implementation of
Borrower#s First Employment Program (FEP) for disadvantaged youth). The AF request
will also allow the restructuring of activities in Component 1, and changes to
implementation arrangements and key outcome indicators for Components 1 and 2, that
do not require additional financing.

 Summary of changes and expected outcomes: Under Component 1, the proposed Credit
would finance a survey of about 100,000 households, leading to the identification of
roughly 75,000 households eligible for Bono 10,000, a Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT)
Program which provides cash transfers to poor families with young children contingent
on children attending school and being taken to regular preventive health care checkups.
The new activity fits under the current structure of the component, as it would be the
basis for the development of a Unique Registry of Beneficiaries to improve targeting of
existing safety net programs, which was envisaged under the original project. Under
Component 3, the proposed AF would finance the training of 2,300 youth. This would
allow the project to reach its original target of 6,000 trained youth (original financing
only allowed for the training of 4,800), and exceed that target by 1,100. Given the
continued high unemployment of at-risk youth in the country, the GoH has established
the expansion of the youth employment program as a priority.

 The PDO remains the same but is rephrased to improve clarity as follows: The project
development objective is to improve Honduras# social safety net for children and youth.
This would be achieved by: (i) strengthening the government#s capacity to administer
social assistance programs; (ii) improving nutritional and health status of young children
by expanding the AIN-C program, and (iii) increasing employability of at-risk youth by
piloting a First Employment program.

3. Project Description
The proposed changes from the original Project are as follows:
 Component 1. Institutional Strengthening of the Borrower#s Social Protection
Framework for Children and Youth (US$1 million).
 The new activity is the collection of household data to identify eligible beneficiaries for
Bono 10,000. The AF would allow the identification of roughly 75,000 households in
urban and rural areas. While the targeting methodology for rural areas is already
developed, the one for urban areas is not, so the AF would finance technical assistance
consulting services to achieve this by: (i) defining the targeting methodology for the
Program in urban areas; (ii) adaptation or design of the data collection instrument
(starting from the rural socioeconomic survey instruments) to be applied in these areas;
and (iii) piloting the data collection instrument.

 The National Statistical Institute (INE) would carry out the data collection given its
considerable experience with household surveys (INE collected the first round of surveys
for Bono 10,000) and because of the need to have a government institution that could
ensure continuity in the process.
 Technical assistance for the identification of community counterparts, and the
development of participatory instruments for local level monitoring would be dropped,
since the Government’s new Social Protection Strategy will include participatory social
monitoring of social programs mechanisms and their implementation would be financed
with national resources.

  Given the changes described above, SOP has identified the need to adjust the
implementation arrangements for Component 1 and agreed on a collaboration with the
Secretary of Social Development (SSD), whereby SSD would be responsible for the
technical oversight of Component 1 (including preparation of periodic progress reports
and updating the implementation plans), while SOP would retain the fiduciary functions
(financial management and procurement).
 Component 2. Support for the Borrower#s AIN-C Program - no additional financing
required.
 An indicator is being added to measure health status of beneficiary children, which was
not included in the original results matrix.

 Clarification of the wording in the PDO indicator is proposed; see Annex 1 for details.

 Component 3. Implementation of Borrower#s First Employment Program (FEP) for At-
Risk Youth (US$2.6 million).
 Following the original project design, the AF would provide financial support for the
implementation of the First Employment Program. The component would finance
activities under four subcomponents: (i) Targeting and selection of eligible beneficiaries
to be enrolled in the First Employment Program; (ii) Training services; (iii) Promotion,
dissemination, and support for labor market insertion; and (iv) Program management and
monitoring.

 (i)     Subcomponent 1. Targeting and selection of eligible beneficiaries. Youth aged
15-21 living in poor urban areas, who are not enrolled in formal education and who are
unemployed or visibly underemployed, would be eligible for the program. A minor
change in the design of the FEP would be introduced to expand the age limit for
participants in the program from 18 years to 21 years old, based on lessons learned from
the first stage of implementation that showed there is a large number of at#risk youth in
the older age group who could benefit from the intervention. In addition, the requirement
to be enrolled in a program of alternative education would be eliminated to avoid
excluding disadvantaged youth who may not find a place because of limited supply.
Notwithstanding the elimination of the requirement to be enrolled in alternative
education, the FEP would continue to emphasize the importance of being enrolled in a
second chance education program. The additional credit would finance a series of
promotion activities in communities, schools, and with NGOs through a variety of
modalities (mass media, job orientation sessions, workshops with graduates of the
program, etc.), as well as specially organized enrollment and eligibility determination
sessions. For indigenous communities, the program would organize mobile enrollment
units working together with the training institutes and the indigenous Federations.
 (ii) Subcomponent 2. Training services. The training would be offered by private and
public training centers, contracted out through a competitive bidding process, which
would be responsible for defining the specific areas of training based on internships they
have previously identified and agreed with employers. While in training, FEP participants
would benefit from: (a) 3-4 months of technical vocational training combined with life
skills training; (b) a stipend to cover the costs of transportation and food for each day of
assistance; (c) training materials; and (d) sitting in an exam to obtain a competency
certification. The training is followed by an internship period of about three to four
months in duration, preferably in private companies operating in business directly linked
to training. So far, most internships have been offered in large services companies
(hotels, supermarkets, restaurants), but also in some small and medium-size enterprises
(garments, construction, hairdresser, greenhouses, among others) as well as public
organizations (museums). The SLSS delegated the administration of training services
through a service contract to the Advisory Center for Human Resources Development
(CADERH), a non-profit organization with a leading role in the accreditation of training
institutes and development of occupational standards in Honduras. Under FEP,
CADERH is responsible for accreditation and maintenance of a Registry of Training
Providers, and handles requests for proposals, evaluation of proposals, contracting of
training providers, supervision of contracts and beneficiaries during training and
internship, certification of competencies, and reporting to the SLSS.
  (iii) Subcomponent 3. Promotion, dissemination and support for labor market
insertion. After the training and internship phase, graduates would be registered in the
database of the National Employment Service of SLSS, and would be eligible to receive
assistance in job search and job placement. In addition, program participants would
receive personalized, intensive psychological support, to manage frequently encountered
traits among beneficiaries including low self esteem, depression, impacts from sexual and
domestic violence, and the affects of low school attainment.
  (iv) Subcomponent 4. Program management. The AF would finance the cost
associated with the annual audit of the project. The current monitoring and evaluation
activities would continue to be carried out with funding from the original credit.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The recruitment points for the AF will be virtually the same as the original project. The
indigenous groups likely to benefit are the Lenca and the Maya-Chorti in the Western
Region, and the Garifuna in Northern coastal areas. Indigenous migrants from other areas
may be recruited as well.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHE)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                            Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                          X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                   X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                              X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                               X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                   X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                             X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                        X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                 X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project should provide training and temporary employment opportunities to at-risk
indigenous youth. The training and internships provided under the First Employment
Programs, for both the indigenous and non-indigenous youth, will improve their long-
term employment opportunities.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
N/A

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The IPP has been updated to capitalize on the lessons learned from implementation of the
original project, and from the outcomes of the consultations with indigenous and Afro-
Honduran organizations. Based this, for all the youths (including indigenous), the AF for
the FEP will include aspects introduced during implementation of the original project.
These include the following:

 #      Training centers will be required to include topics dealing with social exclusion,
sexuality, drugs, stress management, peer pressure, civil responsibility, entrepreneurship,
etc.

 #     The AF project will include professional services for youth counseling, and close
follow-up and monitoring, using resources and materials being used by the Programa de
Atención al Adolescente at the Secretariat of Health. The counseling services will be
coordinated with the Job Assistance Program of the SLSS.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Borrower carried out free, prior and informed consultations with Afro-Honduran and
Indigenous Federations. Both consultations were organized with the participation of the
new Ministry of Indigenous Affairs, and the National Program for Education. Those
consulted included: Youth Group Ememigini, community leaders of the Department of
Colon; leaders from Sambo Creek, La Ceiba, Roatan, and Cortes, staff from the Ministry
of Indigenous Affairs, and regional staff from the SLSS in San Pedro Sula.
Recommendations from the consultations include:
 - The video #Mi Primer Empleo# will be disseminated by the Secretariat of Indigenous
Affairs to community leaders. The Secretariat will make available their facilities in
Copan and Olancho for registration.
  - Organized community groups will assess topics of highest demand based on the job
market, to bring to the attention of FEP staff.
  - Communities will organize training sites to bring training to their locations. Options
are being discussed.
  - The Secretariat of Indigenous Affairs will organize a workshop with indigenous
leaders to promote the FEP among indigenous youth.

 The Secretariat of Labor is committed to improve retention of indigenous youths in the
FEP program. Over the past few years, FEP has learned how to better attract and retain
indigenous youth, and Bank supervision missions have confirmed that they have
incorporated these lessons into their program design.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/02/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/02/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/02/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
  ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

  OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
  Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
  appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
  and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Cornelia M. Tesliuc                       04/28/2011
Environmental Specialist:
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Mr Glenn S. Morgan                              05/02/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                  Mr Gaston Mariano Blanco                        05/02/2011
  Comments: Gaston Blanco was Acting SM on that date.
