                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/03/2013                                     Report No.: AC6920
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P086775                 Original Project Name: HN Rural
                                             Infrastructure Project
Country: Honduras                            Project ID: P144324
Project Name: HN RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECT (AF)
Task Team Leader: Rigoberto Yepez-Garcia
Estimated Appraisal Date:                    Estimated Board Date: June 18, 2013
Managing Unit: LCSEG                         Lending Instrument:
Sector: Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (30%);General water, sanitation and
flood protection sector (27%);Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (23%);Sub-
national government administration (12%);Other Renewable Energy (8%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (35%);Infrastructure services for private sector
development (35%);Decentralization (15%);Public expenditure, financial management
and procurement (15%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             20
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
                                                                          0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []            Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [X]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objectives of the Project are: (a) to improve the access, quality and sustainability of
infrastructure services (roads, water, sanitation and electricity) for the rural poor in
Honduras; (b) to develop capacity and an enabling environment for locally-driven
infrastructure service provision and planning; and (c) to improve the Recipient's capacity
to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency.

3. Project Description
The project will support the following five components:

 Component (A) – Support participatory local planning for integrated infrastructure
service delivery (US$0.88 million); Component A would finance the costs of consultants,
workshops and studies to: (i) further develop rural infrastructure diagnostics for each
mancommunidad; (ii) expand existing strategic plans for development using participatory
planning; (iii) establish mechanisms and procedures to solve infrastructure challenges;
(iv) provide follow up support and monitoring of the overall planning process in each
mancommunidad.
  Component (B) – Infrastructure service delivery (US$ 16 million); Component B has
the following subcomponents: (i) the program wil focus on rehabilitation of rural roads,
"just-in-time" repairs, support for the formation of microenterprises for road
maintenance, and the kilometro municipal program; (ii) financing of design, feasibility
studies, civil works, goods, and services related to the construction and rehabilitation of
water and sanitation systems; (iii) grid extension, solar systems for homes and
community buildings under the program PROSOL and small wind based electricity
generation systems. This component will also include micro-financing support for
acquisition of solar systems for households; and (iv) environmental remediation for the
sub-projects executed in the first phase of the credit as needed.
  Component (C) – Micro-finance services for SHS sub-programs (US$ 0.29 million);
This component will support the MFIs to maximize the development impact of the SHS
Subprograms through the provision of commercially priced loans to on-lend to Micro-
Finance Beneficiaries to finance electricity connections, purchase of photovoltaic
systems, purchase of batteries and accessories for charging in centralized solar stations
and for other business purposes.
  Component (D) – Local capacity building (US$0.89 million); Component D will finance
consulting services, training, goods and other technical assistance to strengthen the
implementation capacity of the implementing agencies at both the local (UTIs) and the
central level (FHIS).
  Component (E) – Project Management, monitoring and evaluation (US$ 1.84 million);
This component will ensure sufficient project coordination and management as well as
safeguards compliance, monitoring and evaluation of the scaled-up project.
  Component (F) – Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM, US$0 million). This
component will provide support to respond to an Eligible Emergency.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will continue to support infrastructure development in the six
mancomunidades (Mambocaure, Chorti, Cra, Mamno, Mancepaz, Guisayote) selected in
the parent project. The project may be expanded to at most two new mancommunidades
and the selection of the new two mancommunidades will be done in accordance with the
selection criteria in the operations manual of PIR. In addition, two indigenous
communities in Mancepaz will be specifically targeted as direct beneficiaries.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Ruth Tiffer-Sotomayor (LCSEN)
   Ms Kristyna Bishop (LCSSO)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The parent project and the Additional Financing are classified as Category B. The
Safeguards Policies triggered in the parent project were OP/BP 4.01 and OP/BP 4.11 and
in the AF two additional safeguards OP/BP 4.04 and OP/BP 4.36 are triggered. The
Environmental and Social Management Framework (MGAS) was prepared in 2004 and it
has been updated to include new safeguards triggered, new national environmental
legislation applicable to the project activities, improvement of environmental
instruments, and increased on-site supervision and environmental training, among other
topics.

 The parent project has had several environmental issues related to internal capacity to
perform supervision of subprojects, knowledge among the staff, contractors and field
consultants of the Environmental safeguards instruments set for the project, compliance
with the national legislation. Some of the common impacts are related to excavations,
health and safety, lack of grievance mechanisms. For instance, irreversible impacts
occurred at the construction of an access road in a mini-hydro project (85kW) which
caused significant impacts in the sedimentation of streams and in private land. The
project is currently implementing a Remediation Action Plan to restore conditions and
compensate impacts.

 Also, about 100 subprojects were built without the required environmental studies and
permits. In some cases the process was initiated but not concluded, or in other cases was
never initiated. About 30 of these subprojects were built within protected areas. An
environmental consultant was hired to perform a review of 38 subprojects which lack
permits to determine if there are any negative or irreversible impacts that will need
remediation. If necessary, the client has already agreed on a budget to be use in the
implementation of a Remediation Action Plan during the AF implementation.

 Social
 The parent project had a Resettlement Framework (RF) and an Indigenous Peoples
Planning Framework (IPPF) and these were reviewed and improved as part of the
preparation of the Additional Financing. As with the parent project, the proposed
operation does not contemplate any physical resettlement or land acquisition but it is
anticipated that some of the works such as road improvement will require restriction of
access during construction and these will be managed by the Resettlement Policy
Framework. Improved supervision by the executing agency and the responsible
mancommunidad will be prioritized during the implementation of the Additional
Financing in order to manage and mitigate impacts during construction and ensure
compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies and local legislation. In particular, a social
development specialist will be hired for the full project execution period and will
participate in implementation support missions. An Indigenous Peoples Plan will be
prepared for each of the sub-projects that will be implemented in the two indigenous
communities in order to address their specific needs and concerns and ensure their
participation in project design and implementation.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Environment:

 The improvement of roads and electricity access, especially in forested or protected
areas can increase land use changes of the areas and increase demand for agriculture and
pasture land. It is difficult to determine if indirect and long term impacts will occur, since
subprojects and their location will be known only during implementation. The EMF will
include measures to prevent, mitigate or compensate impacts following OP 4.01 and
national legislation as well as defined grievance mechanisms.

 Social

 Overall social impacts are expected to be positive; increasing availability and
affordability of rural energy and water and sanitation as well as improving safety and
efficiency of rural road transportation. Indirect social impacts relating to restrictions on
access to sections of the road during construction and inconveniences such as dust and
debris during construction will be managed following measures defined in the MGAS
and by a social communication strategy and increased supervision by the executing
agency.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Environment:
 As subprojects are municipality demand driven, there are few alternatives to consider
such as for instance the installation of electrical lines, road improvements, or solar panels.
In the case of water systems, sometimes different potential water sources can be
considered. Also alternatives can be considered when defining the location of treatment
plants, water tanks and pipelines which is mainly determined by the availably of
municipal land or the local agreements.
  Social:
  The lesson learned from the parent project is that social communication is very
important for ensuring continued community support for the sub-project, reducing social
risks to members of the communities and in order to ensure appropriate project design
and long term sustainability of the investments. As a result, the Additional Financing will
focus more heavily on social communication as a deliberate strategy for community
engagement rather than ad hoc community meetings held to address complaints. A social
communication strategy will be prepared by the social development consultant hired by
the executing agency who will also monitor its implementation. Also, the EMF defines
procedures to engage communities in the supervision of works by local committees and
periodic meetings with the contractor and project staff (UTI, PIR).

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environment:

 To address the environmental risks observed during the implementation of the parent
project, the environmental unit of PIR will prepare a revised Environmental Management
Framework (EMF) for the project which will include checklists for supervision, protocols
to comply with the OP4.01, OP 4.04, OP 4.11 and OP 4.36, consultation and grievance
mechanisms, environmental clauses for contractors, new environmental legislation, and
reporting, among other things. The Operations Manual will also be reviewed and
updated for the AF to ensure project compliance with the Bank Safeguards Policies and
national legislation.

 The client has agreed to take the following actions before the project closes in June
2013: (i) Perform an environmental review of a selected group of projects built without
the country environmental permits and build within protected areas; (ii) obtain the
environmental licenses for about 80 projects pending from the National Environmental
Agency (SERNA); (iii) perform an environmental audit of 25 subprojects built that did
not request its environmental permits t to SERNA; (iv) if impacts are found in the revised
and audited projects, implement mitigation or compensation measures; (v) increase
environmental supervision by the Environmental Specialist of the PIU, the Regional
Mancomunidades Technical Units (UTI) and Municipal Environmental Units (UMA);
(vi) develop environmental capacity building activities for the PIR staff, UTIS, UMA and
local communities; (vii) initiate water quality monitoring of final effluents from treatment
plants in operation; (viii) review the participation of local vulnerable people in the
construction of financed works to address safety concerns.

 PIR will strength its capacity by i) including in the Procurement Plan a) the hiring of an
additional environmental specialist for the Environmental Unit in order to support
supervision of subprojects, implement capacity building activities, carry out monitoring
and evaluation; etc; (b) a budget to support the Environmental Remediation Action Plan
which will cover the cost of mitigation and compensation measures for environmental
and social impacts caused by subprojects build during the implementation of the parent
project, and c) cost of environmental training activities for the PIR, UTI and
Municipalities; (ii) definition and delegation of responsibilities for the environmental
management and monitoring of subprojects among PIR, UTIs, UMAs staff , contractors,
supervisors and local communities, (iii) to ensure a budget in each of the subprojects for
the environmental prevention, mitigation or compensation of impacts as required by the
OP/BP 4.01, others.


 Social:

  In order to better support the social communication strategy and other safeguard issues
during implementation, FHIS has agreed to hire a social specialist to provide the
following: i) Support for the implementation and monitoring of the IPPF and RPF
(screening, preparation of IPP or RP, reporting, presentations regarding progress,
participate in Bank missions); ii) On-going training in social safeguard compliance for
FHIS, UTI and community level staff involved in project implementation; and iii)
Development and implementation of the social communication strategy. FHIS has also
agreed to designate a member of their project core team to be a counterpart for the Bank
team.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Environment:
 The key stakeholders are the water users, rural communities, municipalities,
Mancomunidades, and UTIS (regional technical units for the Mancomunidad). During
project preparation consultations were held at several Mancomunidades and safeguards
documents were disclosed on the Bank website (Infoshop) and in the country by the FHIS
website on December, 2004. During the first stages of the project, consultations were
performed as part of the preparation of "Rural infrastructure action plans" for each
participatory Mancomunidad. Since projects are community and municipality demand
driven, communities are well informed of the subprojects and are in fact awaiting
investments in such basic services for decades. In the case of the construction of water
drinking systems, community participation is very ample, since they are expected to work
in the construction of the systems and be responsible for their operation and maintenance.
Also, environmental education material has been prepared to enhance hand washing,
conservation of water resources, solid waste management. In the revision of the EMF
additional actions for community consultation and participation will be included as well
as clear grievance mechanisms.

 Social: A social communication strategy will be developed during early implementation
as a deliberate strategy for community engagement rather than ad-hoc community
meetings held to address complaints. This strategy will include all affected stakeholders
and will be managed by the social safeguards specialist in FHIS in collaboration with the
responsible staff in the UTI. In addition, the development of the Indigenous Peoples
Plans for the beneficiary communities in Mancepaz will be undertaken with the full
participation of the members of these communities and their broad community support
for the contents of the Plan will be required before they are finalized and project
implementation moves forward.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  04/29/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              05/02/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               05/02/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  04/24/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              04/24/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/24/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  04/22/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              04/22/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/22/2013
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                 No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)             No
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the             Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of          No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other     Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?               Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential             Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                     Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed      N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   Yes
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           Yes
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        No
provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's          Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project      Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the              Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Rigoberto Yepez-Garcia    04/26/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Ruth Tiffer-Sotomayor     04/26/2013
Social Development Specialist       Ms Kristyna Bishop           04/26/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan           05/02/2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies   05/03/2013
  Comments:
