                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC1187

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Aug-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Honduras                         Project ID:      P131094
                            Project Name:      Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)
                            Task Team          Enrique Pantoja
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          22-Oct-2012                      Estimated        18-Dec-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSDU                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector:            Flood protection (35%), Sub-national government administration (35%), Central
                                               government administration (20%), Telecommunications (1 0%)
                            Theme:             Natural disaster management (60%), Decentralization (20%), Other urban
                                               development (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  12.00
                              Total                                                                        12.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support Honduras to continue strengthening its
                           capacity for integrated natural disaster risk management at the municipal and regional level. On the
                           foundations of the previous project, the proposed objective will be achieved through DRM
                           mainstreaming and consolidation of institutions and policy-making, and enhanced coordination
                           between central institutions and key local actors, with a focus on community participation and social
                           inclusion, technical quality, and environmental sustainability.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Project will consist of the following four components: (1) Policy and Institutional Framework
                           Strengthening (US$1.8 million); (2) Natural Disaster Risk Information and Knowledge Management
                         (US$2.70 million); (3) Design and Implementation of Risk Reduction Measures (US$6.0 million);
                         and (4) Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$1.50 million). The Project will be
                         implemented over a five-year period, and will include, among others, flood, landslides, forest fires
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and seismic risks.

                         Component 1: Policy and Institutional Framework Strengthening (US$1.8 million)

                         The objective of this component is to help consolidate the institutional and policy Disaster Risk
                         Management (DRM) framework within the overall territorial and regional planning efforts of the
                         country. The component will comprise the following sub-components and activities:

                         1.1. Strengthening Territorial Planning Capacity, by supporting the Ministry of Planning and
                         External Cooperation (SEPLAN) through: (a) provision of training, equipment and software for the
                         General Directorate of Territorial Planning (DGOT); (b) consolidation and connectivity of the
                         National Territorial Information System (SINIT) and the Territorial Planning Norms Registry
                         (RENOT) under the National Property Administration System (SINAP), in collaboration with the
                         Property Institute (IP); and (c) updating and promotion of a standardized methodology for territorial
                         planning, considering such fundamental aspects as disaster risk and environmental sustainability.

                         1.2. Strengthening Coordination and Promotion Capacity for Disaster Risk Management, by
                         supporting the Honduran Disaster Risk Management Agency (COPECO) through: (a) consolidation
                         of DRM policy and strategy, including, among else, assessments, policy analysis, training,
                         workshops, and South-South knowledge and experience exchanges; (b) promotion of a "culture of
                         prevention", including the implementation of a Social Communication Strategy; (c) promotion of
                         transparency and accountability for DRM, including the implementation of an institutional grievance
                         redress system and carrying out of at least two social audits of relevant Project activities; and (d)
                         consolidation of implementation capacity by (i) designing and constructing offices for the Project
                         within COPECO, (ii) building technical and fiduciary capacity; and by (ii) providing computing and
                         office equipment, mobile communications, vehicles, and other support for the effective functioning
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU).

                         1.3. Strengthening Technical Quality Assurance and Environmental Sustainability Capacity, by
                         supporting COPECO through : (a) preparation of a Good Practice Environmental Code for Disaster
                         Risk Management; (b) updating and promotion of the National Construction Code, in collaboration
                         with relevant stakeholders such as the national associations of architects and engineers; (c)
                         establishment of an Environmental Management Unit within COPECO to process environmental
                         permits and licenses, and to promote integration of environmental sustainability concerns in DRM;
                         and (d) provision of technical assistance and studies in connection to climate change and
                         environmental sustainability.

                         1.4. Strengthening Disaster Risk Monitoring Capacity, by supporting COPECO through (a)
                         consolidation of Early Warning Systems for landslides and of the Metropolitan Wireless Network
                         (RMI); and (b) development of technical capacity and establishment of a seismic monitoring
                         network, in collaboration with the National Autonomous University of Honduras (UNAH); and by
                         supporting the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (SERNA) through (c) strengthening
                         of the General Directorate of Water Resources (DGRH), including among else, training for
                         hydrological and hydraulic modeling.
                         Component 2: Natural Disaster Risk Information and Knowledge Management (US$2.70 million)

                         The objective of this component is to support the strengthening of knowledge and information for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         DRM at the municipal and community level, applying models and methodologies developed under
                         the Bank-financed Natural Disaster Mitigation Project (PMDN), which continue to be applied and
                         improved under the IDB-financed MITIGAR project. Activities under this component will help
                         implement participatory territorial planning processes, including risk and land use characterization
                         and institutionalization of municipal risk management. For the implementation of this component,
                         COPECO will work closely with the Association of Honduran Municipalities (AMHON) and the
                         participating municipalities. The component will include the following sub-components and
                         activities:

                         2.1. Establishment of municipal and local disaster risk management capacity, including (a)
                         organizing, training and equipping of municipal committees for emergency response (CODEMs) and
                         local committees for emergency response (CODELs) in the participating municipalities; (b)
                         strengthening of the Municipal Environmental Units; and (c) conducting of drill/ emergency
                         simulation exercises to monitor and evaluate local preparedness and response capacities.

                         2.2. Development of territorial planning and characterization for local risk management, including
                         (a) the update, revision, and/or development of risk and land use characterization studies and
                         territorial planning in the participating municipalities, including the preparation of Municipal Risk
                         Management Plans (PMGRs), Municipal Emergency Plans (PEMs), and Municipal Land Use Plans
                         (PMOTs); and (b) the production and delivery of the information generated to the participating
                         municipalities and their incorporation into COPECO's Integrated Disaster Risk Management and
                         Territorial Analysis System (SIGRET).

                         2.3. Institutionalization of local risk management, including (a) the validation of information and
                         other products generated by the project at the municipal level, in accordance with the territorial
                         planning process under 2.2; and (b) outreach of local authorities, civil society and private sector
Public Disclosure Copy




                         associations to promote the project and its sustainability through, inter alia, workshops and other
                         events.

                         2.4. Update, Enhancement and Implementation of local and regional Early Warning Systems, in line
                         with the needs identified through the Project.


                         Component 3: Design and Implementation of Risk Reduction Measures (US$6.0 million)

                         The objective of this component is to reduce local vulnerability by supporting the implementation of
                         specific small structural and nonstructural measures as identified and prioritized through the
                         technical analysis and participatory process supported under Component 2. The Operations Manual
                         will establish criteria for municipal participation and describe the process for prioritization of
                         mitigation measures. Based on PMDN and ongoing experience, it is estimated that the financing
                         range of a mitigation measure will be between US$60,000.00 and US$200,000.00, and that between
                         one and two mitigation measures will be implemented in each municipality. These mitigation
                         measures may include, for example, small riverbank protection, drainage canal-bridges, rain water
                         drainage, micro-watershed management plans, and reforestation. The component will include the
                         following sub-components and activities:
                         3.1. Design of structural works and non-structural measures, including updates, revisions, and/or
                         preparation of designs at critical locations in the participating municipalities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3.2. Implementation of small structural mitigation works, including the supervision and construction
                         of prioritized works in participating municipalities.

                         3.3. Implementation of nonstructural measures, including the supervision and carrying out of
                         prioritized nonstructural measures in participating municipalities.


                         Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$1.50 million)

                         The objective of this component is to support Project management as well as the monitoring and
                         evaluation of its results. As such, it includes the following sub-components and activities:

                         4.1. Support Project Management, including (a) training and workshops; (b) technical assistance and
                         technical audits; (c) carrying out of the fiduciary aspects of the project such as financial management,
                         audits, and procurement; (d) the establishment of the Project Coordination Committee; and (e) the
                         supervision of the social communication and gender equity strategies, as well as environmental
                         management.

                         4.2. Support Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) of the Project, including, inter alia, (a) the integrated
                         M&E system covering financial and physical progress; (b) production of bi-annual Project progress
                         reports; (c) collection of base line data to assess the Project's social, environmental, and economic
                         impacts, including gender-differentiated impacts; and (d) preparation of mid-term and final project
                         evaluation reports.

                         Proposed Implementation Arrangements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The implementing agency will be COPECO, which was in charge of PMDN and is currently
                         implementing the IDB-financed MITIGAR Project. A PCU will be established within COPECO
                         under a Coordinator with operational and administrative autonomy. The PCU will also include the
                         necessary technical, administrative, and procurement staff for the Project's effective implementation
                         and attention to social and environmental sustainability. The PCU will be strengthened with a
                         Social / Gender Specialist and an Environmental Specialist.

                         The Project will include the following co-executing agencies: SEPLAN), SERNA, and AMHON.
                         These agencies will be part of the Project Coordinating Committee (PCC), which will be presided by
                         COPECO's Minister-Commissioner or his delegate. The Ministry of Finance (SEFIN) and a
                         representative from the Regional Council will also be invited to participate in the PCC. When
                         necessary, the PCC will establish a Technical-Operational Committee (TOC) to follow up on
                         specialized issues. Finally, COPECO will sign agreements by component with the Co-Executing
                         Agencies to promote coordination and collaboration.

                         The Project will also engage collaborating agencies, based on implementation needs, including, inter
                         alia, the Ministry of the Interior and Population (SEIP), the Ministry of Education (SE), the National
                         Autonomous University of Honduras (UNAH), the Flood Control Committee of the Sula Valley
                         (CCIVS), the Property Institute (IP), and the national associations of architects and engineers (CAH
                         and CICH). When necessary, a Memorandum of Understanding will be signed between COPECO
                         and a collaborating agency.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the             safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The population of Region 1 (Sula Valley) is estimated to be 2,033,702 in 2010 (or 25.3% of the
                         country's population), according to the Honduran National Statistical Institute (INE). The region
                         comprises 20 municipalities across four departments, including Corts,whose total area is within
                         Region 1, as well as Atlntida, Santa Barbara and Yoro. The proposed Project's beneficiaries are thus
                         concentrated mainly in Corts (estimated population of 1,570,285), which includes among its 12
                         municipalities San Pedro Sula, the second largest Honduran city (population of 719,447). One
                         municipality of Atlntida, three of Santa Barbara and four of Yoro are included in Region 1. Under
                         PMDN, preparatory work was carried out in all but five of the region's municipalities. More recently,
                         the Bank-financed Second Phase of the Land Administration Project (PATH II) has been working
                         with most of the municipalities in Corts.

                         The Sula Valley is characterized by high vulnerability to natural disasters, while at the same time it
                         remains one of the most economically and demographically dynamic areas of the country.
                         Hydrologically, the area boasts two of the most important watersheds of Honduras that both drain
                         into the Atlantic: the Ula River basin and the Chamalecn River Basin, making it an area subject to
                         continuous flooding mainly in the rainy season. The Sula Valley includes the Ula and the
                         Chamalecn rivers both of which drain into the Atlantic. Ula is 358 Kms long (not all of it in
                         Region 1) and its river basin hosts almost 3 million inhabitants ; at 121 inhabitants per square
                         kilometer. Average annual precipitation amounts to 1,470 mm and flooding is common in Ula's
                         lower basin. The Chamalecn river is 256 Kms long (most of it in Region 1), its river basin hosts
                         almost 1.25 million inhabitants; at 225 inhabitants per square kilometer, and annual average
                         precipitation is about 1,327 mm. The population of the two biggest cities by the Chamalecn, San
                         Pedro Sula and Choloma, increased thirteen-fold between 1988 and 2001 . Every year floods occur
                         between May and November, the Atlantic hurricane season.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Most of the municipalities of the Project area participated in PMDN that prepared a number of tools
                         based on vulnerability studies: geo-referenced graphic and numerical data bases on and mapping of
                         critical flood and landslide-prone locations, territorial development plans, and municipal information
                         systems and plans for risk management. The Project will complete preparation of such tools for all of
                         the participating municipalities.

                         Initial screening indicates that there are some Garifuna communities, mainly in the municipality of
                         Tela in Atlntida, and Lenca and Pech communities in other municipalities included in the Project
                         area.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         COPECO gained experience with Bank environmental and social safeguard policies in the context of
                         PMDN, which it implemented between 2000 and 2010. The final Project evaluation indicated that
                         PMDN had no negative environmental impacts and that the measures specified in the Project's
                         Environmental Analysis (EA) were generally taken into account. Environmental safeguard
                         compliance had a few shortcomings: (i) measures identified in the EA were not always considered in
                         the preparation and execution cycle of the small mitigation works; (ii) slow processing of
                         environmental permits or licenses by SERNA created a bottleneck to project implementation, and a
                         few works were initiated before SERNA had issued the required environmental authorization, yet the
                           same were finally resolved in a satisfactory manner; and (iii) the supervision of works did not always
                           pay sufficient attention to environmental aspects. With respect to social safeguards, the Project final
                           evaluation indicated that indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples benefited from PMDN although not
Public Disclosure Copy




                           all of the guidelines of the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) were implemented. The
                           final beneficiary survey showed that beneficiaries were generally satisfied with their experience in
                           the project and thought that PMDN helped to reduce disaster vulnerability in their communities, and
                           that indigenous peoples were appropriately consulted.

                           Following lessons learned from PMDN, and with a renewed focus on social and environmental
                           sustainability, under the proposed operation the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will include an
                           Environmental Specialist and a Social/Gender Specialist. Furthermore, the proposed Project will
                           support the establishment of an Environmental Management Unit within COPECO (Component 1.3).
                           This Unit will function in coordination with the Ministry of Environment (SERNA) to help process
                           environmental permits and licenses for mitigation works, taking into account the Project's overall
                           environmental sustainability. Further, it will collaborate with the Ministry of Planning and External
                           Cooperation (SEPLAN) in order to strengthen and promote integration of environmental aspects into
                           territorial planning and related standards and norms. Finally, there are provisions for the promotion
                           of transparency and accountability for the Honduran DRM sector. The proposed Project will set forth
                           an institutional grievance redress system and will carry out at least two social audits of relevant
                           Project activities.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Jason Jacques Paiement (LCSSO)
                           Tuuli Johanna Bernardini (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             This policy is triggered to ensure adequate
Public Disclosure Copy




                           BP 4.01                                              environmental management of the small-scale
                                                                                mitigation works that will be undertaken under
                                                                                Component 3. In general, Project activities will
                                                                                most likely be relatively minor and no negative
                                                                                large, significant or irreversible environmental
                                                                                impacts are expected. On the contrary, the
                                                                                proposed Project will promote environmental
                                                                                sustainability in the DRM sector by establishing
                                                                                appropriate practices within existing
                                                                                institutions, assure that risk reduction works are
                                                                                implemented in a sustainable manner,
                                                                                contemplate potential works on environmental
                                                                                restoration and prevent further environmental
                                                                                degradation. Honduras' environmental
                                                                                management capacity will be strengthened
                                                                                through local preventive planning and capacity
                                                                                building directed to the Municipal
                                                                                Environmental Units. Since the exact locations
                                                                                and specific list of works is still unknown, an
                                                                 Environmental and Social Management
                                                                 Framework (ESMF) is being prepared by the
                                                                 Borrower as the proper safeguard instrument.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 The ESMF will lay out the procedures and
                                                                 responsibilities for screening the activities
                                                                 proposed under Component 3 in order to (i)
                                                                 ensure that the proposed activities are eligible
                                                                 for Bank financing, and (ii) determine what, if
                                                                 any, further environmental and social analysis
                                                                 and instruments will be required before the
                                                                 activity can be implemented. The ESMF will
                                                                 include a description of these objectives.
                                                                 Additionally, a negative list will be included in
                                                                 the Financing Agreement.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   This policy is triggered because region-wide
                                                                 planning and DRM tools will encompass natural
                                                                 habitats such as the Merendon protected area in
                                                                 San Pedro Sula. All areas with a special
                                                                 environmental status will be recognized as such
                                                                 within different planning processes. The ESMF
                                                                 will identify sites in the project area that qualify
                                                                 as critical natural habitat as defined in OP 4.04
                                                                 and the Project will not finance mitigation
                                                                 works that would impact such a site unless the
                                                                 works are consistent with approved
                                                                 management plans for such sites.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   This policy is triggered because Project
                                                                 activities may be conducted in forest areas. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Sula Valley includes considerable forest land
                                                                 and there have been concerns for increased
                                                                 deforestation in El Progreso, Santa Rita, and El
                                                                 Negrito. Moreover, the Project may involve
                                                                 planning and mitigation measures that include
                                                                 the development of forest plantations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    This policy is not triggered because Project
                                                                 activities will not involve purchase, use or
                                                                 storage of pesticides and will not support the
                                                                 procurement or use of, or lead to the increased
                                                                 use of, other agricultural chemicals.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   This policy is triggered since the Project
                         BP 4.11                                 involves small structural works. These works
                                                                 might take place in locations that have not
                                                                 already been screened for physical cultural
                                                                 resources. The country's laws and procedures
                                                                 regarding physical cultural resources will be
                                                                 applied for addressing potential "chance finds"
                                                                encountered during construction, and related
                                                                procedures to be followed will be reflected in
                                                                the ESMF and the Operations Manual. Finally,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                the ESMF will include screening procedures to
                                                                ensure that no works will affect known cultural
                                                                sites.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes   This policy is triggered since some indigenous
                                                                and Afro-Honduran communities live within the
                                                                Project area. Initial screening indicates that
                                                                there are Garifuna communities, mainly in the
                                                                municipality of Tela in Atlntida, and Lenca
                                                                and Pech communities in other municipalities.
                                                                The participatory methodology of the proposed
                                                                Project for risk and vulnerability analysis as
                                                                well as decision making will facilitate the
                                                                inclusion of indigenous and Afro-Honduran
                                                                peoples. An Indigenous Peoples Planning
                                                                Framework (IPPF) based on a Social Analysis
                                                                will be prepared. Overall, the IPPF will include
                                                                specific guidance on how to engage effectively
                                                                and pro-actively with indigenous communities
                                                                and it will develop risk reduction strategies
                                                                particularly for indigenous peoples
                                                                communities. Baseline data will be collected
                                                                and disaggregated by gender and social groups
                                                                (including indigenous peoples and Afro-
                                                                Hondurans). Moreover, there will be a
                                                                Communication Strategy and a Gender Equity
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                Strategy to provide further guidelines, though
                                                                not exclusively for indigenous peoples.
                                                                The Task Team will clarify which social groups
                                                                are covered by OP 4.10 and in view of national
                                                                legislation in order to address any issues related
                                                                to the Afro-Honduran communities within the
                                                                project area. If Afro-Honduran communities are
                                                                not covered by OP 4.10 and the IPPF, the
                                                                project documents will provide details on
                                                                measures that ensure that these communities are
                                                                not adversely affected by the project and they
                                                                will be able to receive culturally appropriate
                                                                benefits. In case infrastructure investments are
                                                                to be identified prior to appraisal, and are
                                                                located in areas with indigenous peoples, an
                                                                Indigenous Peoples Plan will be prepared prior
                                                                to appraisal.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   This policy is triggered considering the potential
                         4.12                                   that some mitigation measures may affect some
                                                                                                                                 people physically or economically. A
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework will be
                                                                                                                                 prepared, although the probability of such cases
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 to occur is considered rather low based on
                                                                                                                                 similar previous Bank experience (PMDN) and
                                                                                                                                 the relatively small scale of the proposed
                                                                                                                                 Project's works. The Project will not finance
                                                                                                                                 resettlement of population living in high risk
                                                                                                                                 areas. A negative list will be included in the
                                                                                                                                 Financing Agreement. If any infrastructure
                                                                                                                                 investments are to be identified prior to
                                                                                                                                 appraisal, and require land acquisition, a
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Plan will prepared prior to
                                                                                                                                 appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This policy is not triggered because Project
                                                                                                                                 activities will not involve construction of dams
                                                                                                                                 or depend on existing dams. The screening
                                                                                                                                 process developed as part of the ESMF will
                                                                                                                                 explicitly exclude any works associated with
                                                                                                                                 dams of any size.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            This policy is not triggered because Project
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            activities will not be conducted in or influence
                                                                                                                                 international waterways. The rivers within the
                                                                                                                                 Project area are solely with Honduran national
                                                                                                                                 territory.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This policy is not triggered because Project
                                 7.60                                                                                            activities will not be conducted in disputed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 08-Oct-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      All safeguard related-studies are under preparation, and the first draft of required safeguard
                                      instruments should be ready by end of August 2012.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Enrique Pantoja

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                                                Date: 14-Aug-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Niels B. Holm-Nielsen (SM)                                                                                           Date: 15-Aug-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
