                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/10/2011                                    Report No.: 63529
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Honduras                              Project ID: P106680
Project Name: Second Land Administration Project in support of the second phase of the
Land Administration Program
Task Team Leader: Enrique Pantoja
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 4, 2009          Estimated Board Date: June 30, 2011
Managing Unit: LCSAR                           Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (55%);Sub-national government
administration (25%);Central government administration (20%)
Theme: Land administration and management (25%);Personal and property rights
(25%);Decentralization (24%);Other rural development (13%);Other urban development
(13%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             32.80
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
                                                                         0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the broader, long-term program (APL) is to strengthen property rights in
Honduras through modernization of the legal framework, institutional strengthening and
development of a fully integrated and decentralized National System for Property
Administration (SINAP).

 The Project Development Objective (PDO) for Phase II of the Land Administration
Program (PATH) is to provide the population in the Project area with improved,
decentralized land administration services, including better access to and more accurate
information on property records and transactions. To achieve this objective, PATH will
continue to promote the streamlining of the systematic cadastral surveying, titling and
registration process and the improvement of land administration services in terms of
access and transparency.
3. Project Description
The second phase of PATH (IDA Credit of US$32.8 million equivalent), will be
implemented over a period of five years, and will include five components: (i) Policy and
institutional strengthening; (ii) Cadastral surveying and land regularization; (iii)
Demarcation of protected areas; (iv) Strengthening of Miskito people’s land rights; and
(v) Project management and Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E). These components are
described below.

 Component 1: Policy and Institutional Strengthening (US$ 9.0 million)

 1.   Sub-Component 1.1: Supporting the consolidation of land policy and strategy to
enhance governance in land administration, including:

  (i)   consolidation of land policy and strategy, through: (A) workshops and technical
assistance on issues within the general framework of land policy and territorial planning;
and (B) the preparation of a policy and master plan for the development of the country#s
national cadastral system;
  (ii) strengthening of the transparency of Program implementation by conducting at
least two social audits of relevant Project activities;
  (iii) development of the normative and procedural framework for municipalities to
become associated centers of the IP for cadastre, registry and property regularization
purposes.
  (iv) development of standard documents for notary protocols related to property
registry procedures, and through a consultation process, the fostering of an agreement on
a proposal to increase access to notary services with the objective of promoting a culture
of registry.

 2.    Sub-Component 1.2: Strengthening the institutional capacity for land
administration in the country’s territory, including:

 (i)     strengthening of the IP, through: (A) improvement of its administrative and
operational capacity by providing equipment, software and technical assistance to
facilitate the implementation of the IP’s organizational development plan and to integrate
the Program’s activities into the IP; (B) continuation of the modernization of regional
property registries to support regularization processes, including: (1) implementation of
SURE in at least five new registries with high transaction volumes; and (2) carrying out
of small rehabilitation works in the IP and selected registries (excluding new
constructions and additions to existing structures); (C) strengthening of three operational
units of the IP: the General Directorate of the Registry (DGR), the General Directorate of
Cadastre and Geography (DGCG), and the General Directorate for Parcel Regularization
(DGRP); (D) carrying out of capacity building for alternative conflict resolution
mechanisms for cadastral surveying and establishing inter-municipal limits; and (E)
strengthening of the Information-Technology Unit in the IP to operate SURE and its
interaction with the other SINAP subsystems.
 (ii) carrying out of capacity building for selected municipalities to allow them to
function effectively as associated centers of the IP and to implement urban titling
activities, territorial planning, including zoning and updating of municipal limits;
 (iii) carrying out of capacity building for the National Agrarian Institute (INA),
focused on rural titling and collective titling of Indigenous Peoples’ Lands, including
supporting the Inter-Sectoral Commission for Protecting Land Rights of Garífuna and
Miskito Communities (established by the Presidential Accord No. 035-2001) and
building capacity in INA for alternative conflict resolution;
 (iv) carrying out of capacity building for the National Institute for Forestry
Conservation and Development, Protected Areas and Wildlife (ICF), including technical
assistance and technology transfer to ensure that it plays an active role in SINAP
implementation;
 (v) carrying out of capacity building for the Ministry of Planning (SEPLAN), the
Honduran Association of Municipalities (AMHON) and municipalities to promote
gradual incorporation of territorial planning norms into RENOT, including the
establishment of at least one departmental council of territorial planning in the Project
Area;
 (vi) consolidation of SINAP, building on the progress made during the first phase of
the Program, by supporting the IP, Co-executing Agencies and selected Municipalities in
the Project Area to gradually strengthen their capacity to operate SINAP and to develop
mechanisms to ensure its sustainability;
 (vii) improvement of the wireless network (Red Metropolitana Inalámbrica)
established during the first phase of the Program to facilitate data transmission and inter-
agency communications and to ensure connectivity of SINAP.

 Component 2: Cadastral Surveying and Land Regularization (US$ 18.0 million)

 3.     Sub-Component 2.1: Carrying out geo-referenced cadastral surveying in the
Project Area, identifying the legal status of each property and incorporating the properties
in SURE, including:

 (i)   preparatory activities such as declaration of zone under cadastral process (Zona a
Catastrar) by the DGCG, taking of aerial photography and preparation of digital ortho-
photos, and purchasing of satellite imagery within the Project Area;
 (ii) surveying, validation and incorporation in SURE of at least 390,000,000 urban
and rural parcels in the Project Area;
 (iii) geo-referenced surveying of the administrative limits of at least ten selected
municipalities.

 4.    Sub-Component 2.2: Carrying out the legalization, titling and registration under
Folio Real of at least 90,000 parcels in the Project Area, including:

 (i)   the provision of new titles for approximately 50,000 families through the various
options provided under the Property Law and in close collaboration with INA, the
Municipalities and/or the ICF, as the case may be;
 (ii) the legalization of 40,000 parcels with an existing property registry to transfer
them into the folio real through a coordinated effort between the three main directorates
of the IP (DGR, DGCG, DGRP) to carry out an investigation comparing geographical
with legal data.

 Component 3: Demarcation of Protected Areas (US$0.50 million)

 (i)    Carrying out the delimitation and demarcation of the buffer zone of at least four
protected areas in the Project Area, including the incorporation of the cadastral
information and its link to the ordinances and norms that establish land use into SURE
and RENOT, respectively;
 (ii) carrying out specific activities under the Project’s communication strategy for
community outreach to raise awareness among residents in and around the area of the
buffer zone demarcated under the Project on the land use designation;
 (iii) supporting implementation of the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and
the Process Framework.

 Component 4: Strengthening of Miskito People's Land Rights (US$ 1.8 million)

 (i)    Carrying out participatory delimitation, demarcation, collective titling, and
registration of Indigenous Peoples' Lands in the department of Gracias a Dios, based on
culturally accepted practices and with a focus on at least 25 participating Miskito
Communities;
 (ii) providing capacity building and organizational support to participating Miskito
communities to establish alternative conflict resolution mechanisms during the process of
delimitation, demarcation, titling and registration, with the support of the Project's
communication strategy; and
 (iii) providing technical assistance and capacity building for participating Miskito
communities, including: (A) territorial planning and natural resource management; and
(B) education to increase legal awareness and help improve organizational capacity in
relation to land tenure.

 Component 5: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$ 3.5 million)

  5.    Supporting Project management, including: (i) training and workshops; (ii)
technical assistance; (iii) the carrying out of the fiduciary aspects of the Project, including
financial management, audits and procurement; (iv) the establishment of the Steering
Committee; and (v) the oversight of the implementation of a communication and a gender
strategy for the Project.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The second phase will include various activities affecting land in the Project Area, which
includes selected municipalities in the departments of Choluteca, Colón, Comayagua,
Copán, Cortés, El Paraíso, Francisco Morazán, Gracias a Dios, Olancho,and Yoro, and
any other department that may be agreed upon in the future. Municipalities in these
departments have been selected to participate in the Project based on a spatial analysis
that considered, inter alia, the correlations between high population density, economic
dynamism, and high tenure insecurity.

 The Project will support the delimitation and demarcation of the buffer zones of at least
four protected areas under Component 3. These protected areas would be: El Merendon
(Departament of Cortes), Danli (Departament of El Paraiso), Mico Quemado
(Department of Yoro), and Arenal/Colibri Esmeralda (Department of Yoro). Finally, the
Project will finance participatory, collective titling of Miskito communities in Gracias a
Dios, as well as legal support and capacity building activities for these communities.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Jason Jacques Paiement (LCSSO)
   Ms Tuuli Johanna Bernardini (LCSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                           X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
All of the potential direct and indirect environmental impacts originally identified as part
of the Environmental Assessment (EA) carried out in mid-2003, prior to the approval of
the PATH Phase I, are still deemed relevant.

  An analysis of the environmental performance of the Phase I was carried out as a part of
its Independent Evaluation. The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) was found to
implement the EMP satisfactorily, and no large-scale, significant or irreversible
environmental impacts were observed. This had been and continues to be expected, since
the physical impacts of demarcation (the physical marking of boundaries) are minor.

 Some of the main findings of the evaluation were: (1) protected area co-management
institutions (including NGOs, Municipalities and ICF) were supported in making field
visits to document the boundaries of protected areas; (2) various workshops, open fora
(cabildos abiertos), and other activities were conducted with patronatos, private
companies and as part of a community education campaign informing local people on the
Project activities, including importance of protected areas, their benefits, delimitation,
demarcation and applicable sanctions for any tampering with boundary markers; (3)
demarcated protected areas were incorporated into the Territorial Planning Norms
Registry (RENOT) under the National Property Administration System (SINAP) so that
they can be placed in the Catalog of Inalienable Public Forestry Heritage; and (4) no
resettlement or restrictions of access to protected areas took place.

 Four main lessons were drawn on the environmental performance of the Phase I:

  1.    Phase I did not follow up on the implementation of the EMP as much as it could
have done. Considering this lesson, an Environmental Specialist will be hired during
Phase II to monitor and supervise the implementation of the EMP. In addition, the Project
will promote institutional strengthening activities such as workshops on EMPs and
safeguards.
  2.    The only real issue detected through Bank supervision had to do with the
improper disposal of the byproducts of the boundary marker construction during
demarcation of a protected area. This issue has since been addressed, and any long-term
negative consequences avoided. The EMP for the Phase II incorporates this and other
lessons learned from the Phase I.
  3.    The NGO co-managers of protected areas do not have sufficient financial
resources necessary to effectively implement management plans; in this respect, the new
Project will support the GOH in working with the relevant stakeholders to inform local
communities on the importance of the protected areas and the expected consequences of
demarcating the buffer zones.
  4.    Many municipalities do not have a stable set of trained personnel which means
that they constantly have to spend resources on training staff. The Project will keep this
in mind when dealing with municipalities in order to take care to provide any necessary
training and thus minimize demands requiring use of limited municipal counterpart funds.

 Expected Positive Environmental Impacts

 Overall, it is expected that the Project will have highly positive environmental impacts.
First, it should promote the conservation of forests and other natural habitats through
demarcation of the buffer zones of at least four protected areas. Taking into consideration
the lessons from Phase I, these protected areas were selected based on the following
criteria: (i) the limits of the buffer zone have been legally recognized; (ii) the protected
area is on the ICF list of areas that are classified as a priority within the National System
of Protected Areas of Honduras (SINAPH); (iii) the protected area is located within the
Project area. Moreover, delimitation and demarcation of the buffer zone is required to
complete the cadastral process under the Project. The delimitation and legal update of the
buffer zone limits will be implemented along with institutional support to ICF, relevant
municipalities and, if applicable, NGOs involved in co-management of the protected area.
These activities will follow the guidelines of an updated Manual for the Regularization of
Protected Areas, based on the Manual that was approved for Phase I. In addition, there
are several critical natural habitats in the Project area that are still not included in the
SINAPH. These areas are identified in the EA. The Project will not finance any private
titling in areas within or adjacent to these natural habitats, unless ICF has made an
official decision about their status and the boundaries of such areas have been defined.
The PCU will coordinate with ICF prior to the start of fieldwork to ensure that this
condition is met. In addition, ICF has identified 98 small watersheds within the Project
area that are of importance to the country’s water resources. The Project will coordinate
with ICF and SERNA when conducting cadastral and regularization activities in parcels
within these watersheds to ensure that the process complies with the required land use
norms.

 In addition, regularization of land tenure is expected to induce mainly positive changes
in land-use decisions (in general, a more sustainable management of land and of its
resources, motivated by security of tenure), although it will not automatically eliminate
choices that may have a harmful effect on the environment. Some of the potentially
positive changes in land-use decisions include the following:

  1. Delimitation, demarcation and titling of participating Miskito communities' lands:
The Project will help delimit, demarcate and title collective lands of at least 25 Miskito
communities in Gracias a Dios. In Honduras, the land use patterns characteristic of
indigenous and Afro-descendant peoples are normally more forest-conserving and
environmentally friendly than those of most non-indigenous rural peoples. While most
Honduran indigenous peoples' livelihoods are based on the forest (including hunting,
fishing, forest-products harvesting and small-scale shifting cultivation), the land use
pattern of non-indigenous peoples in rural areas is dominated by cattle grazing in
deforested areas that are converted into pastures or monoculture areas. Therefore, by
demarcating and titling indigenous peoples' lands, the Project will promote land uses that
conserve large areas of forest.
  2. Reduced use of deforestation to mark land use and possession: Traditionally in rural
Honduras, like elsewhere in Latin America, forest clearing through slash and burn has
been used as a means to demonstrate the de facto possession and use of a parcel. As a
result, most forest land that is not appropriately demarcated and proactively protected is
generally viewed as available for settlement and clearing. Land regularization under the
Project will help to curb these practices by giving documented, secure land titles to
owners or legal certificates to authorized occupants, thereby reducing the need to
demonstrate possession through land clearing. While it is unlikely that regularization
alone will lead to extinction of such an ingrained historical practice, nevertheless, it will
at least contribute to its reduction. Moreover, the Project is promoting through its
activities a cultural shift with respect to these practices.
  3. Long-term land management: It is expected that the increased land tenure security
from Project activities will encourage some rural land-owners to invest in reforestation,
forest management, agro-forestry, perennial crops, and other land uses with a relatively
long-term payoff. These uses are almost always more environmentally friendly than
short-term payoff from annual field crops or pastures on deforested lands.
  4. Increased productivity of agricultural land use: Regularization, through titling and
registry under the Project, is expected to allow for an increased access to credit, since
individual owners will be able to use land as collateral. Altogether, improved tenure
security and a greater access to capital are expected to incentivize more intensive use of
land, especially of land that has a moderate agricultural potential, is currently under-
cultivated in form of pastures, provide few employment and a low productivity per acre.
In the Honduran context, inducing more productive agricultural intensification in these
already deforested lands would bring environmental benefits by: (i) reducing the quantity
of land required to produce a certain amount of food or income; and (ii) creating
additional employment to the rural poor, many of whom would likely migrate to forested
areas as new settlers, according to current trends.
  5. Reduction of settlements in disaster-prone areas: The Project will likely help slow
the expansion of settlements over high disaster risk areas, such as steep slopes and flood-
prone areas, particularly in municipalities where disaster risk mapping has been
completed, in coordination with SEPLAN and the National Disaster Risk Management
Agency (COPECO).

 Potential Adverse Environmental Impacts

 As stated above, increased security of tenure should in general result in positive changes
in land-use choices and/or behaviors. However, there could be negative impacts on the
environment. On the whole, it is impossible to forecast what will be the impact of the
sum of individual behaviors, due not only to the intangible factors that actually determine
these behaviors, and therefore their unpredictability, but also to the agro-ecological and
overall socio-economic differences that exist across the Project area, which can also
underpin the occurrence of different land-use choices. The Project will therefore monitor
environmental impacts in its area of intervention by following up on the implementation
of the EMP and coordinating all necessary control measures and interventions that may
be necessary throughout the process. Some of the potentially adverse changes in land-use
decisions include the following:

  1. Deforestation in Anticipation of Land Titling: A landholder’s incentive to clear
forest to demonstrate possession and use of a parcel of land should decline after receipt of
a secure title made possible through Project activities. However, it is possible that the
landholder might accelerate land clearing activity in advance of the arrival of the Project
brigades who would measure, map, and register the land parcel in order to demonstrate
the largest possible area under "productive use". The Project will seek to discourage this
practice through a public information campaign which would emphasize, inter alia, that
deforestation is neither necessary nor sufficient to claim possession of a parcel of land.
  2. Increased Land Clearing from Greater Access to Capital: By receiving secure land
titles, many landowners would enjoy increased access to capital such as credits, as the
titled land may be used as collateral, and from the "wealth effect" due to the greater value
of titled versus untitled land. It is reasonable to expect that some landowners would use
part of their increased access to capital for clearing the remaining forests on their
property to expand their area of pasture or cropland. The Project will promote
dissemination of information on environmentally-friendly productive systems and
sustainable use of natural resources, emphasizing positive outcomes that a sustainable
management of natural resources can bring to production and to the value of a property.
  3. Increased Migration to Forest Frontier Areas: Through greater land tenure security,
as well as improved registry and cadastre services, the Project is expected to promote
more dynamic land markets due to greater ease in selling and purchasing of lands. As a
result of this dynamism, some rural landowners might be more inclined to sell their fully
titled land and use the proceeds to migrate and clear more land at the forest frontier.
However, receiving a secure title is expected to encourage some Project beneficiaries to
remain on, and further invest in their current landholdings, thereby reducing their
tendency to migrate to new, forested lands.

 Social Safeguard Issues:

 Several of the indigenous peoples’ issues that were present in Phase I of the Project will
remain relevant in Phase II. Because the second phase of PATH includes activities that
will directly impact the lands of indigenous peoples, the Indigenous Peoples safeguard
policy applies. Carefully implementing the policy’s provisions will be a top priority for
all those involved in Phase II, given the socio-economic and political vulnerability of
indigenous peoples in the department of Gracias a Dios (where Component 4 activities
will be carried out), the land tenure insecurity that many of them face, and the pressure
that these lands are currently under. Specifically, the second phase will focus on
promoting the land rights of Miskito communities, none of which has thus far managed to
obtain titles to their lands. The Government has confirmed its interest in pursuing the
recognition of the property rights of Miskito communities, and these communities and
their organizations have also confirmed their interest in continuing to participate in the
Program.

 Project’s design reflects the lessons learned during Phase I, which experienced an
Inspection Panel Investigation related to pilot activities in Garífuna communities.
Accordingly, under the second phase, special attention will be paid to implementing a
culturally sensitive Communication Strategy, strengthening INA's capacity for carrying
out titling activities in La Mosquitia and elsewhere, and developing locally acceptable
alternative conflict resolution mechanisms. As required, an updated Social Assessment
has been conducted and an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) prepared to reflect the results
of consultations with indigenous stakeholders. (See details on consultations below).

 Given the nature of its activities, PATH will continue to exclude any physical
displacement or resettlement. The Involuntary Resettlement policy remains triggered,
however, because of the potential restriction of access to natural resources that may occur
as a result of the demarcation and stricter enforcement of the buffer zones of the selected
protected areas, a restriction that would affect neighboring communities that more or less
rely on these resources. Further consultations with local residents will take place with
regards to ongoing economic activities, and in case these may be restricted, the Borrower
will implement the methodology established in the Process Framework (PF).

 In the selected protected areas, the Project will only finance the delimitation and
demarcation of the buffer zone. It will not support other processes such as the internal
zoning, the elaboration and implementation of management plans, or the regularization of
land within the protected area. The experience of the first phase shows that the
demarcation of protected areas effectively contributes to conservation. It has given
visibility to their boundaries, which as a result have been more explicitly acknowledged
by the communities living near them, cutting down on the potential for encroaching. No
conflicts, either related to land tenure or natural resource use, have emerged in these areas
throughout the implementation of Phase I. This is in part due to the existence a legal
requirement that an occupation census must be completed before the ICF proceeds with
the delimitation and regulation of a buffer zone.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
All of the significant environmental and social impacts of land administration projects in
general, and the Phases I and II of PATH in particular, are inherently indirect (induced).
For example, the production of cadastral maps or issuance of land titles do not have
environmental or social impacts per se; rather, the impacts derive from changes in human
behavior related to land use, which come in response to increased land tenure security.
PATH’s environmental impacts are generally expected to be positive and sustainable in
the long term. However, it is always possible that adverse environmental impacts could
ensue, as described in detail above.

  In relation to indigenous peoples’ development, one indirect impact that could result
from the titling of indigenous peoples’ lands in Gracias a Dios is that, unless it is done in
a comprehensive fashion, it could bring those Miskito communities that are not slated for
collective land titling right away under even greater pressure from logging and
agribusiness interests in the medium term. Given the legal and logistical challenges
involved, the Project has little choice but to carry out such titling sequentially. This risk is
being partially mitigated through the actions of the Communication Strategy, legal
education campaign and strengthening of the National Agrarian Institute staff presence in
La Mosquitia (i.e. Puerto Lempira Project office) and understanding of indigenous land
rights.

 Nonetheless, the Project will be able to contribute to the formulation of a more
comprehensive policy and strategic framework through a South-South Knowledge
Exchange. This exchange will provide capacity building for the formulation of strategy
and policy for the recognition of indigenous land tenure systems and rights. Additional
capacity building at the community level will be needed to ensure the protection of rights
in the form of legal education and organizational strengthening for territorial defense
actions, such as the clearer marking and patrolling of boundaries (which may be included
in a future phase of PATH or in other Government programs).

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
On the environmental side, the Phase II will concentrate on the demarcation of the buffer
zones of selected protected areas, which are in general well conserved. Preparation and
implementation of management plans require substantial resources, and regularization
within the protected areas, which is a challenging activity, could be supported through a
specific operation by the Bank or other donors in the future.

 By supporting the delimitation and demarcation of buffer zones of at least four protected
areas, Component 3 itself will help protect them against potential impacts from Phase II
and other non-Project activities.

  The titling activities included in Component 4 (Strengthening of Miskito People’s Land
Rights) will also help to minimize adverse impacts by preventing or at least discouraging
appropriation of lands and resources upon which Miskito families, among the poorest in
the country, depend. Partly in response to experiences during Phase I, for Phase II the
decision was taken to move away from a narrow consideration of technical issues in land
tenure in this component toward a more integrated, culturally appropriate combination of
studies, land titling and capacity building. Such an alternative will help those Miskito
communities receiving a title to position themselves to make the best use of land as a
productive asset, while at the same time preserving their culturally determined idea of
land as a collective resource with intrinsic value.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01)

 The Phase II was classified as Category B and required development, approval, and
disclosure of an environmental study but not of a full-scale Environmental Assessment.
An Environmental Analysis (EA) including an Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
was prepared between December 2008 and January 2009 by a team of local consultants.
In accordance with IDA#s Information Disclosure Policy (BP 17.50), the EA and EMP
were originally disclosed in-country and in the World Bank’s Infoshop in April 2009. In-
country, all safeguard documents are available to the public in Spanish in PATH’s offices
in Tegucigalpa (Edificio Educrédito, 2a planta, Colonia Florencia Norte), Project offices
in San Pedro Sula and Puerto Lempira, and the Project's website.

 As part of the updating of project design in 2011, the Borrower conducted a new
participatory process of the EA and its EMP. Further, the key lessons learned during the
implementation of the Phase I were incorporated in the document. The revised EA were
disclosed in-country and the Wold Bank's Infoshop by negotiations.

  As described above, several potential environmental impacts, direct and indirect,
positive and negative, were identified and evaluated in the EA. They are especially
associated with: (i) the process of promoting the consolidation of the policy and
institutional framework; (ii) the regularization of land tenure (which could, for example,
result in land use changes); (iii) the demarcation of the buffer zone in at least four
protected areas which is expected to induce mainly positive social and environmental
impacts; and (iv) the strengthening of Miskito peoples' land rights and capacity-building
(for instance, in the management of natural resources).
 Some minor environmental impacts could result from the small-scale rehabilitation
works in IP and selected registries under Component 1.2, including inter alia, painting,
minor remodeling, roof rehabilitation, wiring and installation of air conditioning systems.
No new construction or additions to existing structures will be financed by the Project.
The EMP and Operational Manual will provide contractually-binding guidance to
contractors on environmentally-friendly and worker health and safety practices to be
observed during the execution of these works. The EMP will also provide guidance on
any environmental permits that may be necessary for these small works. All potential
environmental impacts, be they positive or negative, will be monitored under the Project
through the implementation of the EMP and Land Regularization Manual, inclusive of
their annexes.

 Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) and Forests (OP 4.36)

  Both safeguards are triggered as land regularization in rural and urban areas may
potentially have adverse impacts on critical natural habitats that include forests. The
Project Area represents about 16 percent of the total land surface of Honduras, and some
of the selected municipalities are known to have forests. In order to safeguard these
habitats, the PATH Phase II will monitor the implementation of the EMP, and delimit and
demarcate the buffer zone of at least four protected areas. In addition, the Project will not
title any land within zones that have been identified as ecologically important. With
respect to forest areas, the ICF will have to be duly involved in the cadastral process
relevant to these areas. Such mechanisms are fundamental to prevent negative impacts,
though the Project is expected to contribute positively to conservation of these critical
natural habitats.

 The Phase I was found to be in compliance with the OP 4.36 by the Independent
Evaluation, as 1) co-execution agreements were reached under the regularization
activities on forested lands; 2) an Environmental Management Unit was formed within
the PCU; 3) a Manual for the Regularization of Forested Areas was adopted; and 4)
various training/institutional strengthening activities among the project beneficiaries took
place.

 The Project will not finance elaboration of the Management Plan of the selected
protected areas as such work would go beyond the Project’s scope and available
resources. However, communities in and around the protected area will receive ample
information about Project activities and opportunities to participate in the demarcation
process.

 Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11)

 The Honduran Institute of Anthropology and History (IHAH) will continue to be one of
the advisory agencies during the PATH Phase II. The usual ’chance find’ procedures
contained in the EA will apply to the entire Project.
  The Project will support conservation of all cultural and archeological physical
resources within the Project area by delimiting such undeclared sites and thus avoid
private titling in these areas. If, during the surveying and regularization, private or public
lands are found to contain valuable cultural resources, the IHAH will be informed; no
regularization will be carried out within or in the vicinity of identified sites until IHAH
issues a proper authorization.

 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10

  To address the requirements of the Indigenous Peoples policy, the Strengthening of
Miskito People’s Land Rights was included in the Project as a free-standing component.
This component will provide for the demarcation and titling of indigenous peoples’ lands
in a participatory and culturally acceptable manner, so it can be consistent with the
communities’ views with respect to the communal use of land and natural resources. An
Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), based on a fully updated Social Assessment, has been
prepared. This Plan incorporates the results of recent consultations with MASTA, which
is recognized throughout La Mosquitia as the main organization representing Miskito
interests and aspirations with regards to land rights, as well as with other Miskito
federations representing the communities that will be titled under component 4. As such,
it confirms that the titling activities proposed enjoy the broad support of the communities
involved. The Plan also outlines mechanisms for an ongoing process of free, prior, and
informed consultation, meaningful stakeholder participation, and land-related conflict
resolution.

 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12
 As the demarcation, and potentially better enforcement, of limits of the buffer zones of
the selected protected areas may potentially lead to restrictions of access to natural
resources, a Process Framework is needed to outline the participatory process for the
identification, monitoring, and mitigation of the impacts of such restrictions. The Process
Framework that was prepared under Phase I has been updated to ensure compatibility
with activities proposed under Phase II. This Framework will be implemented as needed
in the forthcoming phase, although one of its aims is to refer to the multiple ways by
which such potential restrictions might be avoided, and it stresses the desirability of
doing so.

 The Project will also continue supporting the regularization of informal settlements
through a process called ’regularization based on public need’ (Regularización por
Necesidad Pública). To be eligible, among other criteria, these settlements must be
located in private lands whose legal ownership is under dispute by several parties. As was
the case during the first phase, this process will be closely monitored to ensure that
participating households, which are largely poor, continue to benefit from land
regularization. The process falls under the exception set forth in footnote 8 of OP 4.12,
specifically the second part that states that the policy does not apply to disputes between
private parties in land titling projects. The monitoring that will take place (similar to the
one implemented under Phase I) applies the good practice recommended therein. The
Project will also include at least two social audits of relevant activities, including this
process.

 b) Capacity to plan and implement the measures:

 During the Phase I, capacity to implement safeguards among the various implementing
bodies varied. Following the Inspection Panel investigation, a concerted effort was made
to improve in-country understanding of and capacity to deal with the applicable safeguard
policies, a process that coincided with enhanced, integrated supervision by the Bank in
general, and with more active oversight by social and environmental safeguards
specialists in particular. The participation of numerous PCU technical staff in the
preparation and updating of safeguards-related manuals and instruments, such as the
Protected Areas Regularization Manual on the environment side, and the Indigenous
Peoples Plan on the social side, has led to greatly strengthened capacity for safeguards
management. During the Phase II, these improvements will be built upon and extended
to key entities such as the IP and National Agrarian Institute (INA). For example, staff in
INA will receive training not only in areas that are directly related to its responsibilities
under the Program (e.g. in the titling of lands for Miskito communities), but also in
associated areas with which they have less experience (e.g. the promotion of alternative
conflict resolution mechanisms). Such activities will be provided for under Component
1.

 Capacity for Safeguards Implementation will be ensured by including in the PCU a
Social Specialist and an Environmental Specialist, both of whom will monitor and
supervise the implementation of the agreed-upon EMP, IPP and Gender Strategy. In
addition, there will be a Liaison and facilitators in La Mosquitia working directly with the
participating communities. This group will work in close coordination with the
Communication Specialist. Additional social and/or environmental specialists, and
facilitators, will be contracted if considered necessary to help follow up on the
implementation of the EMP and IPP.

 Based on the Phase I experience, Phase II will include several measures to ensure
greater attention to monitoring progress of the EMP and IPP. Such measures will include
the afore-mentioned technical and logistical resources such as workshops on Bank
safeguards, EMPs, regularization and protected area management, as well as the
contracting of the additional specialists when needed. Also, the Project’s Technical
Committee will follow up on the EMP, providing an additional layer of oversight and
support for compliance with it. Finally, the social and environmental specialists will
prepare quarterly reports on safeguard implementation progress.

 Project-related grievances will be channeled through IP’s grievance redress system. An
IDF Grant for institutional strengthening (P115007) has helped to develop a system for
receiving, tracking, and monitoring grievances, including a Procedural Manual that
specifies responsibilities and expected response times. The system will have a wide
variety of uptake points including: telephone, internet, ’complaints boxes’ in IP’s regional
property registry offices, and in Project offices in San Pedro Sula and La Mosquitia.
Specialized staff will categorize, assign priority, and route the grievances to the
appropriate entity within IP or the Project. Users will have the option of receiving paper
or digital notification of the results of their complaints or inquiries. The system will
report on grievances data and trends for monitoring and evaluation.

 In addition to the dedicated grievance redress mechanism, the Project will include other
channels for the population to request information, provide suggestions and report
grievances. These other channels are mainstreamed into Project activities, and many are
part of the legal framework. For example, the Property Law requires the establishment of
regularization tables (mesas de regularization), conciliatory audiences, and meetings for
public display of survey data (vistas publicas administrativas). These instances are
participatory in nature and provide the space for grievance redress during the cadastral
and regularization process. For the delimitation and demarcation of protected areas, the
Project will carry out consultations through the local consultation councils for forestry,
protected areas, and wildlife providing an opportunity for local governments and civil
society to express concerns. For activities in La Mosquitia, the Project will carry out
consultations through the federations of the Miskito providing culturally-sensitive
channels for grievance redress.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The delimitation and demarcation of the buffer zones will require carrying out of
workshops with relevant stakeholders. These will include the buffer zone occupants and
people living outside of it, as well as the relevant municipalities and patronatos. As
successfully implemented during Phase I, people living in or around the demarcated
buffer zone will be informed and invited to participate in the proposed demarcation
activities.

 Phase II will include revamped consultation mechanisms as means of soliciting
stakeholder views directly and consistently, thereby diminishing the possibility of
conflicts in the Project. Two of the proposed mechanisms will be formal. The first is the
Inter-Sectoral Commission for the Protection of the Land Rights of Garífuna and Miskito
Communities, a multi-stakeholder, central decision-making body that has proven to be
effective during Phase I, which will remain active. The Commission can establish task
forces for specific issues such as the titling of Miskito lands under the Project. Garífuna
and Miskito stakeholders will continue to have a say in the way the land rights of
indigenous and afro-Honduran peoples are strengthened, and how land policy and
programs that may affect them are being implemented through their organizations
OFRANEH, ODECO and MASTA.

 The PCU will also work to convene regular community meetings and fora designed to
serve as an open platform for consultation and participation of indigenous communities
and their representatives. These meetings will not be designed to produce statements or
decisions, but will rather provide a means for PATH and other Government institutions to
bring indigenous participants up to date on Project activities, and to solicit feedback on
the course of Project implementation. The regional committees (Mesas Regionales),
which were set up under Phase I to serve this purpose, will no longer remain active under
Phase II. A special meeting will be organized on an annual basis specifically to identify
lessons learned, address any implementation issues and reconfirm broad support for the
Project from MASTA and participating communities.

 Procedure-specific consultation mechanisms, such as the Vistas Públicas
Administrativas that are an important feedback mechanism for validating parcel
information during the cadastral process (under Component 2), will continue to be
employed. Such mechanisms are spelled out in the relevant annexes of the Operational
Manual.

 IP, through the PCU, has held consultations with various stakeholders and concerned
groups on the Project and its environmental and social aspects including indigenous
groups, environmental NGOs, Government agencies, municipalities and civil society.
These include, among others, the Zamarano Panamerican School of Agriculture,
MASTA, Lempira Indigenous Council, National Coordinator of Honduran Communal
Organizations, the National Council of Patronatos, the Fonseca Gulf Committee for the
Defense and Development of the Flora and Fauna, and the Friends of the Tiger.

 As part of a continuous consultation process during the preparation of the Phase II, a
series of site-specific consultations have been held with a range of interested
stakeholders. Additionally, in workshops conducted during the second half of 2008, the
activities planned for each Project component were shared with potential beneficiaries.
The overall process has been complemented and enriched by the findings of related
studies and diagnostics. Among others, the following specific consultations have been
held:

 1. A Roundtable Discussion and Workshop with PATH co-executors for the Mid-Term
Evaluation and Phase II on April 25, 2008 in Tegucigalpa. The following institutions
participated: ICF, IP, GTZ-Río Plátano Biosphere Project, SEFIN, Ministerio de la
Presidencia, World Bank Resident Mission, AMHON, INA and SGJ.

 2. The Development of the Logical Framework for Phase II held May 29-30, 2008 in
Tegucigalpa. In addition to the other institutions that participated in the April Roundtable
Workshop, SERNA participated.

 3. A consultation on the Project's EA and EMP was conducted on March 11, 2009.
Subsequent consultations on the EA and EMP were conducted in 2011 on the following
dates:March 17 in Yoro,March 18 in San Pedro Sula, March 23 in Danli, and March 29-
30 in Tegucigalpa. Participants included representatives of ICF, IHAH, municipal
governments, and community associations.

 4. Consultations with representatives of Miskito indigenous federation, local churches,
the Puerto Lempira mayor's office, and the Miskito Consejo de Ancianos in Gracias a
Dios on April 16-17, 2009. A subsequent consultation was conducted on March 16-17,
2011 with the same group of stakeholders in Gracias a Dios. The most recent consultation
event took place on May 16, 2011 in Tegucigalpa with representatives of MASTA.
Among other things, this most recent of recurring consultations with indigenous leaders
and other key stakeholders in La Mosquitia resulted in a statement reaffirming their broad
support for proposed Component 4 activities.

 5. Consultations with representatives of the Federation of Xicaques Tribes of Yoro
(FETRIXY)-- a federation representing the Tolupanes -- in the city of Olanchito,
Department of Yoro. The first consultation event took place on April 29, 2009, and the
most recent events took place on March 17 and April 2, 2011.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/13/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             06/09/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/09/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/17/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             06/09/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/09/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/13/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             06/09/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/09/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                 Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)             Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the             Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of          No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other     N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?               Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential             Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                     Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed      N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   N/A
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           N/A
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        No
provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s          Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project      Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Enrique Pantoja                          06/10/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Tuuli Johanna Bernardini                 06/10/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Jason Jacques Paiement                   06/10/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan                          07/24/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Ethel Sennhauser                         06/10/2011
  Comments:
