                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/06/2013                                     Report No.: 65782
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P103881                 Original Project Name: HN Water and
                                             Sanitation Sector Modernization Project
Country: Honduras                            Project ID: P144357
Project Name: HN AF WSS Modernization
Task Team Leader: Lilian Pena Pereira Weiss
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 25, 2013 Estimated Board Date: June 18, 2013
Managing Unit: LCSWS                         Lending Instrument:
Sector: Water supply (47%);Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (26%);Sub-national
government administration (12%);Sanitation (8%);Central government administration
(7%)
Theme: Decentralization (29%);Municipal governance and institution building
(29%);Administrative and civil service reform (14%);Improving labor markets
(14%);City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (14%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             10
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.90
                                                                       0.90
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project's objective is to support the Recipient to improve: (a) the sustainability,
efficiency, and reliability of its WSS services in Eligible Municipalities; (b) the
performance of its national WSS sector institutions in the exercise of their respective
roles in accordance with the WSS Sector Framework Law; and (c) its capacity to respond
promptly and effectively to an Eligible Emergency .

3. Project Description
The Project will support the following five components (revised from the parent Project
in the context of the Additional Financing (AF) to include an Immediate Response
Mechanism (IRM) component and adjust the description of activities of Components 1
and 3):
 Component 1: Supporting eligible municipalities to create autonomous WSS service
providers and invest in efficiency, rehabilitation, and expansion of WSS service delivery
 The component supports the implementation of the Sector framework law ("Ley
Marco") in small-medium-size cities through a combination of technical assistance for
reforms and investments for infrastructure. Specifically, the Project supports the creation
of autonomous municipal service providers, following the Sector Framework.
Municipalities with an urban population between 10,000 and 300,000 inhabitants, that
intend to transfer their water supply or sanitation services to a municipal service provider
as mandated by the Ley Marco are eligible to participate in this component.

  This component uses a demand-based stepped approach to support municipalities during
all reform steps, in which in Step 1 municipalities receive technical assistance (TA)
focused on designing a management model. Once the proposed model has been sent to
and reviewed by ERSAPS (the regulator), municipalities qualify for Step 2 assistance
including support to provide the service providers with tools (institutional and
operational), and to start improving the efficiency of service provision. Once services are
transferred, municipalities move to Step 3 and qualify for investments in system
rehabilitation and expansion. To date, seven municipalities (including one association of
small municipalities) are participating in Component 1.

  Sub-component 1A: Technical assistance for transfer preparation This sub-component
consists of providing TA to the participating municipalities while they design the
necessary details of the new service provider and plan and implement the services
transfer process (whether from SANAA or from a municipal department).

 Sub-component 1B: Support to equip service provider and improve efficiency Once a
municipality has successfully identified and designed a management model, it obtains
support in creating the municipal WSS service provider, as planned for in the Ley Marco.
This sub-component finances activities such as the rehabilitation or construction of
offices and the acquisition of basic management tools. This sub-component also supports
rapid efficiency gains, including: (i) technical (such as leak detection, network
sectorization, meter installation), and (ii) commercial (billing and collection, reduction of
non-revenue water). Municipalities and service providers will be free to propose activities
of their choice within a maximum investment amount as long as they are consistent with
the Project's Operations Manual.

 Sub-Component 1 C: Investment for system rehabilitation and expansion As a
complement to the efficiency improvements reached under Sub-Component 1B, this sub-
component finances investments in infrastructure after the service providers start
operating the system. This sub-component enables service providers to expand and
improve services. Investments funded under this component can include rehabilitation,
connection to and expansion of water supply and sewer networks, on-site sanitation
facilities, and wastewater treatment systems. Water supply investments can include
coverage extension, rehabilitation of existing networks, tanks and treatment plants, and
the development of new water production capacity. Piped sewerage investment can
include rehabilitation and expansion of standard, small-bore, and condominia1 systems.
Wastewater treatment investments can include simple treatment systems such as
stabilization ponds, artificial wetlands, and communal septic tanks. Investments are
limited to an agreed list of facilities and terms of implementation, as per the Project's
Operations Manual. Service providers have the freedom to decide which investments they
would like to execute within the support from an external TA provider and following the
Operations Manual.

  Component 2: Tegucigalpa Non-Revenue Water Reduction
  The component supports a performance-based service contract with a private company
to reduce technical and commercial losses in a limited geographic area of the
municipality of the Metropolitan District. This component aims to improve, in the short
term, the operative situation of the WSS service provider in Tegucigalpa. By freeing up
water production capacity, continuity of service delivery can be improved and water
supply services expanded. International experience shows that good financial paybacks
are possible with well-designed Non-Revenue Water (NRW) reduction programs. A
performance-based service contract provides an efficient means to achieve significant
improvements in operational and financial efficiency, thereby creating immediate
benefits and fostering a positive dynamic to support further reform. The activities of this
component are funded by the PROMOSAS parent Project only, thus the Additional
Financing has no funds assigned to this component.

  Component 3: Institutional strengthening of national and regional sector institutions
  This component provides support for the water sector planning entity (CONASA), the
regulating agency (ERSAPS) and the national utility (SANAA) to fulfill their new roles
in a timely, efficient and transparent manner. The component has three sub-components:
(i) Sub-Component 3A, technical assistance to national institutions; (ii) Sub-component
3B, severance payments; and (iii) Sub-component 3C, preparatory activities for
Tegucigalpa transfer .

 Component 4: Project management
 This component finances the costs of salary, travel, and general operating of the project
management unit (UAP, "Unidad Administradora de Proyectos"). In addition, this
component finances monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities, audits, and other
project management activities on governance and transparency and strengthening of the
implementing agencies through participation in training and study tours, purchase of
vehicles and equipment, and upgrading of the working environment.

 Component 5: IRM Contingent Component
 This component provides support to respond to an eligible emergency. Inclusion of this
component builds on the flexibility provided by the World Bank Operational Policy 8.00
that allows using simplified procedures and rapid restructuring of project portfolios to
meet crises and emergency needs. Accordingly, implementation arrangements as well as
application of fiduciary and safeguard policies, detailed in a specific country-wide IRM
Operations Manual, seek to ensure smooth implementation based on rapid and effective
disbursement of undisbursed and uncommitted funds.
  As described above, the Project has a framework approach, in which specific
interventions are defined during implementation based on a stepped approach. Following
the experience acquired over almost five years of implementation of the parent Project,
the AF is expected to finance the same pattern of activities, including: improvements in
WSS networks (replacements of networks and connections, and some extensions), water
tanks, rehabilitation and cleaning up of existing wells, transmission lines, rehabilitation of
water treatment plants, purchase and installation of macro and micro meters and related
goods for non-revenue water programs, etc., within existing WSS schemes.

 Also following the Project's framework approach, specific additional municipalities are
not defined at present and will be identified and confirmed in the course of Project
implementation. The AF is targeting small towns with a population range from 10,000 to
40,000 inhabitants, which require simplified and small-scale WSS systems.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The parent Project is located in seven municipalities in Honduras, with urban populations
ranging from 40,000 to 300,000 inhabitants. The AF will strengthen the work on these
seven municipalities and will also cover small towns with populations ranging from
10,000 to 40,000 inhabitants; the specific municipalities will be defined during
implementation of the AF .

  An initial assessment has been carried out to define a list of potential new municipalities
that includes several municipalities located in the Lempa River Basin, which is a
transboundary basin shared with El Salvador. Considering the framework approach of the
Project, it is also possible that municipalities located in other transboundary basins of
Honduras could be selected as beneficiaries of the Project . Therefore, considering the
type of interventions under Component 1, and the potential location of new beneficiary
municipalities, OP 7.50 is now being triggered for the Project.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Kimberly Vilar (LCSSO)
   Ms Tuuli Johanna Bernardini (LCSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                   X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                        X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                 X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
a)       Environment: The Project is designed to address key challenges for meeting
urban users' water needs. The studies, activities, and investments financed by the Project
and its AF are expected to improve environmental conditions overall by increasing water
use efficiency and wastewater treatment. Current environmental conditions, and those
associated with the Project, are assessed by an Environmental Social Management
Framework (ESMF) aimed at protecting key environmental assets, avoiding and
mitigating potential adverse impacts, and, importantly, increasing expected positive
impacts. The Project is rated as Category B given the small scale of physical investments
and due to the fact that no significant environmental impacts are foreseen. Minor
potential environmental impacts include:
 a.      Sub-Component 1 C finances small works (as described above) that may result in
erosion, deterioration of spring catchments, noise contamination, reduced air quality (e.g.
dust, transportation), as well as construction waste. These impacts will be avoided or
mitigated as instructed by the ESMF in the design stage and through established
guidelines for contractors during the construction phase. Sub-Component 1 A, in
particular, finances TA to municipal water service provides, including development and
implementation of socio-environmental management tools such as contingency plans,
water quality monitoring systems, environmental rehabilitation/maintenance of water
sources, and training on environmental impact assessment.
 b.      Component 2: Similar impacts and management measures are expected for the
works-related activities under the leak reduction component. In addition, leak detection
can have specific environmental implications such as temporary air quality reduction if
smoke is used to detect leaks or illegal connections. There are, however, other more
commonly used methods available that involve using sonic leak-detection equipment that
identifies the sound of water escaping a pipe. The environmental specialist of the UAP
has instructed and supervised the leak detection works with special focus on proper care
for worker health and safety and use of good environmental practices.

 b)     Physical Cultural Property: It is not expected that cultural property would be
found in the Project area. However, the ESMF includes a screening process aimed at
identifying possible Physical Cultural Resources and at consequently refraining
investments in nearby areas. Further, the ESMF includes a "chance find" procedure in
case such property is encountered, establishing an immediate cessation of construction
activity and reporting to the appropriate authorities.

 c)     Social impacts: During the original project, OP4.10 was triggered from the outset
based on the premise that some eligible municipalities were home to indigenous and
Afro-Honduran communities (namely the Garinagu or Garifuna community) who met the
policy's identification criteria. An Indigenous People's Planning Framework was
therefore prepared preventatively in case participating municipalities prioritized works
involving (i) integrated watershed approach to water producing significant efforts
involving land use; (ii) construction projects, modification and / or expansion of water
systems affecting ancestral lands; or (iii) construction of drainage systems involving any
negative impact on family or communal property. However, ultimately, the participating
municipalities did not select this type of watershed management activity, and the
Municipality of La Ceiba (the cultural capital of the Garifuna community in Honduras)
decided against engaging in the reform process, after participating in several introductory
meetings that were undertaken to encourage municipal authorities to take part in the
program.

 For the Additional Financing, the nature and magnitude of the water and sanitation
infrastructure proposed will be similar to those of the original Project; it is therefore
unlikely that this framework will produce any Indigenous Peoples Plans. However, if
needed, an Indigenous Peoples plan would be prepared during implementation by the
UAP, the relevant municipality and community representatives.

 As for the OP 4.12 on involuntary resettlement, it was triggered during the project's
restructuring process, and consequently, PROMOSAS developed and disclosed an
Involuntary Resettlement Policy Framework, to cover potential impacts associated with
the proposed infrastructure. In fact, only one small-scale plan was prepared, a single case
in El Chile, Puerto Cortés. Given this precedent, the need for resettlement is expected to
be "minor" during the additional financing stage, particularly in terms of the number of
affected people. The type of expected impacts are cases of partial or total acquisition or
use of land belonging to a private party and/or possible impact on settlers residing on
acquired land. The Additional Financing will not cover any land acquisition or monetary
compensation costs - if needed, these costs would have to be covered by counterpart
funding. If the the policy applies, Involuntary Resettlement Plans will be prepared by the
UAP (in coordination with the local resettlement committees in each municipality) during
implementation.

  d)International Waterways: An assessment of the scaling-up of the Project concluded
that some of the potential new municipalities could be located in trans-boundary basins.
Given the type of interventions under Component 1 and the potential location of new
beneficiary municipalities, OP 7.50, Projects on International Waterways, is triggered
(for PROMOSAS and the AF). The Bank team has assessed the Project activities in the
context of OP 7.50 and concludes that while OP 7.50 applies to the Project, the Project
meets the criteria for the exception to the riparian notification requirement laid out in
paragraph 7(a) of said Policy, due to the expected nature of the planned interventions
(consisting mainly of rehabilitations or minor additions to existing schemes). This
exception was approved by the Bank on March 5, 2013. The exception to notification
memo highlights, however, that in the event that the Project's works and activities in
municipalities located in any trans-boundary basin should exceed the original scheme,
change its nature, or so alter or expand its scope and extent as to make it appear a new or
different scheme, a notification process will be carried out in accordance with OP/BP
7.50 procedures.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The Project is designed to address current and future challenges related to the supply of
water and sanitation to urban users and mitigate possible adverse impacts such as
overexploitation of the water source and water pollution. One potential indirect and long
term impact is an increase in the probability of land use change in areas surrounding new
pipelines. In addition, urban areas with improved water supply and sanitation could
experience population growth.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Given that sub-projects will differ fundamentally and have diverse locations,
consideration of alternatives will be conducted on a sub-project by sub-project basis. The
ESMF includes a screening process aimed at identifying, avoiding, reducing and
mitigating potential negative impacts on environmental and cultural resources. Specific
sub-projects consisting of building new infrastructure on sensitive areas are automatically
not considered as eligible for funding under this Project. Specifically in terms of
involuntary resettlement, municipalities are encouraged to explore design alternatives that
will prevent physical or economic displacement.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
As part of the preparation of the Additional Financing, the Borrower has updated and
disclosed the three relevant safeguards instruments: the Environmental Social
Management Framework, the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (known in its
Spanish version as a Framework for Indigenous and AfroHonduran communities) and the
Involuntary Resettlement Policy Framework. The three updated frameworks were
approved and disclosed in-country and in the InfoShop by Project appraisal (March 11,
2013). A twenty day consultation period was initiated and project stakeholders invited to
review and provide written comments on the updated documents. The UAP received
comments from ERSAP, CONASA and SANAA, and the same were incorporated in the
documents as appropriate.

 The parent Project has been consistently rated as Satisfactory in terms of compliance
with social and environmental safeguards . The Project's implementing agency, SEFIN's
UAP, has competent Environmental and Social/Communication Specialists on renewable,
full-time consultancy contracts. These two professionals address safeguard policy issues
in addition to carrying out other relevant environmental and social/communication
activities and supervision.

 In terms of environmental policies, the UAP has complied with the environmental
management requirements established in the ESMF for the construction works, including
application of environmental licenses and environmental contract clauses. Further, the
Project has a functional system for environmental monitoring and supervision. The
Bank's environmental supervision has also been steady throughout the parent Project
implementation and no major concerns have been raised. During the past two years, the
Project has taken advantage of the TA contract with an international consulting firm that
provides assistance to the newly established service providers. This TA contract also
addresses the overall environmental management capacity of the municipal water service
providers. The AF provides a specific USD 120,000 budget allocation to continue this
work and related investments in the beneficiary municipalities.

 In terms of social operational policies, the main lesson learned from the parent Project
in terms of borrower capacity was the need to strengthen the detection of cases at the
local level and reporting to the UAP, in order to ensure timely preparation of plans,
requesting Bank approval before mitigation measures are put in place. During
implementation, the local teams will receive the support they need to improve on this
point.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include municipalities, autonomous municipal-level water providers,
the water users/community members in both rural and urban areas of the beneficiary
municipalities who will be affected or benefited by the works, indigenous and afro-
honduran communities, SEFIN (UAP especially), SANAA, FHIS, CONASA, ERSAPS,
and Municipal Environmental Offices ("Unidad Municipal de Ambiente, UMA"), the
local COMAS (Municipal Committee for Water and Sanitation), USCLs (local Unit for
Supervision and Control) and Transparency commissions.

 The three frameworks have been disclosed on the Honduras Government SEFIN/UAP
website (http://www.sefin.gob.hn/?page_id=1405) since 2007 and the restructuring of the
parent Project in 2010 respectively, and their updated versions were disclosed on the
World Bank InfoShop and in-country on March 11, 2013, at the above-mentioned
website, prior to the Additional Financing appraisal.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     03/11/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 03/11/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  03/11/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     03/11/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 03/11/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  03/11/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  03/11/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              03/11/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               03/11/2013
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           N/A
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                   Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         No
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed    N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         No
  Manager review the plan?
  OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
  Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         No
  If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           Yes
  requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
  to the RVP prepared and sent?
  Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        Yes
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Lilian Pena Pereira Weiss                 03/11/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Tuuli Johanna Bernardini                  03/11/2013
Social Development Specialist       Ms Kimberly Vilar                            03/11/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Wambui G. Gichuri                         03/11/2013
  Comments:
