                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/09/2012                                 Report No.: AC6698
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P096019                  Original Project Name: Himachal Pradesh
                                              State Roads Project
Country: India                                Project ID: P130616
Project Name: HP State Roads Project - Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Pratap Tvgssshrk
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 1, 2012         Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2012
Managing Unit: SASDT                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (80%);Public expenditure,
financial management and procurement (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            61.7
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      35.50
                                                                       35.50
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []           Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to reduce transport costs and to improve
traffic flows on priority segments of the core road network of Himachal Pradesh.

3. Project Description
The Project has two components. The components are:

 A) Core Network Improvement Component consisting of widening and strengthening of
about 447 km of existing state highways to two lane roads.

 B) Core Network Maintenance and Management Component consisting of (a) periodic
maintenance and minor rehabilitation of about 2,000 km of Core Road Network (CRN);
(b) piloting performance-based maintenance contracts; (c) accident black spot
improvements; (d) pre-investment studies for road network improvement and
maintenance; and (e) capacity enhancement in road maintenance, financing, and
management.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project is located in Himachal Pradesh, a hilly and mountainous state (area size of
55,673 square km, population of about 6 million) in Northern India. The state is rich in
natural resources, and is divided into four agro-climatic zones (Shiwalik Hills, Mid Hills,
High Hills, and Cold Dry Zone). The majority of the population is concentrated in the
Shiwalik hills and the Mid Hills, which also house the majority of the forests, natural
habitats, and economic infrastructure. The project roads have been selected through a
feasibility study of a set of 1,670 km of candidate roads identified already by a strategic
options study (SOS). Roads being upgrading are largely concentrated in the Shiwalik and
Mid Hills zones.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Venkata Rao Bayana (SASDS)
   Ms Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (SASDI)
   Mr Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                          X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Issues/Impacts: The fragile ecosystem in the hilly and mountainous state
posed greater than average environmental risks. The key environmental issues were
associated with activities such as strengthening and widening of carriageway;
provision/repair of shoulders; provision of ditches and drains; construction/repair of
culverts; reconstruction and rehabilitation of bridges; and rehabilitation works. The
environmental issues in the original project included: (i) direct/indirect impacts on rich
natural resources (reserved/ protected forests); (ii) felling of roadside trees; (iii)
destabilization of slopes with consequent damage to forests, water sources, pastures,
properties, orchards and farmlands; (iv) issues associated with management and disposal
of debris and other wastes; (v) unavoidable impacts on water resources used by the
people such as springs, river/streams, hand pumps and canals (vi) impact on local and
regional drainage; (vii) conversion of some marginal agricultural lands for road works;
(viii) road safety concerns; (viii) moderate impacts on sensitive sites including
community assets and religious places; and (ix) construction phase impacts including
those related to camp site operation, dust generation and pollution from plants, machinery
and vehicles.

 The said impacts have been by and large addressed through effective management as
detailed in the contract specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) that were
prepared for the original project. The key features of the EMP include sound
environmental management of temporary impacts during construction phase (including
adherence to SPCB and EMP conditions); compliance with regulatory clearance
conditions stipulated for the road packages adjacent to sensitive environs, such as forest
and wildlife areas; piloting and use of bio-engineering techniques for slope stabilization;
sound debris management practices and; environmental enhancements for cultural and
community assets along the project corridors.

  No significant, large scale or irreversible environmental impacts are envisaged from the
activities/sub-components proposed under Additional Financing for HPSRP. The key
issues identified for the original project and the management strategy/measures to
mitigate the adverse impacts remain valid for this project also. The environmental
safeguard policies triggered for the parent project (HPSRP) will also continue to apply to
the additional loan.

 The overall implementation of Environment Management Plans in the project has been
‘satisfactory' despite the challenges posed by topographic and climatic conditions in the
state.

  While there were some deficiencies/gaps in EMP implementation in the initial stage of
project implementation, the over-all progress with regard to environmental management
in the project has been ‘satisfactory’ and more or less in line with the progress of civ
works. The required regulatory clearances for forest land diversion and permissions for
tree cutting, operation of construction camps, plant sites and borrow areas (as applicable
in the sub-project context) have been obtained.

 The project has also been able to address successfully and demonstrate good practices in
dealing with key environmental issues faced during hill roads development. These
include: (a) integration of environmental aspects, including reflection of findings from
the consultation process with key stakeholders, into the engineering design; (b)
incorporation of EMP into the Bidding Documents towards improved compliance of
environment, health and safety requirements by the contractor; (c) management of hill
cutting and disposal of debris/spoils (including its utilization for various productive uses
such as playgrounds, terrace farms, orchards, plantation areas, valley view locations etc.)
and; (d) provision of protection measures (such as retaining structures and gabions) to
avoid adverse impacts on properties, forests, irrigation channels and potable/other water
sources (such as springs). More so, the piloting of bio-engineering techniques for hill
slope protection in the state has been successful, benefitting the road assets, road users
(through enhanced safety), flora and fauna and residents along the highways (through
protection of their properties, farmlands and orchards).

 Social Issues/Impacts: The acquisition of private land has been completed for phase I
and it is in process for phase II road packages. For phase II road packages, land has been
acquired in all packages except for one where the land acquisition has been complete for
only 3 villages out of total 40. The HPRIDC has followed the approach of private
negotiations to arrive at the award value and as a result LA compensation has gone
beyond the estimated budget. The disbursement of R&R assistance however is slow. So
far only 70 percent of the total amount approved in the micro plans towards R&R
assistance has been disbursed. The disbursement of R&R assistance is linked to structure
compensation and so far only half of the structures have been acquired. Of the ten
contract packages, eight packages have about 100% encumbrance-free land and the
remaining two packages have 30% to 60% encumbrance-free land.

 In one of the phase II roads (district Kangra), the district magistrate had refused to
approve the micro plan assisting informal settlers and the contractor demolished the
structures without paying R&R assistances to the affected persons.The report from
Executive Engineer says that encroachers voluntarily demolished their structures, though
there was no written consent. This was in complete violation of OP 4.12 and project
agreement and it was agreed between the Bank and the HPRIDC that by April 30, 2012
all displaced persons will be traced back and will be assisted as per the entitlements given
in the R&R policy. The HPRIDC explained the R&R policy to the district administration
and micro plan was approved by the district magistrate. Approximately 70% of the PAPs
have already received their entitlements and the balance disbursement will be completed
by the agreed date.

 The HPRIDC has also carried out mid-term evaluation of RAP implementation by an
external agency covering phase I roads. The evaluation shows that PAPs are satisfied
with the process adopted for acquisition of private land and R&R assistance provided to
the non titleholders. As a good practice, during construction, HPRIDC has provided
adequate protection to various individual as well as community structures, drinking water
sources, and land area beyond the right of way. At certain places, access to the private
and community properties have been given. This helped in creating confidence and
goodwill among the community. The remaining land acquisition and disbursement of
R&R assistance are expected to be completed by August 2012.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
There are no indirect and/or long term impacts envisaged as social issues such as
landlessness, loss of livelihood, shelterlessness, road safety and spread of communicable
diseases has been adequately under the original project. Likewise, environmental issues
such as adverse impacts on hydrology, water sources, forest/biodiversity rich areas due to
poor planning and management of construction camps, plant sites and debris/wastes
during the construction stage have also been adequately addressed under the original
project and therefore no indirect and/or long term impacts are likely to arise due to
activities under the proposed additional financing.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
This is not relevant as additional financing is required to achieve the original Project
Development Objective, which continues to remain relevant. The proposed additional
loan would help finance the costs associated with cost overrun, which are significant and
need to be provided to meet the original PDO. There would be no changes to the original
design and ongoing activities of the Project. The environmental impacts have been/are
being by and large addressed through implementation of the contract specific
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) that were prepared for the original project.
Alternatives were also considered in the original project to minimize adverse
environmental impacts that included re-alignments, changes in cross-sections and various
safety measures/options in line with site requirements. All social issues have been
adequately addressed under the original project through provision of bypass to avoid
displacement, livelihood training, negotiated settlement for land, and other R&R
assistances to cushion immediate loss.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Himachal Pradesh Roads and Other Infrastructure Development Corporation (HPRIDC),
the implementing agency for the project has developed capacity to address environment
and social issues, as these issues are being increasingly mainstreamed in its regular
business processes.

  Environment Management: An Environment Officer within HPRIDC (corporate level)
is responsible for the over-all management of environmental aspects of the project. In
addition, a senior forest official deputed to the HPPWD helps HPRIDC’s on the
following matters: (a) regulatory clearances, including follow-up with the concerned
GoI/GoHP Departments; (b) monitor plantation works including compensatory
afforestation activities; and (c) co-ordinate with the Forest Department (including its
Wildlife Wing) to ensure proper implementation of proposed biodiversity protection
measures. The Horticulture Wing of PWD has been strengthened and mandated under the
project to carry out bio-engineering works. In addition to this core team at headquarters,
an environment officer and a bio-engineering specialist in the supervision consulting
team and an environment and safety officer in the contractor’s team manage the day-to -
day environment (including bio-engineering), health and safety issues in the field. At the
PI level, one engineer has been designated to oversee the functioning of field level
environment personnel and co-ordinate with the local administration on various aspects
pertaining to EMP implementation. All concerned, including contractors have been
provided training on environment management requirements that includes both Bank’s
requirements as stated in the Operational Policies and regulatory requirements of the
GoI/GoHP.
 The same arrangements for environment management and safeguards will continue for
this project also. More so, the HPRIDC headquarters, two divisions of National
Highways, three CMU units and the Finance Wing of RIDC have obtained ISO 9001
(Quality Management System) and ISO 14001 (Environment Management System)
certification, which is currently valid until August 2013.

  Social Safeguards: In the original project, one engineer at the PIU was designated as
focal social development person responsible for internal monitoring of the RAP
implementation. The RAP was implemented by an independent NGO. The RAP
implementation was also evaluated at the midterm by an independent consultant. The
land was acquired through negotiated settlement that helped HPRIDC to expedite land
acquisition process and without any court case. At the corporate level, HPRIDC has hired
the services of a retired senior level revenue official to guide and monitor the PIUs and
NGO. The social staff of HPRIDC was also given training on Bank operational policies
as well as on relevant local laws and legislations at NITHE, NOIDA. Same arrangement
will be followed for this project.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
A strong participatory approach in the selection, implementation and monitoring of
project interventions through direct participation of beneficiary communities was adopted
in the original project. The RAP and the entitlement matrix (developed on the basis of
consultations with key stakeholders and affected communities) provides guidance on the
over-all consultation strategy and mechanisms to ensure community awareness and
involvement in the project, as well as participatory monitoring and evaluation modalities.

  A stakeholder analysis and extensive consultations with key stakeholders and
beneficiary communities were carried during the Environment and Social Impact
Assessments. This included consultation with experts and officials on specific issues
related to forests, wildlife, horticulture and pollution management. The executive
summaries of the environment and social safeguard documents were translated in local
language and made public through Bank’s Info shop, HPRIDC’s web site in addition to
disclosure in distr public libraries, offices of District Collectors and PIUs.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                     12/29/2006
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 01/15/2007
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                  01/25/2007
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                 01/15/2007
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  12/29/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              01/15/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               03/01/2007
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
Not Applicable


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
  Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints     Yes
  been carried out?
  Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these             Yes
  constraints?
  Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include          No
  provisions for certification system?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's            Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a            Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities         Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project        Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the                Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                  Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name                             Date
Task Team Leader:                    Mr Pratap Tvgssshrk                              04/15/2012
Environmental Specialist:            Ms Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra                     04/12/2012
Social Development Specialist        Mr Parthapriya Ghosh                             04/02/2012
Additional Environmental and/or      Mr Venkata Rao Bayana
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:       Mr Sanjay Srivastava                            04/26/2012
  Comments: Cleared on understanding that all displaced persons under phase II road in dist.Kangra
  will be traced back and assisted as per the entitlements given in the R&R policy by
  Apr.30,'12.Ref.Apr.26email
Sector Manager:                        Mr Binyam Reja                                  04/20/2012
  Comments:
