                                                            71258



                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/12/2012                                     Report No.: 71258
1. Basic Project Data
Country: India                                   Project ID: P122486
Project Name: Karnataka Watershed Development II
Task Team Leader: Grant Milne
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 1,            Estimated Board Date: October 18, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: SASDA                             Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                 Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Agricultural extension and
research (50%)
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (45%);Water resource
management (35%);Participation and civic engagement (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             60
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              25.70
         Local Communities                                                 0.00
         Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country         0.00
                                                                         25.70
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                            Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                     Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
1.     The Project Development Objective is to: demonstrate more effective watershed
management through greater integration of programs related to rainfed agriculture,
innovative and science based approaches, and strengthened institutions and capacities.

3. Project Description
Component (a): Support for Improved Program Integration in Rainfed Areas. The
component would support the following: i) developing and piloting new decision-support
models for integrated watershed management and site selection; ii) development of a
spatial digital library for an integrated landscape approach for watershed management
planning in the National Bureau of Social Survey and Land Use Planning (NBSSLUPP),
pulling together a range of data and map layers, initially focusing on data pilot
watersheds, and establishing a land resources portal for wider data access by
stakeholders; iii) development and piloting of integrated sub-watershed assessment and
planning, with a particular focus on broader hydrological dynamics of the 93 pilot sub-
watersheds (SWS). The activities would include mapping, ground water planning and
modeling, and dissemination of recommendations for micro-watershed planning; iv)
strengthening integrated micro-watershed master planning under IWMP by providing
incremental support to the WDD and communities for more effective linkages with
agricultural development programs, including horticulture and agro-forestry. The
enhanced micro-watershed plans would facilitate science based convergence between
IWMP and NREGS for soil and water conservation. Key areas for convergence would be
on developing a common awareness and local plan for watershed interventions, better
targeting of interventions, and harmonized technical quality and social accountability
mechanisms; and v) strengthening community-based monitoring and documentation by
providing technical support for local M&E systems including simple water monitoring
equipment and IT tools as well as training on participatory M&E.

  Component (b): Research, Development and Innovation. The component would develop
important knowledge and tools for use in components 1 and 3, as well as for eventual
scaling-up in the state and beyond, through the following: i) applied research studies
across key thematic areas including integrated landscape management and agricultural
intensification, climate smart agriculture, and agriculture value chains. The studies would
generate comprehensive knowledge and lessons to support improved integrated
watershed management, evaluations and guidelines for strengthening agriculture value
chains, and syntheses and adaptive research for strengthening climate smart agriculture;
ii) developing best practice approaches and tools for basic and advanced hydrological
assessment and monitoring by financing development of systems to deliver downscaled
hydrological data to sub-and micro-watershed scales based on appropriate models,
remote sensing of evapotranspiration and precipitation, and new field-based sensors and
data-loggers . The component would also pilot community based management of
groundwater based on experiences from other regions; iii) demand-driven technology
transfer strengthened through the development/adaptation of best practice models and
tools for increased adoption by end-users, which would include planning and training
tools at micro-watershed levels, maps and climate information for use by farmers in
decision making, agro-climatic advisory risk systems, improved web-based information
on markets, post-harvesting and value addition, and on-farm participatory field trials and
demonstrations for specific technologies, for example conservation farming; and iv)
research management to strengthen the institutional arrangements for longer-term needs-
based research identification, technology transfer, research quality assurance, and
coordination of rainfed agriculture and watershed management research under the
Ministry of Agriculture.
  Component (c): Institutional Strengthening. There is a need to make a range of tools
(some identified under component 2) and rainfed agriculture schemes more accessible to
enhance farmer adoption, strengthening information and extension systems to help
farmers improve integrated watershed management practices and sustain rainfed
productivity and incomes. To address these issues, the sub-component would provide: i)
training and capacity building that would assess the needs of end users in terms of
extension, integrated watershed management and value addition, and then development
and delivery of training modules, awareness raising activities, and structured exposure
visits. Specialized and experienced training NGOs are likely to deliver most of the
trainings. Training would be provided to village level extension agents (Jala Mitras),
community institutions, Gram Panchayat members, and farmers. Special emphasis would
be given to lead farmers who would form a core group as champions and peer-to-peer
support to other farmers; training at state level, institutional strengthening would include
training to implementing agencies, particularly to strengthen the development of in-house
M&E systems, supporting relevant national and international exposure visits (including
some supported through the Bank's South-South Knowledge Exchange program), and
improving capacities in farmer contact centers in project areas; and ii) upgrading two
District Watershed Training centers servicing key project areas, and strengthen their
internal information technology (IT) systems.

 Component (d): Strengthening Horticulture in Rainfed Areas.
 Horticulture is an important part of watershed development as it plays both a nutritional
and income generating role for rainfed communities. Building on the successful
experiences under Sujala I, which saw considerable expansion of horticulture, the
component would support: i) extension and demonstrations for productivity improvement
in annual and perennial crops, nutrition gardens, crop diversification and crop-soil-water
relationship in improving the productivity of horticulture crops; ii) strengthening model
nurseries in the existing farms of the Department of Horticulture to ensure a more
continuous supply of quality seed and planting material to farmers; iii) promoting
horticulture soil and crop monitoring through enhanced laboratory facilities and
facilitating farmers in project areas to use these facilities for soil and leaf tissue analysis
through training and literature; iii) strengthening horticulture post-harvest management,
value-addition and market linkage support through feasibility studies and participatory
value chain investigations, field demonstrations of low-cost equipment, and expanding
DoH skill development programs for Sanghas; iv) improving market linkages for farmers
through establishment of producer companies in project areas; and v) supporting
incremental costs of DoH to implement the component.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will be implemented in the southern state of Karnataka in seven districts,
namely, Bidar, Gulbarga, Yadgir, Gadag, Koppal, Davangere and Chamrajnagar. Since
the project supports enhancement of institutional capacities, use of new and innovative
technology for watershed planning, and training and capacity building of stakeholders,
there are few physical characteristics of project activities. Some field level investments
are proposed under the horticulture component, but their impacts are either demonstrative
or smaller in terms of both area and intensity. Any pertinent minor impacts will be
managed and/or mitigated during project implementation through the use of the project
Environmental management Plan. Project activities that may have physical characteristics
relevant to the safeguard analysis include the following:

 Investments with physical implications are largely from the Horticultural Component to
include the following:
  i) extension and demonstrations for productivity improvement in annual and perennial
crops, nutrition gardens, crop diversification and crop-soil-water relationship in
improving the productivity of horticulture crops; ii) strengthening model nurseries in the
existing farms of the Department of Horticulture to ensure a more continuous supply of
quality seed and planting material to farmers; iii) promoting horticulture soil and crop
monitoring through enhanced laboratory facilities and facilitating farmers in project areas
to use these facilities for soil and leaf tissue analysis through training and literature; iii)
strengthening horticulture post-harvest management, value-addition and market linkage
support through field demonstrations of low-cost equipment; and iv) improving market
linkages for farmers through establishment of producer companies in project areas (does
not include building of roads).

 No lands are to be acquired for any of the proposed activities and therefore Involuntary
Resettlement is not a concern.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Suryanarayan Satish (SASDS)
   Ms Nicole Andrea Maywah (SASDI)
   Mr Anupam Joshi (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                 Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                            X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                        X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                             X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                      X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Project's objective is to improve integration of programs, strengthened institutions
related to rainfed agriculture, and a stronger science-based approach supported by new
innovations, knowledge and technologies that result in increased productivity of natural
resources and incomes for communities in selected watersheds. Consequently, no
potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are anticipated. The key
environmental challenges that the project addresses are: (i) optimal utilization of
hydrological resources through improved planning and collection of hydrological data;
and (ii) arrest decline of groundwater and reduce soil erosion.
  Some investments under the project are proposed at the field level in: (i) extension and
demonstrations for productivity improvement in annual and perennial horticultural crops;
(ii) strengthening model nurseries in the existing farms of the Department of Horticulture
to ensure a more continuous supply of quality seed and planting material to farmers; (iii)
promoting horticulture soil and crop monitoring through enhanced laboratory facilities;
(iv) strengthening horticulture post-harvest management, value-addition and market
linkage support through feasibility studies and participatory value chain investigations,
field demonstrations of low-cost equipment, and expanding DoH skill development
programs for Sanghas; and (v) improving market linkages for farmers through
establishment of producer companies in project areas. These, however, do not pose any
significant or large scale impacts and would be mitigated during implementation.

  The earlier Bank-supported watershed project, Sujala I, undertook a detailed
environmental assessment and developed an elaborate environmental management
framework to ensure enhancement of positive environmental impacts and mitigation of
negative impacts. The current project would continue to draw upon the measures
suggested in that.

  The social assessment enquiry identified the following as key social development
issues/ principles which should underpin the project's strategy and implementation: 1)
Participation and inclusion is central to the design of the project and the State programs it
aims to assist. Key to this will be mobilizing individuals and institutions at different
levels: from community to state level; 2) Sector related institutions will be strengthened,
or if necessary established, at different levels with an explicit capacity, composition and a
definite mandate, with strong emphasis on accountability and service delivery
performance; 3) An Information, Education and Communication (IEC) campaign will be
implemented by: publicizing the project rules for open engagement of partners;
establishing a communication platform; and an easily accessible digital library.

 None of the above (viz., the Bank's interventions) has any direct bearings on the Bank's
Social Safeguard Policies - Resettlement and Lands. However, some risks are possible for
example in convergence activities (viz., derivate interventions) which involve new
processes, and direct engagement with political bodies. For example, Sub Watershed
assessments are rather exclusively technical, while micro watershed assessments are
more 'social' oriented. Ensuring technical and social matching in planning and
implementation is essential. These will be addressed by providing for participation by
Panchayat Raj Institutes (PRIs), their capacity building and establishment of a grievance
process to address any disputes.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No potential indirect or long term impacts due to future activities are envisaged in the
project area.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The following alternative approaches of watershed management and planning were
considered but rejected: (i) business as usual approach, wherein individual departments
and developmental agencies of the State Government continue to provide services with
little coordination and alignment of the works of the other departments resulting in poor
convergence; and (ii) planning based on the existing system of inadequate coordination
where line departments remain the custodian of limited data generated from the field.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
As part of project preparation, experienced and independent consulting agencies were
contracted by the Watershed Development Department to undertake separate
environmental and social assessments for the proposed project investments. Additionally,
under Sujala I, an elaborated Environmental Management Framework (ESMF) was
prepared, which the executing agencies continue to follow for mitigation of adverse
impacts in government financed watershed programs. The assessment undertaken for the
current project also has identified a range of mitigation measures, but more importantly
measures to enhance the potential positive environmental impacts that the project
investments will result into.

  As part of the project design, new decision-support tools would be developed and
piloted to improve selection of priority watershed sites that combine biophysical,
hydrological, socio-economic, and environmental criteria. Deployment of such tools is
likely to facilitate more sustainable extraction of natural resources, and accurate
investment plans to improve the natural resource base.

  An EMF has been developed for this project that includes a detailed mitigation plan to
limit and/or contain any potential adverse impacts arising due to small field investments.
While no standalone PMP is required due to small scale nature of proposed on the field
investments under the horticulture component, a PMP, nonetheless, has been developed
and included as part of the EMF. In addition, the EMF includes a detailed best
practice/guidance note for enhancing environmental sustainability of watershed
investments.

 Though none of the investments have any direct bearings on the Bank's Social
Safeguard Policies, some risks emanating as 'derivatives', especially in the context of
convergence between IWMP and NREGA cannot be ruled out. Towards addressing this,
following actions are planned: (i) providing for participation by PRIs through sub-
watershed and micro-watershed level institutional platforms; (ii) capacity building of PRI
institutions and securing participation in planning and implementation; and (iii)
establishment of right of grievance to address not only issues arising at the micro-
watersheds, but also disputes (if any) across the different levels. Social Assessment Study
done as a part of the Project Preparation has provided deeper insights into these issues
including gender concerns. The project will make efforts to ensure that men and women
will be equally benefited from the project. Most of the above mentioned 'derivative' risks
are covered as a part of the project Operational Risk Assessment Framework (ORAF) as
well.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Following social and environmental assessments, stakeholders have been identified and
mapped at different levels – state, district watershed and village levels. The grassroots
stakeholders include farmers in the rainfed area, including small and marginal farmers,
landless laborers, women self help groups, water user associations, watershed
committees, Gram Panchayats, and local traders. Intermediate and apex level
stakeholders include mostly different government agencies, R&D institutions, traders,
and representatives of private sector and NGOs. During the assessments, the consultants
had a variety of extensive consultations, at individual, household and village/community
levels in the field and also with local bodies (PRIs). The environmental and social
assessment reports highlights the key feedback that emerged from these consultations.

 As part of disclosure plan, the Watershed Development Department and Department of
Horticulture will prepare summary of the reports in local language and disseminate across
the state including placing on its website. An executive summary of the assessments will
also be prepared and translated in the local language for ready and speedy dissemination.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    06/25/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                06/26/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 06/25/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    06/25/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                06/26/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 06/25/2012
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name      Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Grant Milne            07/10/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Anupam Joshi           07/10/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr Suryanarayan Satish    07/10/2012
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms Nicole Andrea Maywah   07/10/2012
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Sanjay Srivastava      07/10/2012
  Comments: cleared
Sector Manager:                     Mr Simeon Kacou Ehui      07/11/2012
  Comments: Cleared
