                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 02/28/2013                                     Report No.: AC6889
1. Basic Project Data
Country: India                                Project ID: P096023
Project Name: India Orissa State Roads Project
Task Team Leader: Rajesh Rohatgi
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 20,        Estimated Board Date: September 30, 2008
2007
Managing Unit: SASDT                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (95%);Public administration-
Transportation (5%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           196
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                     69.00
         Financing Gap                                                  0.00
                                                                      69.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
1.      The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to remove transport bottlenecks in
targeted transport corridors for greater economic and social development activities.
  2.    The PDO will be achieved by (a) improving the performance, safety and carrying
capacity of priority roads in the state in an environmentally and socially sustainable way,
(b) modernizing and strengthening OWD?s management structure and procedures, (d)
assisting GOO to establish conducive policy, institutional and governance frameworks to
improve road sector management, financing and safety.

3. Project Description
3.     The proposed project comprises two components: (a) Road Corridor Improvement
Component, (b) Sector Policy and Institutional Development Component.

 Component A: Road Corridor Improvement Component
 4.     This component will support the widening and upgrading of about 310 km of
existing single and intermediate-lane roads to double-lane standard, to be completed in
two phases: (i) Phase I Roads, comprising about 204 km of total roads included in the
Project; and (ii) Phase II Roads, comprising 106 km included in the Project; and
implementation of ancillary social, health, resettlement and environmental measures.

 5.     The widening to double-lanes entails widening to 7-meter carriageway and 2.5-
meter shoulders on each side, for a total road with of 12-meter. However, in some
environmentally sensitive areas and heavily built up locations, the road width will be
narrower to minimize environmental and social impacts. The road design includes safety
enhancement in road geometry and provides for uninterrupted flow of traffic along the
road corridors and reduction of frictions by providing truck parks/rest areas, bus stops
and designated space for curbside commercial activities. In addition to the physical
works, the project will finance costs associated with supervision consultants,
Environment Management Plans, Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R&R), Indigenous
People (Tribal) Development Plan (TDP), land acquisition, utility clearing, HIV/AIDS
mitigation measures, and road safety awareness campaign in project road corridors.

 Component B: Sector Policy and Institutional Development Component

  6.    This component will involve (i) Modernization and institutional strengthening of
the Odisha Works Department; (ii) Strengthening the policy, institutional and legal
framework of the state road sector and; (iii) implementation and monitoring of the
project.

 7.     OWD Modernization Support. The project will finance technical assistance and
advisory services to OWD (a) establish Road Asset Management System in OWD,
including the creation of a Road Information System, development of software
applications for maintenance planning and optimal resource allocation; (b) establish
and/or build capacity in core business units/cells in OWD, including Environment and
Social Management, Road Safety, Road Asset Management, and PPP Transactions; (c)
revise and update the PWD Codes and Manuals to improve contract management and
procurement practices in OWD; (d) implement IT/ICT/MIS to modernize financial
management system, computerize record keeping, and introduce e-procurement; (e)
support the implementation of GAAP and compliance with RTI suo moto disclosures;
and (f) extensive training and core skills development program for OWD staff.

 8.     Policy and Institutional Development. The project will finance technical
assistance and advisory service to assist GOO improve its road sector policy, institutional
and legal framework to align it with the rapidly changing environment and context. This
will included support to (a) establish O&M structure for managing the State?s Core Road
Network initially within a restructured OWD, and later through a separate Road
Development Corporation; (b) establish sustainable road maintenance financing options;
(c) policy directive to clarify the roles and responsibilities of the various road agencies in
the state on the one hand, and the public and private sectors on the other; (d) creation of
an apex road authority to coordinate the various road agencies in the state; (e) preparation
of a Road Master Plan, including revision/update of the road network classification
system and assignment of responsibility among various road agencies, (f) update/define
the legal right of way for the state's road network; (g) developing Road Safety Policy
Action Plan; (h) develop axel load control policy and strategy.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Orissa, India. The proposed project roads will be located across many parts of the State.
The covered districts will be: Cuttack, Kendrapara, Bhadrak, Keonjhar, , Kalahandi,
Bolangir, Nuapada, Ganjam,.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Satya N. Mishra (SASDS)
   Mr Khabilongtshup Khumujam (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                          X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project has triggered six safeguard policies as indicated above. The physical
interventions proposed under the project may have social and environmental impacts
including those related to involuntary resettlement of the communities in certain stretches
of project roads. As part of project preparation, social and environmental assessments
were undertaken to identify and assess the impacts associated with the proposed project
activities and develop mitigation measures.

 Involuntary Resettlement: The project causes involuntary resettlement significantly in
some stretches of the project roads where widening and strengthening have been
proposed beyond the existing RoW. The impact is higher in selected road stretches in
urban areas where a large number of shops and residences are affected. A total of 315
Acres of land are required for the Project including 203 Acres for the Phase-I roads and
112 Acres for the P04 in the Phase-II. Of the 203 Acres being acquired for the 3 roads in
Phase-1, compensation has been awarded for 163 Acres and the rest is in progress. The
P04 (Phase II) requires 112 Acres and the LA process is in progress. The land acquisition
and resettlement activities for the road works P01, P02, and P03 are being implemented
as per the resettlement action plans (RAPs) approved by the Bank and are at various
stages of progress. The Bank has reviewed and cleared the Draft RAP for the P04 for
disclosure with suggestions for improvement. The Draft RAP for P04 has been disclosed
on the OSRP website and shall be finalized incorporating feedback and the Bank's review
comments, among others, for updating the Entitlements Framework.

 In terms of IR impacts on structures for the Phase-1 roads, 2067 of the total 2811
affected structures have been shifted with payment of compensation and R&R assistance.
These include 189 of 338 residential structures affected, 1150 of 1593 commercial
structures affected, and 728 of 880 kiosks affected. In Phase-II, P04 will require the
relocation of 4767 structures including 549 residences, 141 residence-cum-commercial,
3329 commercial structures, and 748 kiosks. Another 94 structures, whose occupants
were absent during RAP preparation will be surveyed and relocated as per the RAP,
which has been disclosed and will be finalized incorporating Bank's comments with an
updated R&R Entitlement Framework.

  The indigenous peoples (referred as tribal) policy (OP 4.10) applies in this project to
tribal and other vulnerable groups. There are road stretches proposed under the project
which pass through the tribal areas. As part of the Social Assessment, detailed assessment
of policies, regulations and development schemes applicable to tribal communities was
carried out to identify and assess issues concerning them vis-a-vis the proposed project
activities. Specific consultations were also conducted with tribal communities to inform
the tribal communities about the project interventions and expected benefits and solicit
their views on the proposed measures to help them benefit from the project. The
assessment revealed that though the project interventions are not expected to have any
adverse impacts on the tribal communities, a tribal development (TD) strategy has been
prepared to help them access project benefits. If tribal families are affected adversely on
individual basis, they will be supported as per the provisions of the R&R policy and
measures included in the RAP. The TD strategy prepared for the project includes
measures to help tribal communities to access project benefits, in terms of wage
employment and community development works. Based on this strategy, tribal
development plans (TDP) have been prepared for each of the packages of Phase-1 located
in tribal areas. These plans are included in each of the RAPs prepared so far.

 The GOO has been working to address all the outstanding safeguards issues since the
suspension. The safeguard key actions substantially addressed include: (i) issuing ID
cards to PAPs and streamlining the grievance redress mechanism, (ii) holding
consultations and establishing local resettlement committees (LRC) to accelerate
relocation, (iii) improving LA and R&R documentation, (v) staff capacity enhancement
with hiring a social development advisor and (vi) commissioning of an external
safeguards quality audit. The GOO is working on these issues and the Bank team
continues to intensely monitor the completion of pending actions such as the payment of
agricultural allowances to land losers, site allowances to the squatters, and livelihood
allowances to those eligible. In the light of the implementation experience, the GOO has
proposed to update the entitlements framework, which will be finalized with Bank's
comments. In view of improvement in the LA and R&R implementation in the last year
and the Bank has upgraded safeguards rating to "Moderately Satisfactory".

 Environmental Impacts. The Environmental Assessment has identified that the project
intervention may have environmental impacts as follows: (i) direct/indirect impacts on
forests and wildlife; (ii) felling of roadside trees; (iii) impacts on water resources used by
the people such as ponds, river/streams, hand pumps and canals; (iv) construction phase
impacts including those related to camp site operation, dust generation and pollution, and
workers? health and safety; (v) improper management and disposal of debris and other
wastes. The environmental impacts may also include some adverse impacts on schools,
hospitals and religious properties located along the existing right of way due to increased
noise and air pollution during construction and operation stages of the project.

 Project interventions may also cause undesirable impacts on the rich biodiversity found
in adjoining areas of project corridors as some project roads traverse through Reserved
and/or Protected Forest Areas. Typical impacts that may adversely affect plants and
animals in such biodiversity rich areas include pressure on habitats, movement zone
restrictions threat from increased risk of collision with vehicles and pollution of habitat
zone and pressure on water sources from various construction stage activities.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The long-term social impact will be generally positive as the project will bring economic
and social development in the region. In addition, the project treatment of safeguard
issues specifically approaches to address issues related to encroachers, squatters and
tribal groups may set an important precedent for non-project areas now and in the future.
The experience when gained during the project implementation would help the
implementing agencies to address these issues more systematically in their regular
operations. At the same time, the long-term environmental impacts may include increased
development and alteration of land-use patterns, away from agriculture and forest to other
economic activities. Increased truck traffic may result in increase of HIV/AIDS and other
communicable diseases in project corridors. The road improvements and increases in
vehicle speed may also lead to increase in accidents.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The various alternatives considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts include:
(i) realignments, (ii) bypasses (iii) changes in pavement cross section (iv) provision of
road safety and traffic calming measures (v) reuse of waste material (vi) slope protection
(bio-engineering) and erosion protection measures (vii) provision of crossing sites,
signage, plantation, water holes etc. for wildlife and (viii) various protection and
enhancement measures for common property resources, religious properties and water
bodies.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Specific environment and social impact mitigation action plans have been developed to
mitigate adverse environmental and social impacts and risks and to enhance the potential
positive benefits of the project. These action plans include the EMP, RAP (including
TDP) and Cultural Property Plan (as part of the EMP), Biodiversity Management Plan
(integrated within corridor-specific EMPs) and HIV/AIDS Action Plan. These plans have
been integrated into each package as an integral part of the preparation, capacity-
building, implementation and monitoring. Each Action Plan includes monitoring
indicators and estimated costs that have been incorporated in the overall project costs.

  Social Aspects. The institutional arrangements for implementing the social management
plans have been outlined in the RAP. The Social and Environmental Cell within the
Project Management Unit (PMU) is in charge of overseeing the implementation of RAPs
at the package level with the help of engineering staff and implementing NGOs. The
nodal NGO appointed to assist the PMU continues to help with facilitating and
monitoring and the implementation of social safeguards activities focusing on
resettlement and rehabilitation of the losers of land, physically displaced families,
encroachers, squatters, the affected tribal households. Other issues addressed as a part of
the social management plans are HIV/AIDS, and road safety, also being monitored.
NGOs at the Package level have been engaged to facilitate implementation of social
management plans. In case of P04, the Nodal NGO has been assigned the task of
facilitating implementation as well due to delays in hiring a separate NGO at the field
level. The costs and implementation arrangements have been integrated into the project
design and are described in the RAPs for each Package, HIV/AIDS Action Plan, Project
Implementation Plan (PIP) and other project documents. It was proposed that the Project
will engage an external agency for project level monitoring and evaluation of social
management plans. The PMU has recently commissioned an external safeguards review
consultant who is expected to submit in the near future. The PMU has recently recruited
an experienced Social Development Adviser in addition to the Social Development
Specialist already working with the Project. They will support the Social and
Environment Cell in monitoring the implementation of the RAP.

  The Project was suspended in 2010 due to among others slow progress in LA and R&R
and non-compliance with social safeguards requirements and the safeguards rating was
downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory. The borrower has been working to address the
outstanding safeguards issues since suspension. The safeguard key actions substantially
addressed include: (i) issuing ID cards to PAPs and streamlining the grievance redress
mechanism, (ii) holding consultations and establishing local resettlement committees
(LRC) to accelerate relocation, (iii) improving LA and R&R documentation, (v) staff
capacity enhancement with hiring a social development advisor and (vi) commissioning
of an external safeguards quality audit. The Bank team continues to intensely monitor the
completion of pending actions which include the payment of agricultural allowances to
land losers, site allowances to the squatters, and livelihood allowances to those eligible.
In the light of the implementation experience, the GOO has proposed to update the
entitlements framework, which will be finalized with Bank's comments as a part of the
RAP for P04. In view of improvement in the LA and R&R implementation in the last
year and the Bank has upgraded safeguards rating to "Moderately Satisfactory".

  Environment Aspect. The Social and Environment Cell in the PMU with expertise on
environment management, forestry and wildlife expert has been set-up to handle the
environmental management aspects of the project. This unit is headed by an Executive
Engineer and will act as the core team at HQ. The project will require substantial
strengthening of the existing capacity to effectively and timely handle the multiple tasks
identified in the EMPs. Orientation and basic training has already been provided to
initiate this capacity building process. An environmental expert is also being recruited
from the market to help in the monitoring of the implementation of EMPs.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During preparation, consultations were conducted with a variety of project stakeholders
at various levels - village, block and district. The stakeholders, with whom consultations
were held included, affected people, truckers, other road users and project beneficiaries,
peoples' representatives including Panchayat/local body members, and local traders'
associations. The objectives of these consultations are to involve the affected
communities and other stakeholders and accelerate the resettlement management process,
enhance their awareness of the HIV/AIDS and road safety issues.

 22. The key messages emerging from these consultations include the importance of
addressing issues related to alternate alignments, the entitlements framework providing
for compensating land and other assets at their replacement value, supporting encroachers
and squatters affected due to the project in their resettlement. Separate consultations were
carried out in the tribal stretches to prepare the TDP. The PMU is holding further
consultations and constitute local resettlement committees at the key locations as advised
to accelerate the relocation of residences and businesses affected.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     06/29/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 08/30/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  08/30/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     06/25/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 08/30/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  08/30/2007
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  06/25/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              08/30/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               08/30/2007
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                   Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed    N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector                  Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
  Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints          No
  been carried out?
  Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these                  Yes
  constraints?
  Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include               No
  provisions for certification system?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's                 No
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a                 No
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities              Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project             Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the                     Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                       Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                   Name                               Date
Task Team Leader:                      Mr Rajesh Rohatgi                                   02/04/2013
Environmental Specialist:              Ms Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra                        02/04/2013
Social Development Specialist          Mr Satya N. Mishra                                  02/04/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:       Mr Sanjay Srivastava                                02/27/2013
  Comments: Dear Rajesh,

  This looks fine. If portal does not allow uploading this version, please get a clean hard copy signed
  by me; get it scanned; and disclose it through the Infoshop.

  best, sanjay
Sector Manager:                        Ms Karla Gonzalez Carvajal                          02/13/2013
  Comments:
