                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/16/2011                                   Report No.: AC6141
1. Basic Project Data
Country: India                                   Project ID: P121774
Project Name: Second Kerala Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (Jalanidhi II)
Task Team Leader: Martin P. Gambrill
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 18, 2011 Estimated Board Date: October 27, 2011
Managing Unit: SASDU                             Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                 Loan
Sector: Water supply (70%);Sanitation (30%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (80%);Water resource management (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            155.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              22.00
         Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country       45.00
                                                                         67.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                     Yes [ ]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The development objective of the proposed project is to assist the Government of Kerala
in increasing the access of rural communities to improved and sustainable water supply
and sanitation services in Kerala, using a decentralized demand responsive approach.

3. Project Description
The Project is organized into the following three components:

 Component A # Institution Building (US$ xx million) This component will provide
funds to implement the following sub-components:
 A1 # KRWSA Operations including the establishment of, and the operating costs for,
the project implementation entities and related consultancies, equipment, goods and
services for project management support.
 A2 # Capacity Building of sector institutions and of support organizations.
 A3 # GP Strengthening to increase the capacity of project GPs to plan, implement,
manage and oversee RWSS service provision.
 A4 # Statewide Sector Development Program involving development and institutional
strengthening of Kerala#s RWSS sector to bring rationality, accountability and efficiency
to it.

 Component B # Technical Assistance and Improved Service Delivery (US$ xx million)
This component will provide technical assistance to the different sector stakeholders
involved in implementing the following Project activities such that the corresponding
infrastructure investments under Component C are properly implemented and so that the
resultant services are efficiently provided:
 B1 # Intra-GP Rural Water Supply Schemes
 B2 # Tribal Development Plan
 B3 # Multi-GP Water Supply Schemes
 B4 # Sanitation

 Component C # Infrastructure Development (US$ xx million) This component will
fund the implementation of infrastructure investments through the following
subcomponents:
 C1 # Intra-GP Rural Water Supply Schemes
 C2 # Tribal Development Plan
 C3 # Multi-GP Water Supply Schemes
 C4 # Sanitation

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The proposed project scope includes: (i) expanding and consolidating the Jalanidhi
decentralized, demand-driven approach by implementing rural water supply and
sanitation schemes in about 200 GPs following the Jalanidhi principles; (ii) gaining more
experience in implementing some 10-15 multi-GP water supply schemes along the lines
of the model being developed under the Chavara-Panmana scheme in two Tsunami-
affected GPs; (iii) building capacities of the project GPs in developing and implementing
holistic water security plans ; (iv) supporting full household sanitation coverage in the
project GPs and developing models for implementing community sanitation schemes for
solid and liquid waste management in a few select GPs; and (v) by project end, adopting
the Jalanidhi approach for the entire RWSS sector in Kerala, irrespective of source of
financing or implementing agency, in line with DDWS/MoRD (GOI) guidelines.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Ramachandran R. Mohan (SASDS)
   Ms Priti Kumar (SASDI)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                           X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The proposed project provides funds in the
form of grants to GP institutions for meeting the capital costs of water supply and
sanitation schemes. While these activities undertaken by the GPs are expected to have no
adverse impact on the environment, certain others might lead to small and localized
adverse impacts. The project will mainly support investments in small water supply
schemes and in sanitation schemes focusing primarily on individual household latrines
and on liquid and solid waste management activities on a pilot basis. The project will also
support the construction, rehabilitation and service optimization of some larger single-GP
water supply schemes and a small number (10-15) of multi-GP schemes with a view to
providing better service provision, having water used more rationally, and thus creating
less wastewater, following the same decentralized, demand-driven approach adopted
under the implementation of the small water supply schemes. The environmental issues
associated with the project#s interventions are related to water source sustainability,
water contamination, water quality, and improper waste disposal. In view of the above,
and that limited adverse impacts on the environment can be expected, this policy is
triggered.

 As a consequence, an Environmental Assessment (EA) of the proposed project was
undertaken, and an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was prepared, to
ensure compliance with the applicable regulations and triggered safeguards policies. The
EMF will be applied to subprojects to be taken up by GPs making use of investments
provided to them under Component C of the project. The EMF comprises a set of
procedures for granting environmental approval that includes screening through a
regulatory requirements list to filter out activities that contravene the relevant national
and state regulations and triggered Bank safeguard policies. The project will thus use
classification criteria for categorization of schemes on the basis of the perceived intensity
of risk or impact of the subprojects as being low, medium or high. Environmental Data
Sheets (EDS) will be produced to record the relevant baseline information for water
supply, sanitation, and solid and liquid waste management schemes. Environmental codes
of practice and technical guidelines have also been produced for the various types of
schemes. The EMF thus includes a provision for undertaking Limited Environmental
Assessments (LEAs) for medium impact cases and Environmental Impact Assessments
(EIAs) for high impact investments. The EMF also has provisions for institutional
arrangements, training, and capacity building and monitoring, to ensure that
environmental concerns are adequately addressed during the implementation stage.

 Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): Kerala has about 32 designated natural habitats and they
are protected by National and State regulations. These include two biosphere reserves, six
national parks, 14 wildlife/bird sanctuaries, one reserve forest, one tiger reserve and eight
mangrove sites. Activities/subprojects taken up as part of the proposed project are not
allowed, by regulation, to affect any of these areas. However, given the high
concentration of natural habitats of strategic importance located within a relatively small
geographical area in Kerala, the relatively high-pace of development in the state, and the
possibility of these areas being impacted by villages or habitations of indigenous people
located in the proximity of these areas, this policy is triggered.

 Forests (OP/BP 4.36): The forest cover in Kerala is mainly confined to about five
districts located away from the coast. By regulation, KRWSA has no jurisdiction over
forests areas. However, since almost 29% of the state is under forest cover, it is felt that
the surge of activities taken up under this project might adversely impact any forest
ecosystem in the state unless carefully planned. Hence the policy is triggered.

 Indigenous peoples: (OP/BP 4.10): According to 2001 Census, the Scheduled Tribe
(ST) population of Kerala state is 364,189, which is 1.14% of the total population of the
state. The decadal growth rate of ST population during 1991-2001 at 13.5% was 4.1%
higher than the growth of the total population. Kerala has a total of 36 scheduled tribes
enumerated by Census 2001. Kerala#s ST population is overwhelmingly rural. Wayanad
district has the highest ST population (17.4%) followed by Idukki (14%). Due to
presence of tribals in the project areas, this policy is triggered.

 Environment: The project will support investments in small water supply schemes, in
sanitation schemes focusing primarily on individual household latrines and on liquid and
solid waste management activities on a pilot basis, and on the construction, rehabilitation
and service optimization of some larger single-GP water supply schemes and a small
number (10-15) of multi-GP schemes with a view to providing better service provision,
having water used more rationally, and thus creating less wastewater. The associated
environmental issues are mostly related to water source sustainability, water
contamination, water quality, and improper waste disposal. No large-scale or irreversible
impacts are expected.

 Social: The project is expected to benefit local communities by providing access to
sustainable water supply service delivery. The project will not use involuntary land
acquisition. Tribal groups are present in the project area and a tribal development plan
has been prepared consistent with the Bank OP 4.10.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Environment: No severe or long term impacts are expected as a result of Jalanidhi-II
activities. Furthermore, KRWSA have a clear functional mandate and limited budgets.
Consequently, the nature of activities/works taken up by them is likely to consistently
remain of the same pattern during the project duration.

 Social: A social assessment and a baseline survey were undertaken to assess demand for
the project, willingness of potential beneficiaries to participate in it (including cost
sharing in capital costs and taking responsibility for O&M costs) and other social issues
of relevance to the project. A separate study was focused on tribal settlements. Broad-
based and specific consultations were undertaken in nine GPs, stratified across the state
Kerala (north, central and south on the longitudinal north-south axis, and coastal, midland
and highland on the lateral axis. The study included household surveys (in 800 HHs),
focus group discussions with key stakeholders, and secondary data surveys.

 These exercises helped to confirm that:
 #    There is good demand for the project;
 #    Communities are willing to pay part of the capital costs; and
 #    Vulnerable groups would benefit significantly from the project design.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Environment: Project alternatives are not relevant in this context. However, a number of
features have been built into the EMF with the intention of avoiding or minimizing
adverse impacts. Some of these are:
 #      Emphasizing on adherence to the relevant national and state regulations by virtue
of compliance with a regulatory list. Not supporting activities that are not permissible
under the applicable regulations, or ensuring that wherever permissions are required they
are duly obtained.
 #      Provision of a screening tool to categorize subproject according to level of
impact.
 #      Provision of environmental guidelines for all subprojects.
 #      Provision for comprehensive capacity building of all stakeholders associated with
the project including GP engineers, PMU and RPMU engineers, representatives from
support organizations, technical staff of line departments, and other project staff.

 Social: The Social assessment also helped identify key factors that need to be
incorporated in the project design such as:
 #      The need to improve GPs# accountability and responsibilities for long-term
support after the project exits a GP.
 #      The need for linking the structure of BG federations within local government
structures.
 #      Post-implementation back-up arrangements.
 #      Additional capacity building needed in specific areas.
 #      The need for simpler and more appropriate technologies in tribal areas.
 #     The need for prolonged hand-holding, particularly in the case of tribal schemes.

 These findings have been incorporated in the overall project design and in the
earmarked Tribal Development Plan. The tribal scheme cycle time period has been
readjusted to provide for O&M support activities over a longer duration.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower (KRWSA, Government of Kerala) has previous experience in developing
and implementing environmental safeguards related activities as part of the predecessor
Jalanidhi-I Project. Furthermore, Kerala is a progressive state with 100% literacy, well
educated elected representatives and an enlightened population, where issues related to
water supply and sanitation have been an important area of focus to the state government.
Capacity building of the functionaries of KRWSA and KWA has been regularly taking
place in the areas of sustainable management of water supply and sanitation programs.

  The borrower has guided the preparation of the EA/EMF for the project with the help of
a consulting firm. It has been agreed with KRWSA that personnel with the responsibility
for environmental management will be located as follows in the project institutional
structure: (i) the PMU Director (Technical) will hold co-charge for environment aspects
and will be responsible for (a) the monitoring, supervision and audits linked to EMF
compliance, (b) the selection of experts for undertaking the EIAs of high-impact schemes
and (c) the provision of overall guidance and technical support to the RPMU engineers;
(ii) each of the RPMUs will be staffed with a senior engineer designated as Manager
(Technical) who will conduct technical reviews and approvals of scheme-specific
environmental appraisal reports as well as the monitoring and supervision linked to EMF
implementation at the regional level; (iii) the engineers appointed to each of the GPs will
assist the support organizations and beneficiary communities to prepare the
environmental appraisal documentation as part of the engineering designs; and (iv) a
panel of technical experts at the state and district level will be constituted to provide
technical support to the PMU and the RPMUs. In light of the above, the borrower has
adequate capacity and motivation to implement safeguard-related procedures in an
appropriate and satisfactory manner.

 Social:

 Involuntary resettlement

 The project will not use involuntary resettlement. Over 85% of the project#s water
supply schemes will require very small amounts of land and the remainder will not
require any land, since these interventions involve rehabilitation, modernization and
optimization of existing schemes. These lands will be procured outright at market rates as
successfully done in the predecessor project. The interventions are mostly for very small
water supply schemes catering to a small group of households (around 30). The land
requirement for the construction of water source points and overhead tanks (OHTs) is
very small . Government of Kerala does not intend resorting to involuntary land
acquisition. All facilities will be located either on public lands or procured at market
price from willing sellers. In rare cases, voluntary land donation may be resorted to,
provided it meets the guidelines. All land transactions will meet the following criteria: (i)
the land in question will be free of squatters, encroachers, or other claims of
encumbrance; (ii) lands will be chosen (by the community) after ensuring that water is
available on the piece of land in question; (iii) in each case, the voluntary nature of land
sale/donations will be verified; (iv) land transfers will be completed and the title will be
vested in the name of the BG/GP through a registered sale deed or MOU; and (v) a
provision will be made for redressing grievances. KRWSA will arrange for an
independent agency to examine all land purchases before approving the plans in every
batch. Land donation will be discouraged, particularly from small land holders.

  Voluntary land donations: The project will discourage land donation by poor families
and vulnerable groups. The guidelines to be followed for voluntary land donations
include the following principles: (i) impacts are minor (loss of land less than 10% of
holdings), (ii) no physical relocation is involved; (iii) the subproject is not site-specific;
(iv) the land required to meet a subproject#s technical criteria must be identified by the
affected community, not by line agencies or project authorities (nonetheless, technical
authorities can help ensure that the land is appropriate for subproject purposes and that
the subproject will produce no health or environmental safety hazards); (v) the land in
question must be free of claims or encumbrances; (vi) grievance mechanisms must be
available; and (vii) verification (e.g. witnessed statements) of the voluntary nature of land
donations must be obtained from each person donating land.

 Indigenous People (OP 4.10)

  A fully-fledged tribal development plan (TDP) has been prepared after extensive
consultations with tribal groups. The proposed approach provides for free and prior
informed consent of tribal beneficiaries. Special provisions have been made in the cost-
sharing rules to enable Tribal populations to participate in the project. All lessons learnt
from Jalanidhi-I experience have been suitably incorporated.

  The TDP has been finalized after consultations with key stakeholders in a workshop in
Thiruvananthapuram. In order to improve the effectiveness of project implementation,
several additional modifications have been introduced to the project design based on
lessons learnt from interventions in tribal areas under Jalanidhi-I. These include:
  #      Having an exclusive division to manage the tribal component, to focus on tribal
districts (Idukki and Waynad) with significant tribal population.
  #      Flexible technological options appropriate to the local culture.
  #      Better collaboration with traditional tribal leadership.
  #      More stringent criteria for selection of support organizations for the tribal
component.
  #      Increased scheme cycle to provide adequate post implementation hand-holding
support
  #      Enlisting local tribal promoters as part of the mobilization team, and providing
suitable capacity building to improve post project support.
 #      Working with the existing government machinery involved in tribal affairs, and
thus gaining from their local presence for long-term support.

 The TDP gives details of program content, coverage, costs, schedule, public
consultations, and institutional arrangements.

 Other key design measures for enhanced social development outcomes

  Some of the key design features built into the project design to ensure enhanced social
development outcomes include:
  #      GP selection criteria: The GP selection criteria include vulnerability and poverty
considerations, in addition to water scarcity and water quality parameters.
  #      Addressing gender issues: The project design integrates measures to enhance
voice and choice for women who are truly the household managers of water and
sanitation. Some of the measures include:
  o      Mandatory representation for women in key positions in the beneficiary
committees;
  o      Participation and inclusion of women has been institutionalized in the planning
process; and
  o      Collaboration and networking with existing womens networks (such as
Kudumbashree) # Support Organisations will be requested to integrate these networks
into the planning, implementation and post-implementation phases so that empowered
and well-capacitated local women are available to provide ongoing support after project
exit.
  #      Process monitoring: Independent consultants will monitor the planning and
implementation processes in sample villages so that continuous feedback will be
provided to the implementing teams.
  #      Initial capacity building fund and exposure visits: Based on lessons learnt from
other CDD projects, exposure visits will be planned ahead of implementation once a GP
is selected, and formation of local beneficiary committees will follow (instead of the
reverse which is often the normal practice elsewhere).
  #      Concessional capital cost sharing arrangements for vulnerable groups: Based on
feedback from the predecessor Jalanidhi-I project, concessional capital cost sharing rules
will be applicable to other vulnerable groups such as scheduled castes and coastal fishers
(this arrangement was previously in place only for tribal populations).
  #      Sustainability monitoring: The project will have a continuous system of
sustainability and outcome monitoring. Under this arrangement all completed schemes
will be subject to one round of sustainability monitoring by an independent team and, in
subsequent years, a sample of schemes would be picked up each year (in addition to the
full number of schemes completed in the year in question).
  #      Peer-to-peer monitoring: The project will facilitate monitoring among peers (GP
to GP; BG to BG) on a pilot basis, with a view to later scaling this up. Experience from
other projects has shown that such approaches are of immense value, not just for
monitoring but for capacity building as well. Once developed, such approaches can be
used by the government for other sectors as well.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Environment: The main stakeholders for this project are: (i) the citizens residing in the
jurisdiction of the GPs covered by the project; (ii) Water Resources Department/GOK
officials; (iii) KRWSA technical staff/officials; (iv) line department tTechnical
staff/officials; (v) Support Organizations including NGOs; (vi) advisory groups; (vii) GP
members and beneficiary communities; and (viii) project staff/officials. The mechanism
for consultation was as follows:

 Focused Group Discussions: Stakeholder feedback and suggestions were sought on the
EMF through stakeholder consultations during its preparation. Field visits and focus
group discussions were undertaken in 14 GPs in nine districts.

 Public Consultation Workshops: Final disclosure workshop was held in
Thiruvananthapuram on June 14, 2011, and was attended by a cross-section of the public
and officials from several state government departments. The draft final EA/EMF was
presented at this workshop and comments were recorded and incorporated into the
EA/EMF report.

 Disclosure: It is proposed to disclose the finalized EA/EMF in the following two ways
prior to appraisal: (i) displaying them on GOK#s KRWSA and LGSD websites and at the
Bank#s Infoshop; and (ii) translating the executive summary into the local language
(Malyalam) and displaying it prominently in all district libraries in Kerala. In addition,
the report will be distributed to all the district collectors. Access to a copy of the full
EA/EMF will be provided to interested individuals on request.

 Social:

 The social assessment process involved consultations with all key stakeholders
communities (tribals, vulnerable groups, women), GP functionaries and existing
functional beneficiary groups.

  Project implementation will be a transparent and collaborative process with key
stakeholders. The project design is based on demand responsive approaches with capital
cost sharing requirements and responsibility for O&M by communities. This requires full
ownership and acceptance by all user groups. Facilitation mechanisms have been built in
through services of support organizations. Systematic IEC and capacity building
measures have been nuilt in the project design to ensure stakeholder engagement right
from planning phase to implementation and beyond.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?          Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                          07/14/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             07/14/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              08/09/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 07/11/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             07/11/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              08/09/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                   Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed      Yes
  and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
  OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
  Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   Yes
  been carried out?
  Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           Yes
  constraints?
  Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        N/A
  provisions for certification system?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s          Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project      Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the              Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name                           Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Martin P. Gambrill                           08/09/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Priti Kumar                                  08/09/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Ramachandran R. Mohan                        08/09/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Sanjay Srivastava                            08/16/2011
  Comments: cleared. See email dt 08/16/2011 for details.
Sector Manager:                     Mr Songsu Choi                                  08/16/2011
  Comments: em filed in WBdocs
