                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                              Report No.: AC6252


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/20/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: India                               Project ID: P122770
Project Name: Uttar Pradesh Water Sector Restructuring Project Phase 2
Task Team Leader: Winston Yu
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 20, 2012 Estimated Board Date: July 31, 2012
Managing Unit: SASDA                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (35%);General water, sanitation and flood protection
sector (25%);Crops (25%);Agricultural extension and research (15%)
Theme: Other rural development (25%);Water resource management (25%);Rural
services and infrastructure (25%);Administrative and civil service reform (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            800.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
                                                                          0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Uttar Pradesh Water Sector Restructuring
Project (UPWSRP) Phase II is to:

 1. Assist the GoUP in strengthening its institutional and policy framework for integrated water
resources management for the entire State; and
 2. Enable farmers in targeted irrigated areas to increase their agricultural productivity and water
use efficiency.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
Component A: Strengthening of Apex Water Institutions and Inter-Sector Coordination ($15M)

 Component A1: Operationalizing the State Water Regulator
 The Uttar Pradesh Water Management and Regulatory Commission (UPWAMREC) has been
created under an Act (2008) passed by the legislative assembly. Functions of this ’Regulator’
include, inter alia, approving the Integrated State Water Basin Plans, determining the allocation
and distribution of entitlements for various uses of water (e.g. urban, agriculture, energy) as
defined by the State Water Policy, reviewing and providing clearances to new water resources
project, establishing a system of enforcement, monitoring, and measurement of entitlements,
promoting better water management techniques and setting water supply standards, fixing and
regulating a water tariff system, and to aid and advise the State Government on any matter
referred to the Commission. This component will build the capacity of the UPWAMREC to
implement the power, functions, and duties of the Commission. This will include primarily
training, a panel of experts, and various workshops and study tours.

 Component A2: Strengthening the Knowledge Basin and Analytical Capacity for Integrated
Water Resources Management

 The State Water Resources Agency (SWARA) and the State Water Resources Data and
Analysis Center (SWARADAC) have been created and are functional. These two agencies
support the UPWAMREC. The function of SWARA is to develop and provide State-level inter-
sectoral analysis on water allocation, planning, and management for the optimal use of surface
and groundwater uses. The function of SWARADAC is to collect, verify validate, analyze, and
store data related to water resources management for each river sub-basin in the State. This
component will improve the knowledge base and analytical capacity of these two institutions.
This will include preparing basin plans and decision support systems for the sub-basins in the
Ghagra-Gomti basin, various strategic studies, development of an ’Integrated Water Resources
Information System (IWRIS)’, strengthen the hydrologic-meteorological observation network for
the entire state, develop detailed plans for conjunctive use, and special studies for the
Bundelkhand region.

 Component B: Modernization and Rehabilitation of Irrigation and Drainage Systems ($350M)

 Component B1: Horizontal Expansion of I&D Investments

 This component will rehabilitate and modernize the irrigation and drainage system in new areas
in parts of the Sarda Sahayak System (including along the Haidergarh, Barabanki, and Dariyabad
Branches) and for select basins in the drought-prone Bundelkhand region (including the Ken-
Baghain Basin). The total cultivable command area will be about 500,000 hectares. The aim is
to improve the design of the system to ensure timely, assured, controlled, and measured water
delivery. This may include updating topographic and cadastral surveys in the Phase 2 areas,
updating hydrologic assessments, rehabilitation of canals, drains, and pucca structures,
introducing silt traps where technically advantageous, clarification and modernization of outlets,
SCADA and telemetry system, cross regulators as required, duckbill weirs, village road bridges,
measurement devices (e.g. flow meters), vertical drainage, and canal lining in critical areas. This
component will build upon the design features prepared in UPWSRP.

 Component B1: Vertical Extension of I&D Investments

 This component will introduce modern methods of control and operation in the UPWSRP Phase
1 areas (i.e. Jaunpur Branch) where modernization was not completed.This includes the
installation of controllable and measurable inlets to the minors (with participation of WUAs) to
provide the basis for volumetric water charges, proportional, non-adjustable water dividers
having a measurement facility for outlets to the field channels, modern measurement devices,
and SCADA and telemetry systems.

 Component C: Consolidation and Enhancement of Irrigation Department Reforms ($20M)

 Component C1: UPID Modernization and Capacity Building

 As part of UPWSRP Phase 1, a substantial training program was delivered involving over 4500
UPID participants covering topics ranging from the technical (e.g. AutoCAD, GIS, Canal-Mod,
MASSCOT) to the managerial. Almost 2000 officers were given basic computer training as the
Department was computerized and an extensive management information system (MIS) for
business processing put in place. This component will continue these capacity building efforts
including among other things training on advanced surveying techniques, GIS, modern control
and measurement approaches, computers and IT systems, exposure trips to enhance the
understanding of participatory irrigation management, and financial management. The IT
section of UPID will also be further modernized including strengthening the ISO structure and
staff, creating a centralized IT help desk, and strengthening the LAN and WAN systems across
the divisional offices. Finally, this component will also focus on improving the operation and
maintenance capacity of the department. This will be done through the development and training
on asset management and planning through the existing MIS.

 Component C2: Water Users Associations Strengthening and Development

  Under UPWSRP Phase 1, 4678 water users associations at the outlet and 421 water users
associations at the minor level have been constituted. Elections to establish executive
committees have been completed. The vision of the participatory irrigation management (PIM)
approach to irrigation water delivery (as defined in the Act on Participatory Irrigation
Management) is to build the capacity of these local associations to manage themselves the local
water distribution, assess water charges, manage finances, operate and maintain local
infrastructure, resolve conflicts, plan and operate the schedule of water, and promote greater
efficient water use. This component will support the strengthening and development of water
users associations in both the Phase 1 and new Phase 2 areas. This may include awareness
campaigns about the PIM Act, support to the election process, and training on all aspects of local
level water management and irrigation. This component will also (a) assist the GoUP in ensuring
that the UP PIM Act is effective across the State and mainstreamed in all of its activities, systems
and procedures; (b) ensure that UPID officers and staff are fully conversant with their duties and
responsibilities under the Act and (c) provide technical assistance, training and capacity building
support towards helping the State and UPID realize the stated benefits of implementation of this
Act.

 Component C3: Establishing a State-Wide Flood Management Information System (FMIS)

 Thirty percent of the State is recognized as flood prone. The eastern region is one of the worst
affected area and floods occur almost every year from the Ghagra, Rapti, and Gandak Rivers and
their tributaries. Though a large number of structural and non-structural measures have been
implemented for these areas a modern flood forecasting and early warning system is required.
The main activity is to set-up a comprehensive flood management information system (under the
SWARA) for the state. Specific tools will be developed for the Rapti Basin as a pilot. Moreover,
this component will strengthen the linkages between the SWARA/DAC and the State level
Disaster Management Authority and identify specific disaster management water-related
products.

 Component D: Enhancing Agriculture Productivity ($75M)

  Component D1: Agriculture Intensification and Diversification
  This component will focus on Phase 1 outlet command areas where improvements with
irrigation water availability and timing and support to water users associations can be packaged
with improved production practices (e.g. quality seeds, balanced used of organic and chemical
fertilizers, proper plant spacing) to improve overall productivity and increase diversification. In
these areas, a variety of demonstration programs and pilots will also be introduced. This may
include piloting pigeon-pea, mustard, green gram (moong), banana, and papaya and various
horticulture and animal husbandry practices. This may also build upon the earlier Uttar Pradesh
Diversification Agricultural Support Projects (DASP). These interventions will be sequenced
into the Phase 2 areas as water delivery systems are improved.

 Component D2: Drought-Prone Bundelkhand
 Accelerating productivity and production in the dry Bundelkhand area is a priority for the
GoUP. This component will introduce various measures to conserve water including drip and
other micro-irrigation technologies, conjunctive use, land leveling, and less water intensive seed
varieties (e.g. pulses and oilseeds).Moreover, demonstration packages will be developed to
encourage fertilizer and pesticide usage, improve seed replacement rates, increase the use of
farm machinery and equipment, and create silos and cold storage facilities to minimize post
harvest losses. These new approaches will be disseminated through awareness and training
programs, field demonstrations, and various pilots.

 Component E: Feasibility Studies and Preparation Activities for the Next Phase ($5M)

 This component will include initiating topographic surveys and environmental, social and other
assessment and preparation of feasibility studies for activities to be undertaken in the third
project in the UP Water Sector Reform Program. Lessons learned during implementation of
Phase 2 will be reflected in this preparatory work.

 Component F: Project Coordination and Monitoring ($15M)

 The existing multi-disciplinary Project Activities Core Team (PACT) will coordinate the
project activities, which span multiple Departments. This component is designed to assist the
PACT with its role in facilitating and guiding the implementation and monitoring of all project
activities, ensuring synergy and coordination amongst activities and Departments, preparing
consolidated reports and facilitating training and study tours.

D. Project location (if known)
The project has components that are state-wide (i.e. Component A: Strengthening of Apex Water
Institutions and Inter-Sector Coordination and Component C: Consolidation and Enhancement of
Irrigation Department Reforms) and physical interventions (i.e. Component B: Modernization
and Rehabilitation of Irrigation and Drainage Systems) that are targeted to rehabilitate and
modernize the irrigation and drainage system in new areas in parts of the Sarda Sahayak System
(including along the Haidergarh, Barabanki, and Dariyabad Branches) and for select basins in the
drought-prone Bundelkhand region (including the Ken-Baghain Basin). The project will also
introduce modern methods of control and operation in the UPWSRP Phase 1 areas (i.e. Jaunpur
Branch) where modernization was not completed. Agricultural productivity enhancements (i.e.
Component D) will also be introduced in both of the Phase 1 and 2 areas.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
After several years of engagement working closely with the Bank team, the PACT has built
significant capacity and knowledge about World Bank procedures at the sector (institutional risk)
and project (implementation risk) levels. This continuity with staff and management will
enhance the initial stages of project implementation.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Shankar Narayanan (SASDS)
   Mr Anupam Joshi (SASDI)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
    This policy is triggered as the proposed investments in irrigation infrastructure and water
management activities could have adverse environmental impacts. The physical works of the
project are rehabilitative in nature and therefore are not anticipated to cause any significant
adverse environmental or social impacts. Full environmental and social assessments were carried
out under Phase I and these assessments will be built upon and extended into the Phase II project
areas.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                   X
    An Environmental Assessment will determine whether the Natural Habitats policy will be
triggered or not.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                               X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                              X
    Although the project does not plan to finance any pesticides, there is a possibility of induced
impact of greater pesticide use due to increased agricultural intensification and diversification.
Hence, integrated pest management activities should be enhanced and the pest management plan
that was developed under Phase I will be expanded.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                           X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                                 X
    A social assessment will determine whether the Indigenous Peoples policy will be triggered
or not
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                  X
    Even though it is unlikely that the rehabilitation and modernization of the irrigation systems
in the UPWSRP Phase 2 Project area would call for any involuntary resettlement, this policy is
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No          TBD
triggered to provide for any such requirement that might arise and to ensure that remedial action
incorporates the requirements of OP 4.12.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                        X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                      X
    Although the project is in an international river basin (Ganges), there is not anticipated to be
any significant impact upstream or downstream on water quality or quantity given the nature of
interventions. Given the nature of this project, the OP is triggered and, according to BP 7.50, a
waiver on notification will be sought and granted similar to Phase I.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                            X


Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 06/01/2012

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The team hopes that the Environmental Social Assessment will be completed by May 2012.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                    Mr Winston Yu
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Mr Sanjay Srivastava                                                     06/16/2011
      Comments: cleared. Please share with us the ToR for ESA.
    Sector Manager:                      Mr Parmesh Shah                                                          06/20/2011
      Comments: Cleared




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
