                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/15/2011                                    Report No.: AC5281
1. Basic Project Data
Country: India                               Project ID: P105311
Project Name: West Bengal Accelerated Development of Minor Irrigation
Task Team Leader: Joop Stoutjesdijk
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 12, 2011     Estimated Board Date: October 4, 2011
Managing Unit: SASDA                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (90%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
(10%)
Theme: Water resource management (33%);Rural services and infrastructure
(33%);Rural non-farm income generation (17%);Participation and civic engagement
(17%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           125.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            125.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             50.00
                                                                        50.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to enhance agricultural production of small and
marginal farmers in the project area. This will be achieved through development of
minor irrigation (MI) schemes, strengthening community-based irrigation management,
and support to agricultural development, including provision of agricultural services,
encouraging crop diversification and use of new technologies, and creating income
generating opportunities.

3. Project Description
A. Strengthening Community-based Institutions (US$8.1 million). Development of
water users associations and other farmer organizations to assume the responsibilities for
management, operation, and maintenance of minor irrigation schemes and improved
irrigated agricultural practices. This will be achieved by assisting with their formation
and strengthening through various training and support activities.
 B. Irrigation System Development (US$235 million). Construction of about 2,400 new
minor surface water irrigation schemes (command area varying from 5 to 50 ha) and
about 2,260 new minor ground water irrigation schemes (command area varying from 20
to 36 ha). The total area to be developed under the project is about 139,000 ha,
benefiting an estimated 166,000 farm families.

 C. Agriculture Support Services (US$22.1 million). Provision of agricultural support
services in the project area to enhance productivity and diversification in agriculture.
This will involve improvements in production and water management technologies for
agriculture, horticulture, and fisheries, and more efficient and effective farm advisory
services.

 D. Project Management (US$34.8 million). Strengthening DWRID to ensure effective
project management through State and District Project Management Units; provision of
information management, and social, environmental, and fiduciary safeguard
management systems, and monitoring & evaluation and impact assessment activities.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will be implemented in 341 blocks in 18 of the 19 districts in the state (the
district of Kolkata excluded). These blocks are dispersed over all of the main four agro-
climatic zones of the state. The project intends to bring about 139,000 ha of agricultural
land under minor irrigation (about 4,660 schemes), using either surface water or ground
water. The surface flow irrigation schemes will be located mainly in the four western
districts, whereas no ground water scheme has been proposed in coastal saline zone or in
the known arsenic or fluoride affected areas. Blocks with critical or sub-critical ground
water situation will also be excluded.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Suryanarayan Satish (SASDS)
   Mr Tapas Paul (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                   X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental impacts of the individual scheme interventions are expectedly low and
limited. Therefore, the focus is on assessing impacts of a group or all of the schemes
taken together. Potential issues that have been assessed relate to: protection of natural
habitats (both protected and unprotected ones), although that is expected to be a minor
problem as almost the entire potential command area is already cultivated under rainfed
conditions; water quality related to arsenic and fluoride contamination and use of water
with significant industrial effluent content in urban fringes, again expected to be a minor
issue as blocks with known arsenic and fluoride contamination will be excluded from the
project; pest management to be strenghtened under the project's agricultural support
services component; dam safety, related to about 117 schemes where small tanks will be
developed; reducing customary and traditional access to natural resources due to source
protection in surface water schemes; and choice of construction materials, avoiding the
use of asbestos cement pipes. Overall, the assessment suggests that the project will not
have any significant adverse and/or irreversible environmental impact.

  Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered: As per the departmental practice, there are 10
types of Minor Irrigation Schemes proposed to be taken up under the project. Surface
flow schemes and small tanks practically require no land as they are installed at the fringe
of the water body and across the surface water runoff, respectively, and irrigating very
small areas. For river lift and well schemes the land requirements are very little.
Maximum requirement for any such scheme is about 0.036 acres. Moreover, it is not
necessary that the project should acquire the piece of land. Enough flexibility is available
for the choice of a land. Traditionally, land for source works are secured on a voluntary
basis, through donations. Thus, there is no need for involuntary land acquisition. Rules
for ascertaining voluntariness and that it will not impact on the livelihoods have been
agreed upon and are described in the social assessment.

 Indigenous Peoples: Identification of Tribals. In the ethnographic map of India, West
Bengal occupies an important place for it is inhabited by substantial number of tribal
communities. The tribal communities, in varying concentrations, are found almost in all
the districts of the state. Each tribe has a cultural identity of its own. The distinctiveness
of each tribe is manifested in its language, social organization, rituals and festivals, and
also in their dress pattern, adornments, and art and craft. Tribes in general live in a close
relationship with nature and depend on it for their survival. Following the Indian
Constitutional provision (Article 342), in West Bengal as many as 40 groups have been
categorized. Of these, 3 are declared as Primitive Tribal Groups. From the World Bank#s
Operational Policy (OP) 4.12 perspective, these 40 groups constitute 'indigenous peoples'.

 The tribal population in the state stands at 4.5 million. This constitutes 5.5 percent of the
total population of the state and 8 percent of the total tribal population of the country.
State wide distribution reveals that tribals inhabitate predominately in as many as 10
districts (out of a total of 18). In fact, in 6 districts, tribal population exceeds 10 percent
of the total district population. They live predominantly in the rural areas and their
social, cultural, economic, political, and historical characteristics induce not only
vulnerability, but also often renders them 'excluded' from development interventions.
While the project interventions will not affect adversely the tribals, these groups do
require special attention from the viewpoint of ensuring inclusion and equity. This
assumes further significance as Indian national constitution renders it mandatory to
safeguard the interest of tribals.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
None expected. Environmental screening and exclusion processes will be used. Ground
water monitoring in project areas will take place to avoid over-exploitation and use of
contaminated water.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
None considered. There is no feasible alternative to the proposed project. At scheme
level, project guidelines will choose carefully between surface and ground water
schemes. At scheme design level, based on relevant analysis of alternatives, use of
asbestos containing materials will be avoided in the project.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower has undertaken an Environmental Assessment through independent
consultants - the Consulting Engineering Services (India) Ltd. (CES), during 2008-2010.
The environmental assessment included detailed field investigation and community
consultations over a period of about a year (June 2008 - September 2009), which were
conducted by CES in association with an NGO - All India Council of Mass Education
and Development (AICMED). Borrower also engaged independent consultants -
WAPCOS Ltd. (India) to undertake a Hydrological Assessment, and prepared in-house
the dam safety analysis and procedures - both of which supported the EA. The
management measures recommended as part of the EMP are integrated in the planning of
the project and design of the sub-projects, as appropriate.

 The EMP includes, in addition to mitigation and management measures: (i) the
environmental screening criteria including environmental exclusion criteria, and the
description of the screening process; (ii) environmental codes of practice for the
standardized subprojects; and (iii) specimen environmental management plans for typical
sub-projects. Further, the EMP includes: (i) an environmental monitoring plan,
specifying the parameters, frequency, and responsibilities for monitoring; (ii) a plan to
conduct two independent environmental audits in the Project, at the end of the second and
the fourth year of implementation; (iii) an environmental capacity-building program,
including plans for training and exposure visits for the departmental staff, contractors and
beneficiary groups; and (iv) investments in two additional laboratories and supporting
water quality surveillance to augment the wider water quality monitoring in the state.
Adequate budget provision has been made for implementation of the EMP.
 A Social Assessment study had been done by the borrower as a part of the project
preparation. This has enabled identifying issues that merit attention in the context of
designing and implementing the project. These efforts have led to a comprehensive
Social Mitigation Plan (SMP). Broad elements of which relate to: (i) lands and (ii) tribals.
 As regards Lands, the project will not resort to any involuntary land acquisition. Lands
will be secured voluntarily, as customary, through donations. In order to make this
process of voluntary land donations transparent, the following rules shall be adopted: (i)
voluntariness shall be ascertained by the DWRID and duly documented. Under any
circumstances, the land user will not be subjected to any pressure, directly or indirectly,
to part with the land; (ii) the Department shall ensure that there shall be no significant
adverse impacts on the livelihood of the household donating the land. Preferably, the
voluntary donation should not be no more than 10 percent of the area of any holding by
the land owner. The land donated should not be more than 1,500 sq. ft.; (iii) this should
not result in any physical relocation; (iv) the land in question must be free of squatters,
encroachers, share cropping, or other claims or encumbrances; (v) the Department shall
facilitate the prospective water users in arriving at extending #gratitude# to the land
donor in lieu of the 'contribution' s/he has made. The same shall be documented and
monitored for compliance; (vi) land transfers will be complete, land title will be vested in
the Government; and (vii) provision will be made for redressal of grievances.

 Community's Gratitude. Traditionally, the prospective water users do express their
thanks to the donor with some gratuity. This may entail some cash, waving off of (part
of) the water charges, location of spout, or employment.

  Indigenous Peoples. While the project interventions will not affect adversely the tribals,
these groups do require special attention from the viewpoint of ensuring inclusion and
equity. Given this, and in accordance with the Bank's operational policy on Indigenous
Peoples (OP 4.10), a Tribal Development Plan (TDP) has been prepared with the
following objectives: (i) ensuring inclusion through selective targeting/prioritization; and
(ii) establishing anew/strengthening the existing tribal institutions to undertake irrigated
agriculture. The key elements underpinning the TDP are: (i) discriminatory targeting to
ensure inclusion and equity; (ii) defining the scope of the interventions; (iii) creating an
enabling environment - generating awareness and creating a demand; (iv) providing
capacity support and capacity building provisions; (v) moving beyond irrigation, to
support agriculture based livelihood improvements; (vi) working towards convergence, of
all programs/projects; and (vii) focus on gender.

 As part of the preparation studies, a block-wise list of tribal concentrated villages for the
all the districts of the State was prepared, which is an original piece of work that is
expected to be of immense use in future for tribal development by both national and state
governments.

 It is customary in West Bengal for every department to set aside 6 percent of the budget
for tribal development. For this project, government has agreed to set aside up to 13
percent of the total financial outlay (US$40 million) for the TDP. With this allocation, it
is likely that the project will be able to cover over 2,000 or 50 percent of the total tribal
villages that have no irrigation facilities at the moment.

  The borrower's arrangements for implementation of the EMP include that at each
DPMU, an assistant engineer (environment) will be in-charge for implementing the EMP,
with support from a full-time environmental specialist who will ensure that all
environmental mitigation and management measures are fully implemented. At the
SPMU, a distinct environmental cell will be formed, headed by a Superintendent
Engineer, with a full-time Senior Environmental Specialist, a full-time training
coordinator, and an additional expert to work on the dam safety aspects. The
responsibility of the environmental cell of the SPMU will be to: (i) review and inspect
implementation of the EMP; (ii) review and verify the environmental screening of the
candidate schemes, including sample field verification; (iii) implementation of the
environmental capacity building and awareness activities; (iv) coordinating with relevant
departments with respect to the larger state-wide issues of water quality including heavy
metal, arsenic and fluoride contamination; water efficiency, reducing energy use in
irrigation, promoting renewable energy in irrigation, integrated pesticide and nutrition
management; and (v) managing the environmental audit process.

 At State level a social specialist in the SPMU will ensure that social development plans
are in conformity with the project's social mitigation plan, and that necessary guidance
and budget is provided to implement these plans.

 At the district level DPMUs will ensure that the scheme development plans will include
social management plans, as needed, in conformity with the Environment Management
Framework,Social Mitigation Plan and Tribal Development Plan. The district level social
specialists will ensure proper planning, implementation and monitoring of these activities
at the district level, and also coordinate with the SPMU on these issues.

 At the scheme level, the focal point for organization and implementation will be the
WUA to which all command area farmers and other eligible users such as fishermen will
belong. The WUA will be expected to play an active role in the planning and operation
and maintenance of schemes. Each WUA will have an Executive Committee and
provisions exist to constitute specific sub-committees for finance, works and water
management.

 Non-government support organizations, to be recruited by the project as per selection
criteria agreed with the Bank, will facilitate community mobilization, participation, and
institutional strengthening of the community based institutions. Each SO team,
consisting of staff with expertise in community mobilization, technical works, and
agriculture, will be assigned a cluster of schemes in a district, and will be responsible for
building capacities of WUAs.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
As part of the EA and SA, stakeholder consultations were organized at state and district
levels. At both levels, participants at the consultation sessions included policy makers,
representatives of the Zila Parishads, senior officers from line government departments,
relevant government corporations and autonomous agencies, non-government
organizations, individual experts, and farmers. The important agreements coming out of
these state and district level consultations were integrated in the design of the project.
Following the state and district level consultations, the EA and SA consultants selected
30 sample #blocks#, and organized a number of field level consultation sessions during
October, 2008 to March, 2009. This included, among others, poor and marginal farmers,
women, scheduled caste and scheduled tribe people, local government and DWRID
officials, and elected members of the village panchayats, participated in each of these 30
consultation sessions. Similar people were consulted during the field surveys. These
consultations were supplemented by site visits (to existing minor irrigation infrastructure)
and the focus group discussion with select stakeholders groups.

 In addition to the public and stakeholders consultations undertaken as part of the EA and
SA, the project has engaged stakeholders, including project-affected people, to discuss
different aspects of the project over the last three years. DWRID has organized
community meetings, meetings with village elders and elected leaders of the villages.

 Disclosure: All environmental and social reports as well as the tribal development plan
have been disclosed in the Project website [www.wbadmip.org] on December 9, 2010.
The full EA and SA reports and their Executive Summary were disclosed at all 18 district
headquarters in the State, where the project will be implemented. The availability of
these documents and the location of the disclosure centers were advertized in local
newspapers (leading English and Bengali dailies) between December 24 and 27, 2010. A
complete set of the documents was also disclosed in the Bank#s Info Shop in Washington
DC on April 21, 2011. Finally, the summary reports have been distributed to the Bank#s
Board of Executive Directors on May 27, 2011.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                      11/24/2010
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  12/09/2010
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                   04/21/2011
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                  05/27/2011
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/24/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/09/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/21/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/24/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/09/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/21/2011
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
Pest management plan is incorporated in EA document.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    No
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
  Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                           No
  Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts      N/A
  (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
  Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements        N/A
  been made for public awareness and training?
  OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
  Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         Yes
  If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           Yes
  requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
  to the RVP prepared and sent?
  Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        Yes
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Joop Stoutjesdijk                         08/31/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Tapas Paul                                09/01/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Suryanarayan Satish                       09/02/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Mr Sanjay Srivastava                           09/02/2011
  Comments: Cleared
Sector Manager:                   Mr Simeon Kacou Ehui                           09/15/2011
  Comments: Cleared by email to TTL
