                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/31/2012                                       Report No.: AC6784
1. Basic Project Data
Country: India                                Project ID: P090585
Project Name: Punjab State Road Sector Project
Task Team Leader: Benedictus Eijbergen
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 30, 2006       Estimated Board Date: December 5, 2006
Managing Unit: SASDT                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (96%);Sub-national government
administration (2%);Other social services (2%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (33%);HIV/AIDS
(17%);Injuries and non-communicable diseases (17%);Administrative and civil service
reform (17%);Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (16%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           250
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                    157.30
                                                                     157.30
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project's overall development objective (PDO) is to improve operating conditions of
State roads for road users in Punjab, thus helping to provide the business enabling
environment necessary to support Punjab's economic development strategy.
 The PDO will be achieved by increasing the service levels of the State roads through:
(a) eliminating the growing bottlenecks in the network; (b) increasing vehicle speeds by
providing additional geometric capacity; (c) reducing transport costs by reducing road
roughness; and (d) strengthening GOP's capacity to plan and manage the network.

 The outcome indicators include: (a) increased vehicle speeds; (b) reduction of highway
network in poor or bad condition/reduced pavement roughness; (c) improved user
satisfaction with the Punjab road sector; and (d) adequate road maintenance for network
sustainability. The project will also assist in the greater participation of the private sector
in the development, maintenance and management of the road network, long-term
contract maintenance and stakeholder consultation.
 The Project Development Objective remains unchanged in the proposed project
restructuring of PSRSP.

3. Project Description
A Sector Investment Loan had been proposed in 2006 to finance specific road
investments and achieve targeted changes in the organization, management and financing
of the sector. The original project had two components:

 (a) Component 1: Road Upgrading, Rehabilitation and Periodic Maintenance, funding a
combination of road upgrading/widening of about 153 km of roads, rehabilitation/
strengthening of about 204 km of roads, and periodic maintenance of about 463 km in
Phase I and upgrading and rehabilitation of about 500 km including accident Black spot
improvement under Phase II of works.

 (b) Component 2: Institutional Strengthening, which included the following: (i) E-
governance and e-procurement; (ii) Computerization of the PWD, Geographical
information system and traffic data collection systems; (iii) Training; (iv) Road Safety;
(v) HIV/AIDS; and (vi) Preparation of PPP contracts.
 Project Restructuring: The restructuring proposal purports a 5 year loan extension for
the Punjab State Road Sector Project (PSRSP) from the original closing date of June 5,
2012. An interim extension of 3 months has been obtained for the period of June 5, 2012
to September 5, 2012. This extension of five years is required to undertake activities as
part of PSRSP Phase II comprising of civil works to upgrade and maintain 204 km of
State Highways network. This network includes six road sections under different
categories (State Highways, Major District Roads and Other District Roads). The civil
works to be carried out as Phase II of the project will be undertaken on Output and
Performance Based Road Contracts (OPRC). Through this innovative demonstration
project, the Govt. of Punjab is demonstrating their commitment towards developing a
modern, high service quality highway network.

 The Output- and Performance-based contracting for roads is designed to increase the
efficiency and effectiveness of road asset management and maintenance. It ensures that
the physical condition of the roads under contract is adequate for the needs of road users,
over the entire period of the contract which is normally several years. This type of
contract significantly expands the role of the private sector, from the simple execution of
works to the management and conservation of road assets.

 The proposed changes do not have any implications to the Project Development
Objective. The revised components will continue to ensure the project continues to meet
the Project Development Objective of improving operating conditions of State Roads for
Road Users, in a sustainable way, thus helping to provide the business enabling
environment necessary to support Punjab's economic development strategy.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project is located in Punjab, a state in north-western part of India. Punjab is a state
endowed with rich culture, tradition, religion and acknowledged for its self-dependence,
self-reliance and glory. It is bound on the west by Pakistan, on the north by Jammu and
Kashmir, on the north-east by Himachal Pradesh and on the South by Haryana and
Rajasthan.
 The state is sub-divided into three parts namely Malwa, Majha and Doaba. Malwa
region constitutes majority of the region in the state and comprises of cities like
Ludhiana, Patiala, Bhatinda and Mohali, whereas Majha embrace modern districts of
Amritsar, Gurdaspur and Tarn Taran. The third region, Doaba, is one of the most fertile
regions of the world and was the centre of the Green Revolution in India, includes biggest
cities such as Jalandhar, Hoshiarpur, Nawansher and Phagwara.

 It is one of the fastest developing states in India. The state has posted a steady growth
during the last decade. The average real GSDP of the state has grown at around 8 percent
during the last decade (FY02-FY11), and has increased by more than two-fold.

  Punjab is predominantly an agrarian state and more than 60 percent of the population
lives in rural area. It is widely acknowledged as the "Granary of India". Since the land is
fertile and is free from physical undulation, agriculture has been undertaken very
profitable in the state. Although, the state receives scanty rainfall, five major rivers
flowing through the state provide respite. The state contributes a considerable share in
national food grain production and thereby aids in ensuring the national food security.
Major crops grown in the state include wheat, paddy and sugarcane. The main fruits
grown in state are kinnow, orange, mango, grapes and guava and it is undertaking special
efforts to increase cultivation of cotton, maize, oilseeds and pulses as well. Fodder crops
like jowar and bajra are also cultivated.
  Industrial growth in recent years has been a major contributor to the state's economy. A
good infrastructural framework namely connectivity by road, rail and air has paved way
for industrial prosperity. Punjab has mix of industries such as agro-based industries (food
products, food processing and beverages), textiles, leather products, wood products,
chemicals and chemical products, rubber and plastic products, non-metallic mineral
products, paper products, engineering and sports goods, chemicals, handicrafts, and
manufacturing of transport equipments.

 With the rich agricultural base to its credit, rice remains the prominent export item from
the state. Other major principal exports items from the state are ready made garments and
hosiery, engineering goods, sports goods and yarn and textile, hand tools. Ludhiana,
Amritsar and Jalandhar accounts maximum share in the state's exports.

  The state is abound with rich cultural tradition and heritage coupled with an over-all
good infrastructure, which makes the state, one of the favorable destination by domestic
and international tourists. Tourism is one of the prominent sectors of the state and there
lies immense potential to promote traditional tourism.
 The state has performed reasonably well with a very small proportion of people living
below poverty line and literacy rate of the state is higher than the national literacy levels.
However, the unemployment situation is critical and needs to be addressed with more
investment in creating job oriented education system.

 Roads are the major mode of transportation services available in Punjab. The state has
an extensive 60,881 km network of roads comprising of 1749 km of national highways,
1479 km of state highways, 2112 kms of major district roads, 4482 km of other district
roads and 51,059 km of village link roads. Several initiatives and road upgrading projects
have been/are being undertaken by the state.

  The proposed road improvement works under the project include up-grading of road
links, which are of single/intermediate lane width with high traffic levels causing
congestion. The proposed works also consist of widening of existing roads to two lane
(7m) with paved shoulders including strengthening of existing pavement, junction
improvements, bridge widening/reconstruction and improving the current geometry of the
alignment.

 The rehabilitation works would mostly be carried out on two lane roads, which will be
maintained at the existing lane configuration with addition of 1.5m hard shoulders and
strengthening of the existing pavement. There is no major geometric improvement
involved; however the culverts/bridges are proposed to be widened for the safety reasons
to suit the increased pavement width. The road links requiring periodic maintenance
would involve works of overlay without any widening or geometric improvement.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Mridula Singh (SASDS)
   Ms Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                             X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                         X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                            X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                             X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                      X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Issues/Impacts: The project has contributed and will continue to support
economic growth both locally in the project area and at the regional level by removing
barriers created due to poor road infrastructure. The project is expected to have positive
impacts in terms of providing better connectivity and improved access to population to
more advanced socio-economic centers. Benefit will accrue from the savings in travel
time and transportation costs. Other expected positive outcome of the project includes
improved road safety through the various interventions planned and integrated in the
design of roads.

 The restructuring of the project has no incremental or additional adverse environmental
impacts since primarily the proposition relates to a five-year extension of the closing date
of the original project and use of Output and Performance Based Road Contracts (OPRC)
for upgrading and maintenance of 204 km of state highway network. The changes
proposed do not alter the environment category of the project (PSRSP) or trigger new
safeguard policies, and no waivers of Bank policies are needed.

 By and large, the environmental issues identified for the original project remain relevant
for the restructured project as the nature of physical interventions remain unchanged.

  Similar to issues associated with widening and strengthening of works carried out under
the original project, the civil works as proposed under OPRC component are likely to
create some adverse environmental impacts, particularly in road corridors that require
land beyond the existing right of way (RoW) or that beyond the existing carriageway
width, such as in the case some road links that were taken-up for up-grading/widening in
the original project and now similar works are being proposed under the OPRC
component. The direct, indirect and induced adverse impacts resulting from such civil
works may cause some adverse environmental impacts in the project area, if not
addressed properly. The environmental screening conducted for the OPRC network
indicates that the proposed works may have adverse impacts on protected forest areas
(linear plantation areas along the road declared as 'protected') through which the road
corridors traverse.

 There may be some other likely adverse impacts due to: (i) unavoidable felling of
roadside trees; (ii) impairment to or worsening of the local drainage situations, due to
improperly designed and built road works; (iii) unavoidable conversion of some fertile
agricultural land to right of way and road carriageway; (iv) the potential for poorly
planned or managed development induced by the improved highway, especially close to
sites of religious importance; (v) possible impacts on water bodies and water resources
used by the people, such as community ponds, canals, streams and hand pumps; (vi)
possible impacts on sensitive receptors such as educational institutions, hospitals,
colleges and religious sites such as Gurudwaras; (vii) construction related impacts on
material sources of earth, sand and aggregates; dust from the haul roads; pollution from
the plants and machinery in addition to issues such as occupational health and safety of
workers, road side residents and road users.

 While no significant and irreversible environmental impacts are envisaged on account of
the project, the issues listed here need to be addressed and managed appropriately during
the design, construction and operation stages of the project.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The proposed construction activities related to the upgrading, rehabilitation and
maintenance works, both under the standard form of contracting or under the OPRC
system, do not anticipate adverse long-term environmental impacts. With properly
designed road improvement interventions, it is anticipated that some local drainage
problems will be resolved, and road safety would be improved. However, on the drainage
front particularly, the lessons that have emerged from the original project need to be kept
in mind to avoid unwarranted health and environmental concerns.

  It is expected that a better managed network will boost economic growth in the areas
surrounding the road links and property development is expected to follow from such
improvement. Poor management of this development may create negative impacts in the
medium term, by way of encouraging ribbon development. Co-ordination is essential
with the other line agencies such as Department of Forest, Irrigation, Revenue and
Ground Water during the design, construction and operation period of the project to
ensure that sensitive receptors like Gurudwaras, schools, colleges and health centers that
dot the roadsides can benefit from an increased but safe access, while being protected
from adverse impacts of improvements to the road close to these sites.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
In the original project, for short by-passes at Gill (2.2 km) and Pohir (1.4 km) technical,
cost, social and environmental considerations were all factored into the decision on the
final alignment. Likewise, during the detailed feasibility studies, EIA and SIA
preparation, cross-sectional, structural and geometric design alternatives were considered.
The factors which have influenced the designs of various components of the road
improvements include resettlement, tree cutting, loss of arable land vis-à-vis the traffic-
carrying performance and safety of the roads, and impacts on cultural properties. As far
as feasible, concentric widening has been suggested in the built up stretches to minimize
impacts on properties and land acquisition.
  The design interventions now proposed under the OPRC component of the project
would largely involve widening and improvement of the selected roads along the existing
alignment only.

 Network alternatives have been investigated before selection of the proposed road links
for inclusion under the OPRC component. Options and process requirements (based on
similar principles as prescribed in the original project) have been prescribed in the
Environment and Social Management Framework prepared for this purpose.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental Safeguard Policy Issues and their Management.
 Approach: To help design and implement the restructured project in an environmentally
sustainable manner, the following steps were followed: (i) environment screening study
was carried out to identify key environmental issues on the proposed road links; (b)
assessment of impacts was carried out in the context of various types of engineering
interventions that would be executed under the OPRC contract; (iii) an Environment
Management Framework, based on findings from the first two steps, was prepared to
create the structure within which the Employer, Monitoring Consultant and Contractors
will operate to design, implement and operate a project with due considerations to
environment, health and safety aspects and; (iv) a codes of practice was prepared to serve
as a detailed guidance document for dealing with specific key environmental
activities/aspects.
 The management framework developed specifically for the OPRC component requires
the contracting entity to take all necessary measures and precautions to ensure that the
execution of the works and all associated operations on-site or off-site are carried out in
conformity with the statutory and regulatory environmental requirements and as per the
requirements prescribed in the Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF).

 The framework specifically provides for mechanisms to address construction-stage
impacts such as: (a) air and noise pollution, dust from material transport, crushers and
asphalt plants; (b) water and soil pollution from spills of fuel, lubricants and construction
camp wastes; (d) operation and rehabilitation of borrow pits, quarries and construction
camps; (e) traffic safety and management; and (f) worker's health and safety. Avoidance
or minimization of negative impacts on trees, land, water bodies, religious properties,
utilities and road-side communities is being addressed through realignment/design
alterations, incorporation of safety, enhanced junction treatments and other provisions.
Examples of other mitigation measures included in the ESMF cover noise restrictions at
sensitive sites, prevention measures against siltation, restriction on the sitting of crushers
and asphalt plants and slope protection. All of these requirements have been
comprehensively included in the bidding document for the OPRC component.

 The ESMF primarily consists of nine (9) key elements or steps. An outline of these
steps, including the responsibility for implementing the same, is given below:
 •      Step 1 A: Environmental Screening (Contracting Entity)
 (requirement to follow further step/s would depend on the results of the screening
exercise)
 •      Step 1 B: Environment Baseline Data Collection and Mapping (Contracting
Entity)
 •      Step 2: Study OPRC intervention proposals for each link to identify and scope out
environment issues (Contracting Entity)
 •      Step 3: Assess Applicable Policy and Regulatory Framework (Contracting Entity)
 •      Step 4: Environment Impact Assessment (EA) (Contracting Entity)
 •     Step 5: Stakeholder Consultation Process (Monitoring Consultant on behalf of
Employer)
 •     Step 6: Formulate Environmental Management Plan (Contracting Entity)
 •     Step 7: Implement EMP and RAP (Contracting Entity)
 •     Step 8: Self-Assess Environmental Performance (Contracting Entity)
 •     Step 9: Environment Performance Assessment by Employer (Monitoring
Consultant on behalf of Employer)

 The contracting entity's design proposal and Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
(among other documents) would be approved in writing by the Employer prior to the
commencing of any physical work. Specific EMP/s applicable at link-level would be
prepared for major interventions such as improvement and widening proposals by using
the process elements briefly mentioned above and described comprehensively in the
ESMF.

 As part of the environment management process, the contracting entity needs to assess
and identify applicable environmental policy and regulatory requirements for the
identified OPRC intervention. If this is properly planned and pursued, the
contract/proposed civil works will not be held up for lack or delay in obtaining regulatory
clearances. Any delay in obtaining clearances will affect the overall performance of the
Contracting Entity, potentially leading to contractual penalties and other legal issues. In
fact, the proposed interventions are to be planned/framed within the ambit of applicable
regulatory norms and the over-all time that such processes usually take. To assist the
Contracting Entity, a regulatory clearance matrix along with typical time schedule for
obtaining each clearance has been collated and presented in the ESMF.

 Implementation Arrangements for Environmental Safeguards. The OPRC as a model for
road asset management is similar to Design, Build, Maintain, Operate and Transfer
(DBMOT) model of contracts which addresses the issue of inadequate incentives. A
lump-sum periodic remuneration paid to the Contractor will cover all physical and non-
physical services provided by the Contractor, except for unforeseen emergency works
which are remunerated separately. In order to be entitled to these periodic payments, the
Contractor must ensure that the roads under contract comply with the Service Levels
which have been specified in the bidding document. It is possible that during some
months he will have to carry out a rather large amount of physical works in order to
comply with the required Service Levels and very little work during other months.
However, his periodic payment remains the same as long as the required Service Levels
are complied with.

 For the project as a whole, PRBDB, as employer will have the over-all responsibility for
adequate provision of the personnel and resources required to supervise and monitor the
contract, including its environmental compliance requirements. The role of the Road
Administration and of the Employer is to enforce the contract by verifying compliance
with the agreed Service Levels and with all applicable legislation and regulations. The
Design Standards and Specifications shall be recommended by the Project Manager and
meet at least the minimum specified design standards. The bidder can propose higher
standards if it serves better his optimal Programming for the project designed for 10 years
period.

 As part of this process, services of a Monitoring Consultant will be hired to routinely
assess environmental performance. This assessment would be made against specific
performance indicators, which have been listed as part of specifications in the bid
document. The assessment will form part of routine and other inspections as necessary
and will form the basis of payments to be made to the contracting entity. The
Environment Officer in the PRBDB team will provide specific support for: (a)
coordinating issues pertaining to regulatory clearances from the concerned GoI/GoP
Departments; (b) supervise the performance of monitoring consultant and; (c) monitor
preparation of various environmental studies and implementation of the EMPs by the
contracting entity. The PRBDB will share with the Bank quarterly reports on
environment supervision and monitoring reports.

 On the contracting entity's part, the EMP preparation would include the allocation of
appropriate manpower and material resources to implement the said plan and an internal
monitoring and supervision mechanism as part of the contracting entity's over-all contract
management system. A matrix showing the monitoring mechanism delineating the roles
and responsibilities for implementing various activities has been developed and included
in the ESMF. The contractor is responsible for designing and carrying out the works,
services and actions he believes are necessary in order to achieve and maintain the
Service Levels stated in the contract. The Service Levels are defined from a road user's
perspective and from a strength of the pavement point of view and may include factors
such as, riding comfort, safety features, residual strength of pavement, etc. If the Service
Level is not achieved in any given month, the payment for that month may be reduced or
even suspended.

 The Contractor will be responsible for the detailed design of the rehabilitation and other
consequent phases included in the life-span of the project (the Contractor is not entitled to
any payment for the design). This type of contract makes it necessary for the Contractor
to have a good management capacity. Here, management means the capability to define,
optimize and carry out on a timely basis the physical interventions which are needed in
the short, medium and long term, in order to guarantee that the roads remain above the
agreed Service Levels.

 Borrower's Capacity: By and large, the Employer's performance has been satisfactory in
implementing the environment management and safeguard requirements of the original
project. Several systematic training programmes have helped in creating substantial level
of awareness and understanding on environmental issues and ways to address these on
the ground. However, one specific area of improvement requiring attention pertains to
handling 'drainage issues' – this has not been properly handled in the original projec
(pointed out on several occasions during the missions) and required course correction in
some cases. Also, the over-all performance of the Supervision Consultant (on up-grading
works in particular) with regard to supervision and monitoring of environment, health
and safety aspects has been unsatisfactory. Keeping this experience in mind, there will be
a need to closely examine and regularly scrutinize the performance of the Monitoring
Consultant.

 Training and orientation programs will be conducted for field level staff of PWD,
Contractors and other stakeholders to enhance their understanding on dealing with OPRC
form of contracting system and the effective implementation of ESMF prepared for this
component – this capacity building will specifically focus on issues like 'drainage', which
have been identified as a weak area. This will include on-site training and exposure as
well, specifically on the OPRC component.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultation: The project preparation process has involved public consultation at various
stages, including screening and scoping. The public consultation carried out at the
screening and ESMF preparation stages includes personal interviews, village meetings,
focus group discussions, consultations with experts and local NGOs. The consultations
involved the rural, semi-urban and urban population along the project roads. The
consultations were designed such that: (1) links between communities and their natural
resource base adjacent to project locations were explored; (2) public awareness and
information sharing on the project process was promoted and; (3) views of the
communities on local issues were solicited. The main concerns highlighted by people
living along project roads related to high road accident rates; compensation and
resettlement and rehabilitation issues; disturbances to cultural property including shrines,
water sources; roadside drainage; employment; traffic congestion; and air and noise
pollution. The feedback from stakeholder consultations has been useful in designing the
Environment and Social Management Framework for the OPRC component. The
requirement for regular consultations during detailed design preparation, EIA/SIA and
EMP/RAP preparation by the contracting entity has also been built into the ESMF
process.

 Disclosure: All safeguard documents, including Final Resettlement and Rehabilitation
Policy for the project; Environment and Social Screening Reports; EIAs, SIAs, EMPs,
and RAPs for rehabilitation and up-grading works (for works carried out under original
project scope) and ESMF for the OPRC component have been disclosed in the Bank's
InfoShop and PRBDB's website.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                       03/13/2006
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                   05/20/2006
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                    03/21/2006
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                   03/22/2006
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  06/16/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              05/20/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               06/12/2006
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                 Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)             Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the             Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?               Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential             Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   N/A
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           N/A
constraints?
  Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include     No
  provisions for certification system?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Benedictus Eijbergen                      08/17/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra                 08/17/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Mridula Singh                             08/17/2012
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Parthapriya Ghosh                         08/17/2012
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Sanjay Srivastava                         08/22/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Simon David Ellis                         08/30/2012
  Comments:
