                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 02/02/2012                                  Report No.: AC6334
1. Basic Project Data
Country: India                                Project ID: P118445
Project Name: India: Secondary Education Project
Task Team Leader: Tobias Linden
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 24,         Estimated Board Date: February 14, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: SASED                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Secondary education (100%)
Theme: Education for all (65%);Education for the knowledge economy (35%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            500
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                       12,306.00
         UK: British Department for International Development (DFID) 90.00
                                                                  12,396.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to help India to achieve increased and more
equitable access to good quality secondary education through support of the
Government’s ongoing program for secondary education as delineated in the Rashtriya
Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA) Framework.

3. Project Description
The project would support all activities detailed in the RMSA Framework, for which
financial and technical norms have been determined (IDA: US$500 million; DFID
US$90 million; GoI US$12,306 million). The Bank’s support is being provided through a
Sector Wide Approach, so there are no separate components, but this section describes
the different types of activities which will be supported with the Framework. RMSA
represents a systemic shift in the way secondary education is planned, managed and
financed in India.

 Activities focusing on improving the quality of secondary education will be built around
the Quality Framework within RMSA, which has recently been developed by NCERT in
collaboration with the World Bank, DFID and the European Union. This Framework
provides guidance to States on the types of interventions which may be funded through
the RMSA program which improve quality. Interventions are identified at the school,
district, State and national levels. Activities include:

 •       Appointment of some 100,000 additional teachers (following a teacher
rationalization exercise in some States).
 •       In-service teacher professional development for all teachers working in
government and private aided secondary schools, using th new pedagogical techniques
set out in the new National Curriculum Framework and being adopted in each State.
 •       Building the capacity of local institutions, such as Block and Cluster Centres, to
support quality improvement in schools and develop professional development networks
at the local level
 •       Participating in the OECD Programme for International Student Assessment in
2012 and 2015, with up to 10 States.
 •       Provision of libraries and books, science laboratories and laboratory consumables,
computer laboratories, etc.

 Activities focusing on improving equitable access to good quality secondary education
are blended throughout the RMSA Framework, which provides additional funding for
disadvantaged districts and States as well as specific programs to reach disadvantaged
groups. Most importantly, the activities focused on quality will increase the attraction of
going to and staying in school. For example, culturally-sensitive textbooks, and lessons
on child-friendly, environment-friendly, and technology-enhanced schools are being
integrated into RMSA planning. Funding is also provided for the expansion, repair and
renovation of about 60,000 existing government secondary schools, upgrading
approximately 44,000 upper primary schools into secondary schools, and opening of
approximately 11,000 new secondary and senior secondary schools. These new and
renovated schools are mainly in underserved areas, based on school mapping exercises
and data from the Secondary Education Management Information System (SEMIS).
SEMIS tracks disadvantaged children for every school in the country and submission of
SEMIS data is a requirement for accessing RMSA resources.

  Activities focused on improving accountability of secondary education involve
strengthening existing and developing new mechanisms. School Management
Development Committees (SMDCs), which represent the different stakeholders in the
school community, are charged with oversight of the school—and have particular roles in
managing civil works contracts (a successful practice under SSA), monitoring teacher
attendance and ensuring all children attend school. SMDCs will receive training to
perform their roles more effectively, especially responsibility for monitoring quality and
tracking money at the school level. Monitoring, evaluation and research is provided
through a dedicated portion (currently 2 percent but expected shortly to increase to 6
percent) of RMSA funding, which States can use to investigate particular issues and
policies of concern to them. The analysis and dissemination of better quality and more
complete information will feed back into policy making.
 Finally, there will also be activities focused on developing innovative approaches to
secondary education, under the innovation component of the RMSA program. The
objective is to identify cost-effective innovations that improve access, equity, quality and
management in secondary education at the State or sub-State level, and which can
subsequently be scaled up at the national level through their inclusion into the RMSA
Framework as it evolves.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
India, country-wide. While the overall secondary education gross enrollment rate (GER)
stands at approximately 50 percent, the GERs of tribal children and other disadvantaged
groups in most areas of the country are lower. Physical access to schools is unequal
because of difficult terrain and dispersed settlements in tribal areas. Over-all, around one-
third of villages are more than 5 km from a lower secondary school and alternative
approaches to access (such as transport and distance learning) are rarely used. The
situation is worse in tribal areas. Further, many poor tribal (and other) households cannot
afford the direct and opportunity costs of secondary education. India’s size and diversity
in terms of languages, culture, religion and caste calls for secondary education to cater to
students from different backgrounds and enable them to learn together, well and equally.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Meera Chatterjee (SASDS)
   Ms Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Key Environmental Issues: The RMSA as it currently stands, particularly in terms of
what is specified for financing, is primarily designed for expanding ‘access’ to secondary
school education. The program gives priority to creation and strengthening of physi
infrastructure. As per current estimates, this involves creation/upgrading of nearly 11,200
buildings and strengthening/renovation of about 44,000 schools across the country. While
the RMSA framework seeks to bridge the current gap in infrastructure requirements,
there is not much emphasis on the need and ways to create and maintain a sustainable/
environment friendly school campus.
  While, in general, the nature of activities proposed under the programme does not pose
large scale or significant environmental risks, there are some environmental concerns
associated with activities such as civil works involving new construction/expansion/
repair of buildings. More so, pressure on already stressed basic facilities in the school
campus with introduction of new building blocks/classrooms is likely to increase. In
addition, issues pertaining to health and safety need attention and are directly related to
creation and maintenance of a clean and safe learning and teaching environment, which
ultimately help in achieving the programme objectives.
  On the whole, the key environmental issues are associated with the project have been
categorized into the following categories: (i) site planning and design related
(location/site planning/ accessibility/building design); (ii) maintenance of buildings and
associated services; (iii) resource management (energy/water etc.) and; (iv) health and
safety (linked to sanitation, potable water availability, hygiene, fire safety and disaster
response).
  Social Safeguards: O.P. 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples (Scheduled Tribes, STs) is
triggered. As the project covers tribal areas and people, a key need is to ensure program
benefits to them. An Equity Action Plan (EAP) has been prepared to achieve positive
impacts on them, and provide a framework for free, prior and informed consultations
with tribal communities to seek broad community support prior to initiating any
construction activities in areas where they are present. Broadly, the project aims to
benefit tribal children by: opening of new secondary schools in underserved tribal areas;
professional development of tribal teachers; provision of free textbooks; use of culturally-
sensitive and local language learning materials; capacity building of SMDCs; and
piloting innovations in community involvement. SMDCs will be responsible for ensuring
that all children are enrolled in and attend school. The SEMIS gathers data on all
disadvantaged groups including STs in each school, and will be used to assess the
effectiveness of these efforts. States and Districts will receive guidance and capacity
building to monitor the disaggregated data and use the AWP&B process to provide for
the disadvantaged groups including STs. JRMs will focus on the data and plans made for
these groups. The Results Framework includes equity-related indicators and targets
disaggregated by disadvantaged groups (e.g., elementary to secondary transition,
enrolment and completion of class X).
  O.P. 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered as no involuntary land
acquisition will be carried out in RMSA. For the construction of new schools and
expansion of existing ones, the RMSA would apply the principle of ‘Avoidance’ for land
requiring any resettlement (however minor) while obtaining land. To ensure no
significant physical displacement or adverse impact on lives or incomes, all land transfers
including voluntary donations would meet the following criteria: (i) the land would be
free of squatters, encroachers, other claims and encumbrances; (ii) to protect the poor,
land would not be accepted from anyone who is below the poverty line; (iii) any land
with disputed title and/or legal or illegal settlements would be excluded; and (iv) the
voluntary nature of the donation would be verified by the local administration. In keeping
with program principles, all sites would be selected by or be acceptable to the concerned
community. Participatory and transparent processes would be followed to obtain land for
construction in both rural and urban areas. Documentation of land transfers would be
aggregated at the district and state levels and made available to JRMs to ascertain that no
displacement (loss of residence or livelihood or community services) has taken place in
obtaining the land. In the event that any proposed construction would displace residence,
livelihood or community services (even of squatters or encroachers) from a site, that site
would not be used for construction and an alternative site would be sought. In order to
ensure that the above processes have been followed, the RMSA will carry out Joint
Monitoring and Supervision (see Environment section).

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The project is expected to have positive long-term impacts by improving the availability
of, access to, and participation in secondary education, particularly of tribal (and other
disadvantaged) children. The Equity Action Plan (EAP) provides for specific actions to
be implemented to benefit these groups. The project will monitor these actions and
benefits and take additional steps to ensure them where needed. Due in part to its wide
spread, there is a risk of the project not following agreed procedures for land transfers
including voluntary donations, and a risk of coercion in the latter. The Joint Monitoring
and Supervision planned for the project would review land transfer documentation and
carry out checks to ensure implementation of the agreed procedures, including the
conduct of free, prior and informed consultations with tribal people (see section II.A.1
above and the EAP).

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Coverage of tribal and other disadvantaged children is central to the achievement of
RMSA goals, and no alternatives were considered in this respect. Regarding, involuntary
resettlement, the alternative of allowing involuntary land acquisition was discarded in
favor of the ‘avoidance’ principle detailed in section II.A.1 above.

 To avoid and/or minimize adverse impacts related to environment, health and safety
aspects, the project supports introduction and integration of the concept of ‘greener
buildings’ in the secondary school sector of the country.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environment Management and Safeguards: Since safe, clean and sustainable
surroundings in schools is recognized as a basic pre-requisite for ensuring a conducive
learning and teaching environment, an Environmental Study for secondary school
programme has been initiated by the Ministry of Human Resource Development
(MHRD). This exercise seeks to facilitate MHRD in overcoming the deficiencies with
regard to environment, health and safety aspects in secondary schools gradually and in
introducing/ implementing the concept of ‘greener schools’. Further, the study seeks to
capture information on current practices in the field that would b used for training key
stakeholders during various stages of the programme implementation.
 In this context, the environmental study apart from reviewing and consolidating key
statutory/regulatory provisions covers assessment of existing situation/case studies
through site visits and consultation with various stakeholders. The Borrower through an
independent consultant is also carrying out this said study.

  More so, planning, development and management of the Secondary Schools involves
some important obligations, particularly those related to health and safety aspects
(including fire safety; storage and handling of chemicals in laboratories; disposal of
chemical wastes). In order to fulfill these requirements, the findings from this study will
be used to: (i) integrate environmental principles during site selection, design and
construction; (ii) improve operation and maintenance of the school buildings; and; (iii)
expand and augment the current good practices with regard to environment, health and
safety aspects.

  Some of the important parameters that are being assessed as part of this study include:
location and site planning; accessibility (including that for physically challenged
students); building design and maintenance (particularly materials used, ventilation,
lighting, fire safety); drainage/water logging; provision and maintenance of basic
facilities (water, sanitation and waste disposal); construction practices; availability of
class room and laboratory space per student; resource consumption (energy and water)
and; over-all house-keeping and cleanliness in the school campus. These parameters have
been/are being assessed for a sample base of secondary schools. These have been selected
on the basis of criteria such as geographic location (urban/rural/coastal/plain/disaster-
prone); and climatic conditions (hot/humid/dry/arid/warm) to enable formulation of
comprehensive guidelines to suit these conditions.

 Further, as part of the project preparation, an Environment Management Framework
(EMF) has been prepared, for which the Borrower and its sub-national agencies at state
and district level have limited capacity. The framework provides a set of
measures/guidelines, which would help in preventing, minimizing and/or managing
various environmental, health and safety concerns faced during construction, operation
and maintenance of schools. The EMF will be a live document and would be
strengthened/refined (as required) to reflect the learning from the field during the
execution of the project.

 The environmental issues with regard to location (in very few cases, where schools may
come on green fields) and lay-out (would be applicable in majority of the cases) of school
buildings and associated facilities would be addressed programmatically through the
process of guiding the decision-makers on site selection and design criteria. The EMF
provides the basic guidance on these aspects. The EMF also addresses construction-stage
impacts such as: (a) occupational health and safety issues faced by workers; (b) dust and
noise issues and; (c) construction wastes/debris management. EMF also includes a
monitoring plan and reporting arrangements to accomplish these tasks.
 Institutional Arrangements for EMF implementation. A robust training and capacity
building plan is required to ensure effective implementation of EMF on the ground. Some
key areas/topics that will be covered in the training plan would cover environmentally
sensitive site selection and building design; campus environment management (issues and
measures) and; health and safety issues (including good and bad practices). The capacity
will be strengthened systematically during the programme/project implementation period.

 For this, the central and state level institutional structures would be strengthened to
address environmental management and safeguard related issues during project
implementation. The MHRD will assume the overall responsibility for adequate
maintenance of the personnel and resources required to supervise, monitor and implement
the EMF. Management of environmental aspects shall be addressed by designating an
Environment Officer, who will co-ordinate, monitor and provide support for (a)
satisfactory implementation of the EMF; (b) orientation and training for field level staff
of State Directorates and other stakeholders and; (c) reporting and documentation. The
MHRD will share with the Bank reports as part of the Joint Review Missions, which will
include a section on EMF implementation and related activities.

 Social Safeguards: A review of available information has been undertaken as part of the
Social Assessment (SA) for the project. On the basis of the SA, an Equity Plan has been
prepared for implementation during the project. The EAP actions would be given special
attention, in addition to general project implementation in tribal areas, as improving the
education of tribal (and other disadvantaged) children is central to the achievement of
RMSA goals.

 The Bank Policy on Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered as no involuntary land
acquisition will be carried out in RMSA. The RMSA does not provide for the purchase of
land and it would not fund construction on any land for which clear title is not already
available. As the project will support the construction of new schools and
expansion/repair/renovation/upgrading of existing ones, the RMSA would apply the
principle of ‘Avoidance’ for land requiring any resettlement (however minor) while
obtaining land, as described in section II.A.1 above. Participatory and transparent
processes would be followed to get voluntary land donations for construction of
educational structures both in rural and urban areas. Normal government procedures
would be followed for documentation of transfer of government/panchayat-owned and
donated land. The project will have a robust monitoring and supervision system to ensure
that any possible expansion of school buildings is done on available land in physical
possession of the schools and is free of encumbrances, including encroachers and
squatters. In order to ensure that the above processes have been followed, the RMSA
will carry out Joint Monitoring and Supervision (see Environment section). Monitoring
and supervision reports and documentation of land transfers would be made available to
GOI and the Development Partners on Joint Review Missions to ascertain that no
displacement (loss of residence or livelihood or community services) has taken place in
obtaining the land.
 The Borrower and its sub-national agencies at state and district level have the basic
capacity to implement the EAP, including carrying out the consultations, and to
implement the processes for the transfer of lands including voluntarily donated land.
However, this capacity needs to be strengthened, which would be done under the
program.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
A sample of primary stakeholders - children aged 14-16 – and their parents, school
teachers, managers and members of SMDCs, and secondary stakeholders such as
educational administrators at district, state and national levels will be consulted through
meetings and focus group discussions during the project. The Equity Action Plan (EAP)
provides a specific framework for free, prior and informed consultations with tribal
communities to seek broad community support prior to initiating any construction
activities in areas where they are present.

 The Environment Management Framework and Equity Action Plan have been disclosed
on the RMSA website. Key measures for tribal and other disadvantaged groups will be
made known down to the school level through posted notices. In addition, the safeguard
documents have been disclosed on the Bank’s Infoshop.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01/19/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  01/19/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   01/20/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07/12/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  07/31/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   01/20/2012
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name                           Date
Task Team Leader:                    Mr Tobias Linden                                01/20/2012
Environmental Specialist:            Ms Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra                    01/27/2012
Social Development Specialist        Ms Meera Chatterjee                             01/27/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Sanjay Srivastava                             02/02/2012
  Comments: cleared. Please see email dated 01/23/2012 and 02/02/2012 for details.
Sector Manager:                     Mr Amit Dar                                      01/20/2012
  Comments: cleared
