                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/29/2011                                   Report No.: AC6231
1. Basic Project Data
Country: India                               Project ID: P107648
Project Name: National Dairy Support Project
Task Team Leader: Deepak Ahluwalia
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 26, 2011      Estimated Board Date: September 15, 2011
Managing Unit: SASDA                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Animal production (60%);Agricultural extension and research (20%);Agro-
industry, marketing, and trade (20%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (80%);Rural policies and institutions (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            352.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             39.10
         Local Communities                                              62.80
                                                                      101.90
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
1.The Project Development Objectives are to increase the productivity of milk animals
and improve market access of milk producers in project areas.

 2. These objectives would be pursued through: (a) adoption of scientific and systematic
processes in provision of technical inputs and services to milk producers, with
appropriate policy and regulatory measures; and (b) facilitating access of milk producers
to the organized milk processing sector.

3. Project Description
1. The key principles underlying project design are:

 A dairy farmer-centric approach.

 Improving quality of inputs and services delivered to farmers through adoption of
common protocols and Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) in provision of technical
inputs and other services at the farmer#s doorstep.
  Enhancing market access for sale of surplus milk by milk producers -- through village
level institutional structures operating in a fair and transparent manner.

 An enabling policy environment to support implementation of project investments.

 2. The project will seek to increase milk production by genetic improvement of the dairy
herd (cows and buffalos) and optimal use of feed and fodder. This would be achieved
through investments in animal breeding, extensive training of dairy farmers and doorstep
delivery of ration balancing advisory services and AI services, integrated with veterinary
support, together with development of related information network and databases. The
project will raise farmers# awareness about the importance of good quality milk and
build their capacity for hygienic milk production, collection and sale. Collective sale will
strengthen farmers# negotiating power and reduce transactions costs for such a highly
perishable commodity.

 3. There is a strong case for public intervention in technology transfer activities to
improve the quality of the dairy herd and increase productivity. Investments in animal
breed improvement are typically long term in nature with benefits accruing after several
years. Since farmers are free to sell their milk to anyone, there is little private sector
appetite for investing in herd improvement and village level collection and bulking
centers, except for a few large private dairies pursuing long term commitments.

 4. The project intends to support the following three components.

 5. Component A: Productivity Enhancement (Estimated Cost US$ 258.3 million). This
component will aim to increase bovine productivity through improved animal breeding
and nutrition services. To achieve this aim the project intends to support the following
activities:

 Sub-Component # 1 Animal Breed Improvement: This sub-component will support:

 a)     Production of high genetic merit bulls (HGM) through: (i) Progeny Testing (PT)
program in selected breeds; (ii) Indigenous Breed Development (IBD) program in
selected breeds; and (iii) Import of exotic bulls/embryos/frozen semen.

 b)     Semen Production: Strengthening of existing semen production stations and
establishment of new semen stations.

  c)   Delivery of Artificial Insemination (AI) Services through trained mobile AI
technicians (MAIT) at farmers# doorstep.

 Sub-Component 2 Animal Nutrition: This sub-component will support:

 a)    Ration Balancing Program (RBP): A comprehensive RBP whereby extension
advice would be provided to dairy farmers through trained local resource persons (LRP)
for advising on animal feed and nutrition. Research shows that feeding balanced rations
has the potential to increase milk yield, reduce production costs, and contribute to
reduced methane emissions.

 b)    Fodder Development: Extension initiatives/interventions for fodder development,
including support for improved fodder seed production, fodder contracting,
demonstrations for silage making, and reducing wastage of dry fodder through processing
and enrichment.

 6. The main expected results from interventions proposed under Component A are
increased productivity per milk animal, increase in in-milk animals, improved conception
rates, improved animal nutrition, and reduction in feeding costs per animal.

 7. Component B: Milk Collection and Bulking (Estimated Cost US$ 166.3 million).
This component aims to improve access to markets by milk producers, through investing
in village level milk collection and bulking facilities. These investments are expected to
strengthen negotiating power of small dairy holders and enable collective milk marketing
to existing (and future) milk processing facilities. This will include:

 a)     community mobilization and institution building through: (i) expansion of
selected existing dairy cooperative societies (DCS) registered under the Cooperative
Societies Act, and (ii) promotion of new milk producer institutions which would be
registered as producer companies under the Companies Act;

 b)    training and capacity building of milk producers and other functionaries; and

 c)    investments in village level infrastructure for milk collection and bulking such as
milk cans, bulk milk coolers for a cluster of villages, associated weighing and testing
equipment, and related IT equipment.

 8. The main expected results from interventions proposed under Component B are
increase in number of milk producers organized into dairy cooperative societies/producer
companies, increase in coverage of villages for milk collection and bulking, increase in
share of milk sold to the organized milk processing sector, and improved milk quality.

 9. Component C: Project Management and Learning (Estimated Cost US$ 29.3 million).
The aim of this component is to ensure smooth implementation and coordination of
project activities, regular and timely monitoring of implementation progress and
outputs/outcomes achieved, and learning through feedback to management. Activities to
be financed include: (i) support for Project Management Unit (PMU) at NDDB; (ii)
operation and management of computerized information systems for collection of data
and dissemination of information related to animal breeding, nutrition, health services
and milk collection and bulking; (iii) services of external agencies for carrying out
baseline, mid-term and project completion surveys and other special surveys/studies as
may be needed during project implementation; (iv) third party quality assurance of civil
works under the project; and (v) technical assistance and support during implementation.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project aims to cover 14 major dairying states over a six year implementation period.
These states account for 93% of the country#s milk production and about 87% of the
breedable cattle and buffalo population. The 14 states are Andhra Pradesh, Bihar,
Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab,
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. Participating states will have to
apply the ESMF for this project.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Mohammed Hasan (SASDS)
   Mr Anupam Joshi (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                           X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                    X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                   X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                             X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                        X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                 X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is aimed at enhancing milk productivity and access to milk market. Though
the project would benefit overwhelmingly small dairy units and adverse impacts are
likely to be minimal at the household level, the cumulative impacts due to the spatial
spread and current practices could result in increased pressure on available common
natural resources for grazing, increased GHG emissions from the livestock and improper
waste management at the dairy farm level. Due to poor awareness and lack of leadership,
there is a possibility of elite capture in dairy cooperatives and producer companies.
However, the project offers opportunities in enhancing the social outcome of the
interventions (through cooperatives including producer companies) and in improving its
environmental footprint, including mitigating climate change, through adoption of better
technologies and sustainable package of practices.

 The key environmental challenges that the project addresses are: (i) reducing GHG
emissions from livestock through a Ration Balancing Program; (ii) bridge the fodder gap
through promotion of quality fodder seeds that would increase per unit tonnage of fodder;
and (iii) on farm waste management by promoting a package of practice approach that
accounts for better utilization of wastes generated.

 On social aspects, the project ensures that: (i) dairy farmers (through cooperatives) have
an important and active role in project interventions; (ii) small dairy farmers will have
greater opportunities to participate in project activities; and (iii) any adverse impact
resulting from the project interventions will be mitigated appropriately.

 Most of the identified environmental and social issues and their mitigation have been
mainstreamed in the project design. This approach would reverse some of the potential
impacts. It is anticipated that the project activities would also result in positive
environmental and social impacts, which have been identified and measures included in
the ESMF to enhance them.

  The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) has been completed and
disclosed publically, which identifies the type and extent of environmental and social
impacts including related to Pest Management (OP 4.09), waste management, GHG
emissions, Tribal (OP 4.10), women and other vulnerable groups. The SESA also gives a
screening matrix for categorizing sub projects on the basis on potential negative impacts.
It includes a detailed Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
prepared on the basis of impacts identified by SESA and includes a Pest Management
Plan and a strategy for Tribal Development. ESMF provides a detailed mitigation
strategy for limiting adverse environmental impacts, but also guidance to increase
environmental sustainability of dairying as well for transparent consultations and
disclosure at the sub project level. The ESMF also provides for a Grievance Redress
Mechanism.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Dairy operations in India are largely restricted to small farmers with fewer animals and
the project focuses on ration balancing in the short term and improving the genetic
potential of dairy cattle in the long term. The project is unlikely to introduce any new
impacts or intensify the existing impacts, mainly, pressure on natural resources,
contributing to climate change and on farm waste management. On the contrary, despite
small operations, poor awareness, and reduction in common property resources
(land/pasture/water), there are opportunities in improving its environmental footprint,
including mitigating climate change, through adoption of better technologies and
sustainable package of practices.

 Since no major infrastructure development is planned, the proposed project
interventions are unlikely to adversely impact local population. The project would not
support investments that require any land appropriation and thereby any displacement,
both physical and economic. Since the majority of the project beneficiaries belong to
small farmers, it would ensure inclusion of women, tribal and other vulnerable groups
through active involvement in dairy cooperatives and improved membership in producer
companies and thus provide #voice# in decision making process. This would restrict elite
capture.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The following alternative approaches of providing balanced nutrition through the Ration
Balancing Program targeting individual milch animal were considered but rejected: (i)
feeding of only available crop residues as bulk fodder; and (ii) the regular practice of
open grazing. These were rejected to mitigate both increasing pressures on natural
resources and reducing livestock based methane production.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
As part of project preparation, an experienced and independent consulting agency was
contracted by NDDB to undertake SESA for identifying the project#s potential negative
and positive environmental impacts (both direct and indirect) and develop measures to
prevent, minimize, mitigate and compensate for adverse impacts and enhance the positive
impacts. Based on the results of the assessment and findings of SESA, an ESMF has been
developed to address adverse impacts resulting from the proposed project interventions
and improve the environmental and social performance of the project.

  The capacity of the implementing agencies # both at the project (NDDB) and subproject
levels - to address environmental and social issues is currently weak. To improve the
capacity an Environment and Social Management (ESM) Cell would be established
within the Project Management Unit (PMU). The cell will include a social development
expert and an environment management expert to monitor ESMF implementation. An
Environment & Social (E&S) officer would also be appointed / deputed at each of the
End-Implementing Agencies (EIAs). Adequate provisions for orientation, sensitizing, and
training the relevant stakeholders, including beneficiaries, implementing officers etc. on
environmental and social concerns have been budgeted as part of project costs. This will
be closely supervised during implementation. The project would have both internal and
external monitoring mechanisms # internal monitoring would be done both at the PMU
and subproject levels. Besides an external M&E agency that will be engaged at the
project level will also periodically monitor and evaluate the social and environmental
measures and their outcomes.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
As part of SESA, wide ranging stakeholders# consultations were undertaken. The project
stakeholders include dairy farmers, members of dairy cooperatives, tribal and women and
other vulnerable groups, NGOs, representatives of Panchayat Raj Institutions (PRIs),
functionaries of dairy cooperative unions and NDDB, staff of relevant line departments
and others. These consultations were held at individual, household and
village/community levels in the field and also with local bodies (PRIs) and dairy
institutions. In these consultations, the stakeholders were informed about project
components and activities proposed to increase milk production, enhance access to
market through bulk marketing and institutional strengthening of dairy institutions. The
discussions focused on potential social and environmental impacts, and feasible
management measures including improving the project design. The feedback from these
consultations was used in developing an ESMF.

 As part of disclosure plan, NDDB disclosed the draft SESA report on its website to get
feedback before the report is finalized. An executive summary of SESA is also prepared
and translated in the local language and disclosed. Besides NDDB#s website, these
documents would be made available in the NDDB#s offices at the state level. The full
SESA report has also been made available at the web-site of NDDB and its offices at
Anand and participating States.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 06/15/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             06/14/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              07/04/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 06/15/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             06/14/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              07/04/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 06/15/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             06/14/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              07/04/2011
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Deepak Ahluwalia          07/21/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Anupam Joshi              07/21/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Mohammed Hasan            07/21/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Sanjay Srivastava          07/21/2011
  Comments: cleared. Please see memo dt 07/21/2011 for details
Sector Manager:                    Mr Simeon Kacou Ehui          07/25/2011
  Comments:
