                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC5034


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/03/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: India                               Project ID: P119039
Project Name: India Financing Affordable Housing
Task Team Leader: Michael Markels
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 30,      Estimated Board Date: November 30, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: SASFP                         Lending Instrument: Financial
                                             Intermediary Loan
Sector: Housing finance and real estate markets (100%)
Theme: Other financial and private sector development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):         125.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):          375.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                       0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The objective is to enhance access to responsible housing finance for low income households to
enable them to purchase or upgrade a dwelling, subject to property rights and lending standards
acceptable to NHB.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
Beneficiaries: Low income households which seek housing finance. The project will help
households to avoid or get out of illegal settlements (slums). It is not designed to help people in
slums to fix up or add onto their dwelling, unless the relevant government authority is
redeveloping the property and provides title or tenancy to the beneficiaries, acceptable to NHB.
  Approach: Our approach (in partnership with NHB) is multi-disciplinary, and includes parallel
activities by the Bank’s Urban team (supply of low income housing provided by RAY program),
World Bank Institute (research and information organization), and International Finance
Corporation (training of primary lenders). The approach is to create lasting institutional capacity
and market infrastructure, such that benefits are sustained after the Bank’s credit line component
is exhausted. Access to housing finance will be enhanced by increasing the financial and
technical capacity of the apex institution, National Housing Bank (NHB), and by increasing the
number and capacity of primary lenders (NHB’s clients), including those which have the skills
and relationships necessary to train, underwrite and collect repayments from low income
households. Enhancing lenders’ capacity to serve these segments could have a significant impact
on the outreach of housing finance. The credit line will provide the incentive to the primary
lenders by partially compensating them for the credit risk and costs of serving low income
households. The project will demonstrate the use of longer term financing instruments in the
Indian market, both at the retail and wholesale levels. The project will focus on tier two through
four cities which have progressive housing agencies (e.g. Rajasthan) that are providing
affordable land for low income housing. Tier 1 cities will receive less emphasis by default
because high land costs are a more severe impediment to supply of housing. Housing affordable
for LIG households is achievable in metropolitan areas such as Ahmedabad, for example. And
the financing of incremental housing in authorized settlements for informal sector households is
a huge, underserved segment for formal housing finance through the project.

  Project Components:
  A.     Institutional Capacity Building (Preliminary Estimate: $25 million):
  1.    Enhance capacity of NHB
  a)    Rebuild with people, risk management systems, processes and products (financing,
training, standard setting and incentives) necessary to enhance access to housing finance for low
income borrowers, as described in its ’Business Plan’.
  2.    Enhance the number, capacity and geographic outreach of primary lenders (including
housing finance companies, micro-housing finance, micro-finance, regional rural banks, urban
cooperative banks, etc.) so that they provide access to finance for low income borrowers.
  a)    Incubation, including direct equity stakes
  b)    Business plans for sustainable business models
  c)    Training (including financial literacy, underwriting and risk management).
  3.    Sector Strengthening Activities by NHB:
  a)    Develop prudent lending standards, including the use of credit bureaus by the primary
lenders.
  b)    Promote market discipline, sound lending practices, use of credit information bureaus and
new business processes.
  c)    Develop strategy and programs in financial literacy and capability of the prospective
borrowers with a focus on avoiding over indebtedness as well as initiatives to support repayment
once loans have been made.
  d)    Build a Real Estate Research and Information Center. Compile and disseminate data,
research and best practices.
  B.    Credit Line (Preliminary Estimate: $450 million)
  4.    Credit line
  a)    The credit line component will be used by NHB as an incentive for primary lenders to (a)
incur the higher operating costs required to underwrite and service loans to low income and
informal sector households to purchase or add on to a legal dwelling, and (b) to work with state
agencies on the demand side, housing finance (not project finance) aspects of their initiatives,
subject to NHB’s risk management. Depending on the IDA/IBRD mix agreed for the project,
there will be a small subsidy, after swap costs, of about than 1-2% annually when compared to
local funding. The benefit of Bank funding is the longer tenor than the market, which brings
down the payment of the retail financing. The intent of the project is to pass this subsidy on to
the lenders to compensate for the higher costs and risks of serving low income borrowers.
Separately, GoI is trying to implement a 5% per annum interest subsidy for small loans to low
income households.This program has faltered because income qualification is not done by the
lenders, but instead by a government department.
  C.    Pilot Initiatives (Preliminary Estimate: $25 million)
  5.    Pilot Initiatives (in progressive states where supply constraints are addressed)
  a)    Incremental housing in authorized settlements (building quality requirements)
  b)    Informal sector borrowers (credit process and scoring)
  c)    Product design, e.g. loan linked savings product designed to create savings for down
payment and approve credit worthiness of borrowers
  d)    Research on the feasibility of formal rental housing solutions, followed by a pilot
  e)    Credit guarantee facility (to be assessed during appraisal)
  f)    Principal buy down (to be assessed during appraisal).

D. Project location (if known)
India, urban areas nationwide

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
To be assessed.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Meera Chatterjee (SASDS)
   Mr Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (SASDI)
   Mr Satya N. Mishra (SASDS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
    The proposed project line of credit will be intermediated by NHB to several PLIs for
refinancing banks/financial institutions retail lending to individual customers accessing loan for
EWS and LIG housing. The proposed refinancing by NHB would not lead to negative
environmental impacts. Further, as part of sector strengthening activities under Component # 3,
the project envisages to establish prudent lending practices / retail housing loan appraisal
mechanisms, including basic minimum housing compliances like building by-laws, applicable
environmental regulations of the country, water supply, sanitation, etc. In case of lending to
EWS customers, the appraisal mechanism would ensure that the priority will be given to
household level investments for improving sanitation.

     Considering the foregoing, the project environmental safeguard preparation will be limited
to preparing a simple loan screening checklist which shall part of the appraisal mechanism of
PLIs
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                  Yes                                          No             TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                    X
   Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment


Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 09/30/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   09/30/2011

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed
   (the specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS):
     Focused social assessment addressing key questions, reviewing relevant experience, and
   stakeholder consultations. Start around 07/01/2011 and complete by 9/30/2011.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Michael Markels                                             11/30/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Sanjay Srivastava
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Ivan Rossignol
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
