                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 01/26/2012                                   Report No.: AC6619
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P084792                   Original Project Name: Assam Agricultural
                                               Competitiveness Project
Country: India                                 Project ID: P129686
Project Name: IN - Assam Agricultural Competitiveness Project Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Manivannan Pathy
Estimated Appraisal Date:                      Estimated Board Date: March 8, 2012
Managing Unit: SASDA                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);Irrigation and drainage
(25%);Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (20%);Agricultural extension and
research (10%);Forestry (5%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             50
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               12.50
                                                                          12.50
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                          Simple []            Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                     Yes [ ]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the project would be to increase the productivity and market access of
targeted farmers and community groups. Key indicators of success would be increased
yields of crops, fish and livestock products - complemented by an increase in the
proportion of marketed surplus. Although the over-riding objective is to stimulate growth
of Assam’s agricultural economy, project activities would be predominantly pro-poor,
directed primarily at small and marginal landholders, poor fishing communities and the
landless.

3. Project Description
The Project Development Objective, design and institutional arrangements would remain
the same as the original project except fine-tuning some aspects of the of the parent
project. The Additional Financing would use the same approach and strategy of
community driven development. The proposed additional financing is intended to be
allocated to scale up the three components of the parent project, namely Component A:
Investment Grant Scheme; Component B: Agricultural Services and Market Chain
Development; and Component C: Infrastructure Development.

  a)    Investment Grant Fund (US$ 32.17 million) this component would promote
income generating farm investments by small farmer groups in irrigation, mechanization
and fish ponds, and community investments in micro-watershed drainage and community
tank and beel (open water bodies / Oxbow lake) fisheries. The Additional Finance would
finance civil works and equipment; farmer group and community group mobilization by
NGOs; the matching grant portion of investment costs; extension and training activities
and associated incremental operating costs. Specific investments would include –

  •     Groundwater monitoring: As per international norms, density of water level and
water quality monitoring stations will be established. This will include installation of
piezometers, digital water-level recorders and water quality sensors (at selected locations)
coupled with telemetric stations. The telemetric system will allow monitoring at required
frequency; Directorate of Geology and Mining will have the overall responsibility for
groundwater monitoring program and would be involved in the analysis of the data
collected. The directorate will be strengthened with modeling facilities for proper
groundwater assessment; and the data will be shared with concerned agencies such as
department of Agriculture who will use it for planning the investment and particularly
decide the density of STW with respect to geological regions.

 •     Irrigation development would involve formation of 30,000 irrigation groups of 3-
5 farmers acquiring Shallow Tube Wells (STW) to irrigate about 75,000 hectares;

 •     Farm mechanization activities would foster formation of about 900 Agro Service
Groups (ASG) made up of 10-20 small farmers acquiring tractors, for own use and
provision of custom hiring service;

 •      Fish production activities would assist small and marginal farmers to rehabilitate
existing farm ponds covering 800 ha; communit groups to undertake similar development
of 300 ha of community owned tanks; and community beel groups to develop 700 ha of
beels; and

 •      Micro-watershed drainage activities would assist flood plain communities restore
natural drainage lines and reduce annual water logging and crop loss on 15,000 ha.

 b)    Agricultural Services and Market Chain Development (US$ 11.39 million) to
address the constraints of inadequate market linked technology transfer; and absence of
producer organizations with links to markets, this component would support

 •      Consolidating the ATMA institutions promoted by AACP (in 12 districts) and
GOA / GOI (14 districts) and further strengthen these advisory services by making them
more market oriented. All ATMAs of the state will be brought under the supervision,
monitoring and management under ARIAS Society and the proposed additional financing
will provide necessary support for undertaking this activity. ARIAS Society shall be
designated as the State Nodal Agency for the implementation GOI ATMA and will open
a separate bank account for the receipt of GOI funds. The State Project Director of
ARIAS Society shall also be designated as the State Nodal Officer for the
implementation of GOI ATMA. ATMA support would include strengthening staff
capacity to deliver marketing extension, preparation of training materials, provision of
need based information technology and other equipment and the establishment of farmer
information and advisory centers and development of Assamese script SMSs and
introduce two-way SMS –based interaction between the line department and with
farmers;

 •     Under the livestock (dairy, pig, goat) project would support to improve
productivity and market access of targeted farmers and community groups and this would
include procurement of superior parent stock, husbandry and marketing; outsourcing of
AI services to private sector service provider and formation marketing groups.

 •      Project will also support those members of agriculture, fisheries and livestock
groups that are undertaking productive activitie to form Farmer Producer Organizations.
The project will provide technical and investment support for these institutions to develop
their productive activities and access profitable markets. Project support will be available
based on eligibility criteria that emphasize the demand and the capacity of the FPOs;

 c)      Key Infrastructure Development (US$ 32.17million) to address the constraint of
poor rural road network to connect to markets and inadequate haats (markets)
infrastructure this component would support investments in two priority areas viz.,: (i)
improvement of about 113 km of rural roads including 29 bridges contained in the
original project. These roads were included in the original project scope but the bids were
not invited due to lack of clarity about the project funds; (ii) demonstration projects on
low cost road construction and innovative bridge designs involving construction of about
20 bridges. PWD has already introduced construction of low-cost gravel roads and pre-
cast designs of bridges under the project. PWD now proposes to build on those through
the proposed demonstration project so that the low-cost construction technologies could
be used connecting the smaller habitations and linking agriculture production areas with
agriculture markets in a cost-effective manner. The innovative bridges designs has the
potential to reduce both the time and cost of construction by about 30%; and to
strengthen the rural market infrastructure to support increased crop production and crop
diversification efforts, and to provide multiple marketing points for the producers in the
project area. Under this subcomponent, improvement in the basic infrastructure of about
25 wholesale haats and about 30 retail haats (village markets) would be taken up selected
districts where production activities are focused. AF would also support development of
model haats on a pilot basis in three districts.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Assam, located between 24008'N-27059'N latitude and 89042'E-96001'E longitude, has
an area of 78,523km2, and is generally composed of plains and river valleys. The state
can be divided into three distinctive physiographic regions - the Brahmaputra Valley, the
Barak Valley, and the Mikir (Karbi Anglong) and Cachar Hills, which divides the two
river valleys. Assam is geologically of recent origin, and is characterized by features such
as floodplains, marshes, beels, scattered hillocks, folded hill ranges and old plateaus. The
state (with moderate tropical climate, temperatures 7o-36oC; the average rainfall
2659mm), experiences regular floods and frequent seismic movements. Assam, with its
rich evergreen forest cover (including 5 national parks and 12 wildlife sanctuaries),
wetlands and river systems is part of the Indo-Myanmar region IUCN Global
Biodiversity hotspot. A significant amount of biodiversity rich vegetated area and
wetlands are outside the protected forest area boundaries. Large numbers of people are in
farming and paddy amongst other is the predominant crop grown in the State. Beel
fisheries also form a mainstay for many marginal and poor households. The State is rich
in groundwater resources, which is well within utilization limits as per the Central
Groundwater Board.

 The population in the plain and the hill districts comprise of Schedule caste, Schedule
Tribe, Other backward caste, Bengalis, Assamees and Muslims. Scheduled Tribes (STs)
constitute more than 12 per cent of Assam’s total population. There are 23 notified STs in
the state. The tribal people are distributed across the state, but particularly concentrated in
Kokrajhar, Dhemaji, Buxar, North Cachar and Karbi Anglong districts. The ST
population is predominantly rural, and they represent significant beneficiaries of AACP
interventions in these districts. The project strategies of communication, beneficiary
mobilization, participatory planning and, especially livestock and fisheries activities,
would directly benefit tribal. The project will not only improve the well being of the
majority vulnerable population, but would also make assistance available to improve the
planning, management and communications capacity of local institutions.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Anupam Joshi (SASDI)
   Mr Varun Singh (SASDS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                   X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                            X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                       X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                             X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                      X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): Environmental issues in the project relate to
the sensitive ecological and natural resource base of the state. Although the individual
project interventions would be small-scale, there would be potential risks of: (i) ground
water depletion due to high concentration of shallow tube wells; (ii) increased levels of
Iron (Fe), Fluoride (F) and Arsenic (As) in groundwater; (iii) water-logging and salinity
due to excessive water use; (iv) possible increase in the chemical fertilizers and
pesticides; and (v) introduction of exotic fish species. Besides these, building and
upgrading of marketing and storage facilities would be associated with construction
related impacts such as land clearance, site modification and waste generation. Dairy
interventions are associated with issues such as wastage of water, lack of recycling in the
milk processing plants, quality of the dairy products, especially contamination of milk.
Due to the rural roads sub-projects, adverse environment impacts are likely to occur if
selected roads are not properly planned, designed or constructed. The issues with the
rural roads sub-projects include improper construction practices, inadequate drainage,
material management, borrow area and quarry operations; sitting and operation of hot-
mix plants and labor camps; disposal of debris and bituminous waste; and
embankment/slope stability.

 Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): Though no project activity will take place within
protected areas, many biodiversity rich areas/habitats outside the protected areas could be
affected if proposed project investments are not implemented with due caution and
sensitivity towards the natural habitats, including some rural roads that may traverse near
forests or other ecologically sensitive areas, leading to associated ecological impacts,
such as fringe deterioration.

 Pest Management (OP 4.09): Due to increased availability of irrigation, promotion of
mechanized farming, adoption of high yielding crop varieties and hybrids, crop and farm-
animal diversification, promotion of horticulture, there could be increased use of
fertilizers and chemical pesticides in the State.

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): The project has rehabilitated nearly 700 KM of
existing black top rural roads, and about 120 kms of black top rural roads would be
covered under the AF. The land for road up gradation has come from voluntary land
donation process, as outlined in GoA R and R policy framework. Community
consultations and supervision missions have confirmed the benefits of improved access to
rural markets and services by the beneficiary communities. However, field visits and an
external audit have highlighted instances of small losses of some structures and
livelihoods. These adverse impacts need to be mitigated as per R and R policy framework
of Government of Assam which identifies mitigation measures for all vulnerable Project
Affected Persons (PAPs) who have voluntarily donated land and experienced loss of
structures, livelihoods, incomes, common property resources, including nontitle holders.
The social safeguard performance of AACP is moderately unsatisfactory primarily due to
shortcomings in providing rehabilitation assistance the identified PAPs of rural roads up
gradation program, and weaknesses in consultations and documentation on voluntary
land donation process.

  Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10): Many project districts have high concentration of
tribal people such as Kokrajhar, Dhemaji, Buxar, etc. For AACP, a social assessment was
carried out and a social action plan was prepared to specially target tribal and other
vulnerable people through targeted communication and information campaigns; social
screening and beneficiary mobilization, participatory planning, and capacity building on
group management. These mechanisms have ensured that tribal’s and the other
vulnerable groups access project benefits, especially in forestry, livestock and fisheries
activities. This approach would continue to be implemented during the AF.

  Forests (OP/BP 4.36): The community forestry investments made through the Joint
Forest Management Committees (JFMC) on natural resource management and integrated
livelihood did not result in any significant impact on the natural forests in the original
project phase. Best practices are likely to be supported in the additional financing phase.

 Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03). There is a very little possibility of
impacting cultural properties in the project as the project interventions and construction
activities are small-scale, including the case of rural roads sub-projects, which involve
rehabilitation works only. Chance-found cultural properties will be addressed through
contract requirements and project’s due diligence.

 No large scale, significant and/or irreversible impact is anticipated in this project.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Introduction of exotic fish species could result in long-term direct impacts on local fish
diversity. Installation of shallow tube wells could cumulatively have an indirect impact
on the ecology of beels and wetlands. Increasing levels of As and F in groundwater might
become an issue in future, particularly where shallow tube wells are also used for
drinking purposes. The rural roads sub-project may also lead to long-term cumulative
environmental impacts, especially if adequate erosion control devices are not
implemented, or drainage is impacted in the flood plains of Assam.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The use of surface irrigation and small water storage structures (farm ponds) were
considered and rejected in favor of shallow tube wells due to high water table in the state
and its adequate replenishment through good monsoon and frequent flooding in major
rivers of the state. Use of shallow tube wells helps in preventing water logging and arrests
building of induced salinity.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment: The borrower had prepared an Environmental
Assessment (EA) of the project, which would remain effective for the AF phase. This
includes an EMF consisting of the following: (a) application of environmental screening,
monitoring and environmental audit processes, (b) application of Environmental Codes of
Practice (ECPs), (c) preparation and implementation of environmental management plans
(EMPs), where necessary. Borrower is also updating the study on Safe Yield of
Groundwater and Levels of Iron, Fluoride, Arsenic & Hydrocarbon in the Groundwater
of Assam, which will guide investments in shallow tube wells. During the AF, another
study conducted earlier on Increasing Pattern of Use of Fertilizers, Pesticides and other
Chemicals in the Field of Agriculture in Darang, Barperta, Kamrup and Nagaon Districts
of Assam would be updated to address the issue of potential increase in use of agro-
chemicals.

 Adequate institutional arrangements had been recommended in the EMF, and budgets
had been earmarked. These will continue in the AF phase. The implementing agencies
will carry out an environmental screening of the individual sub-projects, based on
methods described in the EMF, prior to selection of the interventions/beneficiaries.
Environmental issues identified by such screening will be integrated in the sub-project
design and implementation.

  As determined by the environmental screening, “high impact? interventions will either
be excluded from the project, or will be subject to detailed case-specific EA, as per the
EMP format contained in the EIA Notification, 1994. For “medium impact?
interventions, EMPs will be prepared. Five Specimen EMPs are included in the EMF to
facilitate each of the implementing departments in preparing such EMP. The
implementing departments will ensure that the EMP provisions are integrated in the plan
and design of the intervention, and be a part of the agreement with the beneficiary (or
contract document in the case of rural roads sub-projects). The “low impact? category
interventions will be implemented integrating the procedures and due diligence listed i
the ECPs, which are available for: (i) Biodiversity Management, (ii) Building Activities,
(iii) Collection, Cultivation & Processing of Medicinal Plants, (iv) Irrigation
Management, (v) Land Development Schemes, (vi) Soil and Nutrient Management, (vii)
Handling & Storage of Fertilizer & Pesticides, (viii) Beel (Open Water) Fishery
Management, (ix) Farmers Ponds and Community Tanks Fishery, (x) Fish Seed
Production Management, (xi) Bio-Medical & Chemical Waste Management in Animal
Husbandry and Veterinary Facilities, (xii) On Farm Dairy Waste Management, (xiii)
Management of Wastes from Milk and Meat Processing Plants and Abattoirs, (xiv)
Guidelines for Integrating Environmental Issues in Training and Awareness Programs.

  The EMF includes an extensive Environment Monitoring Plan, which was implemented
during the original project phase and this monitoring would be continued in the additional
financing phase. This includes, monitoring of groundwater quality at-large and quality of
water from the shallow tube wells installed by the project. Based on the analyses of
40,000 shallow tube well samples (20,000 tested and 20,000 tested y March 15, 2012), in
the original project phase, across various districts/blocks, safe blocks have been identified
where all tested samples are within safe limits with respect to As, Fe and F. In such safe
blocks, As would be tested for 25% of installed shallow tube wells. Fe and F would be
continued to be tested as per the original project at 5% of all installed tube wells.
However, for unsafe blocks, where As exceeded the safe limits in any sample tested from
that block, testing would be carried out at 100% basis. All project interventions and
processes will be subject to independent environmental audits that would confirm that
EMF processes and provisions are being implemented as planned

  OP/BP 4.04: Natural Habitats. The EMF also includes exclusion criteria for project
interventions to avoid high or irreversible impacts, or where the knowledge base is weak.
The following will be excluded from the project, or will be subject to detailed sub-project
environmental assessment: (i) siting of interventions in environmentally sensitive areas
such as reserved forests, national parks, wildlife sanctuaries, Ramsar sites, wetlands
included in the Directory of Asian Wetlands, locations identified as hotspots in the
Assam State Biodiversity Action Plan, designated grazing lands; (ii) culture of
endangered fish species or nuisance fish species; and (iii) collection and processing of
endangered medicinal plants. Detailed checklists have been prepared to identify these
issues at the sub-project identification stage. Environmental codes of practice would
further ensure that natural habitats are not adversely impacted due to project investments.

 OP 4.09: Pest Management. The project will implement all provisions of the Assam
State Integrated Pest Management Policy, which has been prepared based on the relevant
GOI plan. The project will encourage use of bio-pesticides and bio-fertilizers. An
extensive training and awareness program targeting the officers, field extension staff of
the relevant departments, and beneficiaries/farmers has been planned for implementing
the IPM plan. This would be supplemented by the similar extensive training proposed as
part of the environmental training program.

 OP 4.12: Involuntary Resettlement. The social safeguard performance of AACP is
moderately unsatisfactory primarily due to shortcomings in providing rehabilitation
assistance to about 10 project affected persons (PAPs) who were adversely affected by
rural roads upgradation, and weak documentation of voluntary land donation process.

 The Assam State Roads Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy, 2004 will continue to
apply in additional financing. It lays down the procedures to enable the community to
participate in the planning and implementation process of rural road sub-projects, and
options for mitigation of small scale impacts. In addition, a Resettlement and
Rehablitation (R and R) handbook has also been prepared to help communities and Zilla
Panchayats participate in planning, implementing mitigation measures and monitoring the
roads sub-component. Any necessary transfer of land and implementation of mitigation
measures will be completed before initiation of civil works. The policy would be
subjected to independent review from time to time, and adjusted if necessary to increase
effectiveness.
  ARIASPS is committed to comply with this policy and address these issues by
preparing and implementing a time bound Social Safeguard Action Plan for Rural Roads,
including social mitigation plan/abbreviated resettlement plans (ARPs) for all identified
PAPs. All 10 identified PAPs will be provided R and R assistance by 15 March 2012.
The project has initiated several steps to mitigate the adverse impacts of the road
components. These include: re-orientation and training of project staff and NGOs on R
and R policy provisions, strengthened consultations and documentation of voluntary land
donation, and rapid socioeconomic impact assessment for providing R and R assistance.
A fulltime social development specialist (SDS), and dedicated R and R nodal staff in
SMU and PWD are now available to implement the plan, under close supervision of the
Bank with STC support. The action plan will also monitor facilitate strengthened
consultations and information sharing, completion of documentation on land donation,
training for project staff and NGOs, external audit and strengthened monitoring support.
A policy workshop on R and R will also be held during the AF. The Bank has provided
resources for providing additional implementation and supervision support to the SMU.
An external audit of R and R Policy will be conducted during AF.

  OP 4.10: Indigenous People. The community-based approach of AACP has ensured
that tribal communities participate in the information dissemination and communication
activities, and are significant beneficiaries of project interventions in tribal dominated
districts, as well as other non-tribal areas. The social action plan will continue to be
implemented in tribal districts, with additional livelihood support for tribal women in
upper Assam. Participatory planning with trial communities will enhance their access to
investments in agriculture, livestock, fish production, and forestry and improve their
livelihoods. In addition, legal literacy program to empower the community on the legal
framework that governs the fisheries and forestry sector will continue to be implemented.
AF will support amendment of the Assam Fisheries Rules and Regulations and Act to
provide resources, skills and livelihood opportunities to the traditional fishing community
of the State.

 Borrower Capacity: The GOA, through the ARIASP Society and the implementing
departments now have the experience of implementing two Bank financed projects: (i)
Assam Rural Infrastructure and Agricultural Support Project, which had initially built the
capacity to deal with the relevant social and environmental issues; and (ii) Assam
Agricultural Competitiveness Project, which built on the earlier experiences of
addressing environmental and social safeguards issues. The PCU has a social
management unit (SMU) and an environmental management unit (EMU) and also field
NGOs to assist SMU in R&R implementation along with social mobilsation, information
dissemination and capacity building. The Borrower has, over the years, build institutional
capacity to manage the program, including planning and implementation of actions to
meet social and environmental needs and safeguards.

 SMU prepared the social assessment and action plan which included the Operational
Manual on the implementation arrangements in coordination with all the line departments
for the project in-house. The field NGOs in project districts will continue to assist the
community to participate in the overall planning and implementation of the project.
However, the SMU has been without a full time and suitably qualified social
development specialist to oversee the implementation of the social action plan, including
the R and R action plan, for more than two years. This has been rectified, as a fulltime
SDS and dedicated R and R nodal staff is now available. The Bank will be providing
additional implementation support to the SMU. Both SMU and EMU and its staff
positions would continue as it is during the AF phase. With these, the borrower will have
adequate capacity to manage the safeguard issues in the project.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Beneficiary consultation, information dissemination and social mobilization have
remained integral part of AACP implementation. The planning approach is bottom-up,
where communities and local level institutions including the village education
committees are involved in identification, planning, design, implementation, operation
and maintenance of the project interventions. During preparation of the EA/EMF and the
social assessment and the action plan of the project, extensive consultation has been
carried out with communities, intended beneficiaries, implementing departments,
experts, NGOs and other stakeholders. Details of the consultations during EA and Social
Assessment is contained in a stand-alone report, and the outcomes of consultations have
been integrated in the EMF. Beneficiary consultations and participatory planning have
continued throughout the implementation period, and will continue in AF.

 The environmental and social development documents were disclosed in the web
(www.assamagri.in), and in the State Public Library in Guwahati. These documents,
including an Assamese (vernacular) translation of the EA Summary are being disclosed
in the public libraries of each of the project districts.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    06/05/2004
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                06/11/2004
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 06/25/2004
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    06/05/2004
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                06/11/2004
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 06/25/2004
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                               N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                 Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)             No
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the             Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of          No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other     Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                        Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                       No
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or      Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 No
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           N/A
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   N/A
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           N/A
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        N/A
  provisions for certification system?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Manivannan Pathy                          01/16/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Anupam Joshi                              01/16/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr Varun Singh                               01/16/2012
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Venkata Rao Bayana                        01/16/2012
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Zia Al Jalaly                             01/18/2012
  Comments: cleared
Sector Manager:                     Mr Simeon Kacou Ehui                         01/16/2012
  Comments: Cleared
