                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/07/2011                                   Report No.: AC6577
1. Basic Project Data
Country: India                                   Project ID: P122486
Project Name: Karnataka Watershed Development II
Task Team Leader: Grant Milne
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 10,            Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: SASDA                             Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                 Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (65%);Other social services
(15%);Agricultural extension and research (10%);SME Finance (10%)
Theme: Water resource management (35%);Other environment and natural resources
management (25%);Participation and civic engagement (20%);Rural non-farm income
generation (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             64.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               7.20
         Local Communities                                                0.00
         Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country        0.00
                                                                          7.20
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                     Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to: demonstrate more effective watershed
management through greater integration of programs related to rainfed agriculture,
innovative and science based approaches, and strengthened institutions and capacities.

3. Project Description
The Project has five components:

 Component (a): Support for Improved Program Integration in Rainfed Areas. The
component will demonstrate successful integration of science based Integrated Watershed
Management Program (IWMP) and employment based National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (NREGS) for effective watershed development, and better integration
with rainfed agriculture. It will demonstrate new approaches for integrated planning at
both sub-watershed (SWS) and micro-watershed levels (MWS), guided by more robust
hydrological assessment and monitoring systems. The component will develop micro-
watershed master plans to guide convergence of IWMP with NREGS operations and
improved integration and coordination of water and watershed, agriculture, horticulture,
forestry, and livestock programs.

  Component (b): Research, Development and Innovation. It will develop new landscape
management approaches for sub-watershed and micro-watershed planning. The
component will also support development of best-practice models/systems for improved
hydrological assessment and monitoring and integrating these into operational planning.
The component will also develop better information and delivery systems for farmers on
land suitability, water accessibility, and climate sensitive crop and animal disease risks,
and develop multi-media tools for local learning and planning. This will include
strengthening system-based guidelines for post-harvest management and value addition
in close partnership with the private sector. It will also support climate smart agricultural
adaptation and mitigation through an improved ICT-based agro-climate advisory system
for farmers, demonstrate best practices around soil conservation, water retention, and
traditional knowledge, and explore the potential of agricultural carbon accounting.

 Component (c): Institutional Strengthening. The component will strengthen the
institutions and human resources of key stakeholders to improve effective delivery,
coordination, and financial management within converged land-based programs within a
watershed management framework, and the adoption of research and development
products. This will include establishing a comprehensive, integrated data base that will
support sub-watershed and micro-watershed planning, and related research and
development.

 Component (d): Strengthening Horticulture in Rainfed Areas. The component would
support: training and demonstrations of farmer groups around key horticulture crops,
nutrition gardens, crop water management, production methods and diversification; soil
and crop monitoring; horticulture post-harvest management and value-addition including
feasibility studies and field demonstrations of low-cost equipment. The component will
also support the Horticulture Department with incremental costs of implementation.

 Component(e): Project management and coordination: The component would support
incremental specialized staff (both full and part-time) in headquarters and field offices;
incremental administration costs for field travel, creating and managing a project website,
improved communications, financial management activities and internal audit,
procurement, and equipment to support overall project implementation, etc. The project
would have a comprehensive communication and review strategy to ensure wide
awareness about the project purpose and lessons, and ensure stakeholders engage in the
continuous improvement of the project. The component would finance 3rd party
monitoring and evaluation requirements directly tied to project activities, incremental to
that taking place under the IWMP, and would complement the strengthening the M&E of
the WDD under Component 3.2. The project would primarily fund baseline, regular and
process monitoring, impact assessments and case studies to guide project implementation.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will be implemented in the southern state of Karnataka in 7 districts, namely,
Bidar, Gulbarga, Yadgir, Gadag, Koppal, Davangere and Chamrajnagar. Early concepts
of the project had it financing on-the-ground investments, such as, water and soil
conservation works, constructing check dams, erosion prevention structures etc. However
the final design as requested by GOI has resulted in the project supporting enhancement
of institutional capacities, use of new and innovative technology for watershed planning
and training and capacity building of stakeholders. This minimizes the environmental
risks, if any, emanating from Bank#s investments.

  None of the investments have any direct bearing on the Bank's Social Safeguard Policies
- Resettlement and Tribals (Indigenous Peoples). No lands are to be acquired for any of
the proposed activities. The project is not expected to impact the tribals since the SA
study documents that there are no #IPs# in the sub-watersheds wherein the derivative
interventions are expected.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Suryanarayan Satish (SASDS)
   Ms Nicole Andrea Maywah (SASDI)
   Mr Anupam Joshi (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Project's objective is to improve integration of programs, strengthened institutions
related to rainfed agriculture, and a stronger science-based approach supported by new
innovations, knowledge and technologies that result in increased productivity of natural
resources and incomes for communities in selected watersheds. Consequently, no
potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are anticipated. The key
environmental challenges that the project addresses are: (i) optimal utilization of
hydrological resources through improved planning and collection of hydrological data;
and (ii) arrest decline of groundwater and reduce soil erosion.

 The first project, Sujala I, undertook a detailed environmental assessment and developed
an elaborate environmental management framework to ensure enhancement of positive
environmental impacts and mitigation of negative impacts. The current project would
continue to draw up on the measures suggested in that.

  The social assessment enquiry identified the following as key social development
issues/ principles which should underpin the project#s strategy and implementation: 1)
Participation and inclusion is central to the design of the project and the State programs it
aims to assist. Key to this will be mobilizing individuals and institutions at different
levels: from community to state level; 2) Sector related institutions will be strengthened,
or if necessary established, at different levels with an explicit capacity, composition and a
definite mandate, with strong emphasis on accountability and service delivery
performance; 3) An Information, Education and Communication (IEC) campaign will be
implemented by: publicizing the project rules for open engagement of partners;
establishing a communication platform; and an easily accessible digital library.

 None of the above (viz., the Bank#s interventions) has any direct bearing on the Bank's
Social Safeguard Policies - Resettlement and Lands. However, some risks are possible for
example in convergence activities (viz., derivate interventions), which involve new
processes, and direct engagement with political bodies. For example, sub-watershed
assessments are rather exclusively technical, while micro watershed assessments have a
higher 'social' orientation. Ensuring technical and social matching in planning and
implementation is essential, and is covered through the regular IWMP approach to
participatory watershed planning. With respect to leveraging additional resources from
NREGS for soil and water conservation works in project micro-watersheds, Panchayat
Raj Institutes (PRIs) will be supported through capacity building and establishment of a
grievance process to address any disputes.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No potential indirect or long term impacts due to future activities are envisaged in the
project area.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The following alternative approaches of watershed management and planning were
considered but rejected: (i) business as usual approach, wherein individual departments
and developmental agencies of the State Government continue to provide services with
little coordination and alignment of the works of the other departments resulting in poor
convergence; and (ii) planning based on the existing system of inadequate coordination
where line departments remain the custodian of limited data generated from the field.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
As part of project preparation, an experienced and independent consulting agency was
contracted by the Watershed Department to undertake an environmental and a separate
social assessment for the project investment. Additionally, under Sujala I, an elaborated
Environmental Management Framework was prepared, which the executing agencies
continue to follow for mitigation of adverse impacts. The assessment undertaken for the
current project also has identified a range of mitigation measures but more importantly
measures to enhance the potential positive environmental impacts that the project
investments will result into.

  As part of the project design, new decision-support tools would be developed and
piloted to improve selection of priority watershed sites that combine biophysical,
hydrological, socio-economic, and environmental criteria. Deployment of such tools is
likely to facilitate sustainable extraction of natural resources, accurate investment plans to
improve the natural resource base. In additional the Environmental Management
Framework developed for this project includes a detailed best practice/guidance note for
enhancing environmental sustainability of watershed investments.

 Though none of the investments have any direct bearings on the Bank's Social
Safeguard Policies, some risks emanating as 'derivatives', especially in the context of
convergence between IWMP and NREGS cannot be ruled out. Towards addressing this,
following actions are planned: (i) providing for participation by PRIs through SWS and
MWS level institutional platforms; (ii) capacity building of PRI institutions and securing
participation in planning and implementation; and (iii) establishment of right of
grievance to address not only issues arising at the MWs but also disputes (if any) across
the different levels. Social Assessment Study done as a part of the Project Preparation has
provided deeper insights into these issues. Most of these are covered as a part of the
project Operational Risk Assessment Framework (ORAF) as well.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Following social and environmental assessments, stakeholders have been identified and
mapped at different levels # state, district, watershed and village levels. The grassroots
stakeholders include farmers in the rainfed area, including small and marginal farmers,
landless laborers, women self help groups, water user associations, watershed
committees, Gram Panchayats, and local traders. Intermediate and apex level
stakeholders include mostly different government agencies, R&D institutions, traders,
and representatives of private sector and NGOs. During the assessments, the consultants
had a variety of extensive consultations, at individual, household and village/community
levels in the field and also with local bodies (PRIs). The environmental and social
assessment reports highlights the key feedback that emerged from these consultations.

 As part of disclosure plan, the Watershed Department will prepare summary of the
reports in local language and disseminate across the state including placing on its
website. An executive summary of the assessments will also be prepared and translated in
the local language for ready and speedy dissemination.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/21/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/24/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              11/01/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?             Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)         Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the         Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Grant Milne                               10/31/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Anupam Joshi                              10/31/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Suryanarayan Satish                       10/31/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms Nicole Andrea Maywah                      10/31/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Mr Sanjay Srivastava                           11/07/2011
  Comments: cleared. See memo dated 10/31/2011 for details.
Sector Manager:                   Mr Edward C. Cook                              11/02/2011
  Comments:
