                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                               Report No.: 63310


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/06/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: India                               Project ID: P119039
Project Name: India Financing Affordable Housing
Task Team Leader: Michael Markels
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 30,      Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: SASFP                         Lending Instrument: Financial
                                             Intermediary Loan
Sector: Housing finance (100%)
Theme: Other financial and private sector development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):         125.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):          375.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                       0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The objective is to enhance access to responsible housing finance for low income households to
enable them to purchase or upgrade a dwelling, subject to property rights and lending standards
acceptable to NHB.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
Beneficiaries: Low income households which seek housing finance. The project will help
households to avoid or get out of illegal settlements (slums). It is not designed to help people in
slums to fix up or add to their dwelling, unless the relevant government authority is redeveloping
the property and provides title or tenancy to the beneficiaries, acceptable to NHB.
  Approach: Our approach (in partnership with NHB) is multi-disciplinary, and includes parallel
activities by the Bank’s Urban team (supply of low income housing provided by RAY program),
World Bank Institute (research and information organization), and International Finance
Corporation (training of primary lenders). The approach is to create lasting institutional capacity
and market infrastructure, such that benefits are sustained after the Bank’s credit line component
is exhausted. Access to housing finance will be enhanced by increasing the financial and
technical capacity of the apex institution, National Housing Bank (NHB), and by increasing the
number and capacity of primary lenders (NHB’s clients), including those which have the skills
and relationships necessary to train, underwrite and collect repayments from low income
households. Enhancing lenders’ capacity to serve these segments could have a significant impact
on the outreach of housing finance. The credit line will provide the incentive to the primary
lenders by partially compensating them for the credit risk and costs of serving low income
households. The project will demonstrate the use of longer term financing instruments in the
Indian market, both at the retail and wholesale levels. The project will focus on tier two through
four cities which have progressive housing agencies (e.g. in Rajasthan) that are providing
affordable land for low income housing. Tier 1 cities will receive less emphasis by default
because high land costs are a more severe impediment to supply of housing. Housing affordable
for LIG households is achievable in metropolitan areas such as Ahmedabad, for example. And
the financing of incremental housing in authorized settlements for informal sector households is
a huge, underserved segment for formal housing finance through the project.

  Project Components:
  A.     Institutional Capacity Building (Preliminary Estimate: $25 million):
  1.    Enhance capacity of NHB
  a)    Rebuild with people, risk management systems, processes and products (financing,
training, standard setting and incentives) necessary to enhance access to housing finance for low
income borrowers, as described in its ’Business Plan’.
  2.    Enhance the number, capacity and geographic outreach of primary lenders (including
housing finance companies, micro-housing finance, micro-finance, regional rural banks, urban
cooperative banks, etc.) so that they provide access to finance for low income borrowers.
  a)    Incubation, including direct equity stakes
  b)    Business plans for sustainable business models
  c)    Training (including financial literacy, underwriting and risk management).
  3.    Sector Strengthening Activities by NHB:
  a)    Develop prudent lending standards, including the use of credit bureaus by the primary
lenders.
  b)    Promote market discipline, sound lending practices, use of credit information bureaus and
new business processes.
  c)    Develop strategy and programs in financial literacy and capability of the prospective
borrowers with a focus on avoiding over indebtedness as well as initiatives to support repayment
once loans have been made.
  d)    Build a Real Estate Research and Information Center. Compile and disseminate data,
research and best practices.
  B.    Credit Line (Preliminary Estimate: $450 million)
  4.    Credit line
  a)    The credit line component will be used by NHB as an incentive for primary lenders to (a)
incur the higher operating costs required to underwrite and service loans to low income and
informal sector households to purchase or add on to a legal dwelling, and (b) to work with state
agencies on the demand side, housing finance (not project finance) aspects of their initiatives,
subject to NHB’s risk management. Depending on the IDA/IBRD mix agreed for the project,
there will be a small subsidy, after swap costs, of about than 1-2% annually when compared to
local funding. The benefit of Bank funding is the longer tenor than the market, which brings
down the payment of the retail financing. The intent of the project is to pass this subsidy on to
the lenders to compensate for the higher costs and risks of serving low income borrowers.
Separately, GoI is trying to implement a 5% per annum interest subsidy for small loans to low
income households.This program has faltered because income qualification is not done by the
lenders, but instead by a government department.
  C.    Pilot Initiatives (Preliminary Estimate: $25 million)
  5.    Pilot Initiatives (in progressive states where supply constraints are addressed)
  a)    Incremental housing in authorized settlements (building quality requirements)
  b)    Informal sector borrowers (credit process and scoring)
  c)    Product design, e.g. loan linked savings product designed to create savings for down
payment and approve credit worthiness of borrowers
  d)    Research on the feasibility of formal rental housing solutions, followed by a pilot
  e)    Credit guarantee facility (to be assessed during appraisal)
  f)    Principal buy down (to be assessed during appraisal).

D. Project location (if known)
India, nationwide.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The institutional capacity of the NHB and primary lenders for safeguards is currently low and a
focussed assessment is expected to provide guidance on what capacity needs to be developed.
The necessary capacity would be built in the NHB and among primary lenders in the early stages
of the project. This could include, for example, development by NHB of a technical assistance
package for use by primary lenders to provide borrowers with guidance on safety and quality of
housing construction, use of water and sanitation services, and so on.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Meera Chatterjee (SASDS)
   Mr Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (SASDI)
   Mr Satya N. Mishra (SASDS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
    The proposed project’s line of credit will be used by the NHB to refinance several primary
lenders that provide housing loans to individual customers for EWS and LIG housing. The
proposed refinancing by NHB is not expected to lead to negative environmental impacts. As part
of sector strengthening activities the project envisages establishing prudent lending practices /
retail housing loan appraisal mechanisms, including basic minimum housing compliance with
building by-laws, applicable environmental regulations of the country, water supply, sanitation,
etc. In the case of loans to EWS customers, the appraisal mechanism would ensure that priority
would be given to household level investments to improve sanitation.

     Considering the foregoing, the project’s environmental safeguard preparation will be limited
to preparing guidance for screening of loans which would be part of the appraisal mechanism of
primary lenders.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                            Yes          No          TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                         X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                  X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                             X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                              X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                       X
    OP 4.10 is not triggered as the project would refinance housing loans extended by primary
lending institutions (PLIs) mainly to urban individuals. While some individuals may be
identified as ’tribal’ in the Indian context on the basis of cultural identity or language, at least one
of the four characteristics defining Indigenous Peoples in O.P. 4.10, i.e., "collective attachment
to geographically distinct habitats or ancestral territories...and to the natural resources..." would
not apply to such borrowers, and most likely the characteristic of customary institutions would
also not be in place.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                 X
    No involuntary resettlement is expected to occur as the housing loans made by primary
lenders (and refinanced by the NHB with the project’s line of credit) would be made only if title
or tenancy rights are established. However, to ensure prudent lending practices and retail loan
appraisal in keeping with O.P. 4.12, the project’s social preparation would include development
of guidelines to ensure that no one would be displaced on account of construction undertaken
with the loans. Ensuring this would be part of the loan appraisal mechanism of primary lenders
and would be included in their capacity building. A focused social assessment will be carried out
to examine, inter alia, actions to be taken by the NHB or primary lenders to ensure safeguard
’due diligence’, issues related to the safety and quality of housing construction, and inclusion of
the poor and vulnerable (within the EWS and LIG categories).

     It is unlikely that Bank funds would lead even indirectly to land occupied by slums being
cleared for construction as the loan could only be used by NHB to refinance primary lenders that
make housing loans for regularized settlements. Adequate title/tenancy will be required to
support housing finance, whether for renovation or expansion of current dwellings (incremental
housing) or to purchase a dwelling. Bank lending would largely re-finance individual
incremental housing and pro-poor informal housing, and is not targeted at group financing. The
SA would seek, inter alia, to identify and address ’legacy issues’ and understand aspects such as
loan availability for incremental housing (in declared or notified slums) and pro-poor housing.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                      X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                 X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                          X
    Environmental Category: FI - Financial Intermediary Assessment


Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 09/30/2011
B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Focused social assessment addressing key questions, reviewing relevant experience, and
   stakeholder consultations. Start around 07/01/2011 and complete by 9/15/2011, i.e., before
   appraisal scheduled for 9/30/2011.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                       Mr Michael Markels                           06/29/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:        Mr Sanjay Srivastava                         06/21/2011
      Comments: cleared on understanding that a guidance for screening, management and monitoring of
      sub loan will be prepared; and b) a social assessment will be undertaken
    Sector Manager:                         Mr John F. Speakman                          07/06/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
