                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/20/2011                                 Report No.: AC6202
1. Basic Project Data
Country: India                                 Project ID: P102330
Project Name: North East Rural Livelihoods Project (NERLP)
Task Team Leader: Nathan M. Belete
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 10, 2011        Estimated Board Date: July 28, 2011
Managing Unit: SASDA                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme: Rural non-farm income generation (50%);Rural markets (25%);Other rural
development (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            130.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             14.40
                                                                        14.40
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
1.      The project development objective of the proposed NERLP is to improve rural
livelihoods especially that of women, unemployed youth and the most vulnerable, in four
North East states. The activities to be supported under the proposed NERLP will aim to
achieve the following key outcomes:
  a)    create sustainable community institutions consisting of Community Development
Groups (CDGs), women self-help groups (SHGs), SHG village federations, producer
organizations (POs), and youth groups of men and women (YGs);
  b)    build capacity of community institutions for self governance, bottom-up
development planning, democratic functioning with transparency and accountability;
  c)    increase economic and livelihood opportunities by i) managing natural resources
and improving agriculture for food security and income enhancement from farming and
allied activities; ii) developing employable skills of youths and establishment of self
and/or group managed enterprises; iii) establishing backward and forward linkages for
economic enterprises; iv) creating access to finance through linkages with banks and
other financial institutions; and v) creating critical infrastructure; and
  d)    develop partnerships of community institutions for natural resource management,
microfinance, market linkages, and sectoral economic services.
3. Project Description
A.     Project Components

 2.     The proposed NERLP will focus on improving livelihoods of the most vulnerable
(as identified by participatory wealth ranking) people in the project area. The project
components are designed in a manner that they complement and supplement each other.
The core of the model is building strong grassroots institutions of the poor (i.e. CDGs,
SHGs, SHG village federations, POs, and YGs). Funds will be made available for
empowering the poor. Similarly investments will be made for increasing the capacity of
the SHGs, project staff and other stakeholders. It will also develop the skill base of young
people to increase their employability in various sectors. The project will comprise the
following four components: (i) Social Empowerment; (ii) Economic Empowerment; (iii)
Partnership Development and (iv) Project Management.

 3.      Component 1 - Social Empowerment (US$28.6 million): The objective of this
component is to empower the rural communities and create sustainable institutions so that
they can manage common activities around microfinance, livelihoods and NRM. Benefits
of broad economic growth trickle down very slowly when the poor have little access to
key physical, social and financial endowments and development is conducted in a top-
down manner. To overcome highly unequal distribution of these endowments and
achieve rapid pro-poor growth, poor people need new opportunities to organize, generate
business and link with mainstream development activities. Forming community
institutions of the poor as opposed to institutions for the poor thus becomes a central and
crucial strategy of effective social and livelihood development. The main strategy in
developing community institutions is to provide the poor section of the society the voice
and the scale required to more effectively engage themselves in the decision making
process and to address their needs for economic empowerment. This component will help
develop and support inclusive, self-reliant, self-managed and sustainable community
organizations and aggregate them at a higher level for livelihood improvement. The
component will finance technical assistance consultancies, training, and development of
related course materials. The following activities will be supported:

 a)     Support to Project Facilitation Teams (PFTs) # establish teams of quality
professionals at the block level to help social mobilization and beneficiary identification,
and provide facilitation and hand-holding support to the SHGs throughout the course of
the project. PFTs will help train the SHGs and SHG village federations on livelihood
promotion, financial management, and participatory monitoring among others. Training
on participatory development, community facilitation, livelihood development, and
conflict resolution will be provided to PFT staff regularly, and exposure trips will be
organized within the region to allow PFTs to share experiences to enhance their skills and
capabilities.

 b)     Community Mobilization and Institution Building # support the identification,
selection, and mobilization of poor rural households into self-managed institutions such
as CDGs, SHGs, SHG village federations, YGs and POs.
  #     CDGs: One of the first institutions that would be formed would preferably consist
of the entire village and would be called the Community Development Group (CDG).
The strategy behind forming the CDGs is to involve the community members in the
process of defining and transforming social problems and empower them to address their
own needs and plan for development. In the tribal communities, formal and traditional
village institutions are strong though PRIs/Village Councils only exist in Sikkim and
Tripura. Establishing CDGs thus offers a broader platform for representation as each
household will have 3 representatives (husband, wife, and adult child). NERLP will
ensure existing village institutions# acceptance of CDGs and utilize their hold in the
community in order to reach out to the larger deprived communities in the villages.
Although CDGs will take the full responsibility to implement the project at the village
level, PRIs/Village Councils will be involved in identification of the poor through wealth
ranking process, planning and reviewing the Community Development Plans (CDPs),
providing guidance on the overall direction and monitoring of the development activities
undertaken by the CDGs.
  #     SHGs: An SHG is a small group of poor women, formed on the basis of social
affinity, geographical proximity and common livelihoods, based on the principle of thrift
and credit in each village. While women are believed to enjoy relatively egalitarian
tradition in the NE, preliminary study has also found that they have limited decision
making power with regard to any financial transactions. Mobilizing women into SHGs,
building their capacity on issues such as income generation and financial management,
and providing seed capital for income generation activities have been effective in
improving livelihoods in other parts of India. Along with formation of new SHGs,
strengthening existing SHGs will be a major activity. Preliminary assessment shows that
women#s participation in SHGs can be as high as 60 percent in certain states. However,
the quality of their participation, capacity, and activities are unclear. Pre-existing SHGs
will not be integrated outright but will be assessed to ensure that they meet the required
grading criteria. If required, the project will provide the necessary technical assistance to
integrate them into the project. At various stages in the project, each SHG#s capacity will
be rigorously assessed and necessary support will be provided to strengthen them.
  #     SHG Village Federation: When at least three SHGs are formed in a given village,
they will be federated into an SHG village federation. SHG village federation will serve
as an umbrella organization for all the SHGs in the village. Federations help SHGs
become institutionally and financially sustainable as they provide the economies of scale
that reduce transaction costs and make the provision of these services viable. SHG village
federations will also act as financial intermediaries linking SHGs to financial institutions
and as service providers by providing services such as book-keeping at a fee.
  #     POs: Members of SHGs, CDGs, and YGs are encouraged to form POs. POs will
help the poor increase their incomes in a sustainable manner by leveraging on the
economies of scale for procurement of inputs; marketing; access to finance, services,
knowledge; developing and managing common facilities and infrastructure; and access
higher value in the value chain.
  #     YGs: It is estimated that nearly 25 percent of the village population are in the age
group of 18-35, most of them school drop-outs and unemployed. To improve their
employability, NERLP will organize unemployed male and female into YGs and provide
support.
  4.     Component 2 - Economic Empowerment (US$86.9 million): The objective of this
component is to provide funds to the above community institutions to undertake various
individual and common economic livelihood activities in a demand-driven manner, as
well as enable unemployed youth in project areas to capture new employment or self-
entrepreneurship opportunities. This component will provide: (i) SHG investment
support; (ii) community development investment support; (iii) producer organizations
investment support; (iv) skill development and placement support; and (v) innovation
support. To ensure that the funds are not misused, PFTs will provide close monitoring
and ensure that formal and informal grievance redress mechanisms are well developed
and disseminated to mitigate/capture problems at an early stage. The component will
finance various grants to different community organizations, technical assistance
consultancies, and training and development of relevant training materials. The following
activities will be supported under the component:

 a)      Self Help Group (SHG) Investment Support # once the SHGs have mobilized
savings among themselves and reached a certain level of maturity, as measured by a pre-
defined set of criteria, seed grants will be provided to capitalize the SHGs and facilitate
their linkages with financial institutions for credit. Once SHGs prepare their Livelihood
Plans and are approved by the project, livelihood grants will be provided to help them
undertake productive livelihood enhancing activities.

  b)     Community Development Investment Support # funds will be provided to CDGs
to undertake village level activities such as development of common natural resources
(land development, water management, forest management) and small village
infrastructure that directly enhance local livelihood activities (storage, grading facilities,
collection centers) as defined in their CDPs. A major objective of CDP is to converge the
proposed development activities with other government schemes and leverage resources
that would help the livelihood activities taken up by women in SHGs or SHG village
federations. CDPs can include newly proposed projects that are yet to be funded or
support projects which are already included in the shelf of projects identified through any
previous village participatory planning exercises. The CDPs will seek to align with the
activities of the SHG members as indicated in the SHG Livelihood Plans. To ensure
sustainability of the infrastructure built under this sub-component, communities will only
be provided with grants once they have mobilized the equivalent amount from urged to
leverage funding from other government schemes.

 c)     Producer Organization Investment Support # the project will facilitate members of
SHGs, YGs, and CDGs to form POs, collective enterprises in farm and/or non-farm
sector based on the livelihood activities, at the block or district level. This will enable
communities to access higher level services by leveraging on economies of scale for
procurement of inputs, marketing, finance, services, technology, and achieving higher
value along the value chain. The project will support PO formation, provide POs training
on business skills, financial management, marketing etc. and help them develop viable
business development plans to be approved by commercial banks. Some financial
assistance will also be given in form of grants to help kick-start their activities.
 d)      Skills Development and Placement Support # the project will help identify
specific sectors, with the help of industry, with high employment potential, assess the
existing level of skills or interests, and develop skills development plans for each YG.
The project will provide skills development training, job placement, coaching and
facilitate enterprise start-ups to an estimated 20,000 unemployed young male and female
to be organized into YGs in collaboration with appropriate NGOs and private sector.
Areas of training will be tailored to the needs of the market as well as the preference of
each target group.

 e)      Innovation Support # the project will support selected innovations that enhance
rural livelihoods and have potential for scaling-up and replication. Social security
projects that address SHG members# health emergencies or food security can also be
included. Proposals will be invited from various institutions such as the private sector,
NGOs, community organizations, local government agencies, and research institutions.
The project will provide funds to the approved proposals.

  5.    Component 3 - Partnership Development (US$14.3 million): The objective of
this component is to develop and support effective partnerships with the private sector,
public sector, and civil society to enhance the communities# major livelihood activities
such as agriculture and livestock/dairy through strategic public-private partnerships. The
project will bring various resources and support for the communities to facilitate access
to finance, technology, procurement of inputs, establishing value chains and marketing
for livelihoods development of the rural poor. The project will work to create mutually
beneficial relationships for both community organizations and service providers, and
ensure that the linkages are sustainable beyond the project. To this end, the component
will finance technical assistance consultancies, training, and development of related
training materials. The following activities will be supported under the component:

  a)     Financial Support Linkage # given the communities# limited access to finance in
the NE, financial linkage is extremely important for the sustainability of community
institutions which include SHGs, SHG village federations, and CDGs. The project will
help develop linkages between community organizations and various formal financial
intermediaries such as microfinance institutions, commercial banks, apex development
financial institutions such as National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
(NABARD) and Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI), and specialized
funding agencies such as North East Development Finance Institution (NEDFI). Linkages
with microfinance institutions such as Rashitiya Gramin Vikas Nidhi (RGVN) and
Friends of Women#s World Banking (FWWB) will also be encouraged to provide loans
directly to the SHG village federations for onward lending to the SHGs and SHG
members. This sub-component will finance technical assistance, training and/or product
development costs through partnerships with formal financial intermediaries.

 b)    Technical Support Linkage # the project will help foster linkages between
community organizations/para-workers and technical resource organizations such as
universities, research institutes, private/corporate agencies and NGOs, to provide among
others training, socio-technical support services, action research, thematic studies, issue-
based workshop/seminars, and post-harvest technology support. Sectors envisaged
include floriculture, horticulture, animal husbandry, NRM, handicraft and handloom,
food processing, and eco-tourism. The length of engagement will vary depending on the
communities# needs. The project will also engage sector support organizations (SSOs)
that will provide technical know-how for value chain linkages, critical market linkages
and capacity building support to community organizations.

 c)     Marketing Support Linkage # marketing is the crux of economic activity
promotion. The project will provide resources to engage various private and public sector
organizations who in turn will assist the POs and SHGs to access better market
information and latest technology, obtain higher returns for their produce, and help the
communities align their produce better with market demand. Specific activities envisaged
under this sub-component include support for production cluster development; collective
marketing; market infrastructure development; market intelligence collection, analysis
and dissemination; value chain analysis and linkage support; public-private partnership;
and linkage with nodal agencies such as Small Farmers# Agribusiness Consortium
(SFAC), State Agricultural Marketing Board (SAMB), NABARD, NEDFI to facilitate
marketing.

  6.   Component 4: Project Management (US$14.6 million): The objective of this
component is to facilitate the implementation, coordination, monitoring and evaluation,
learning and quality enhancement efforts of the project. This component will finance
technical assistance consultancies, training and related material, office equipment,
management information system (MIS) development, and operational costs. The
following activities are envisaged:

 a)     Project Management # the project will help establish and strengthen various
functions of the RPMU, State Project Coordinators (SPCs), and DPMUs to enable them
to effectively manage, deliver and support all aspects of NERLP.

 b)     Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) # the project will help develop a
comprehensive M&E system not only to monitor the progress but also to provide useful
quantitative and qualitative information on household and community-level impacts. A
web-based management information system (MIS) will be established for tracking the
progress of the project.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
7. The project area lies within the ecologically fragile, biologically rich North-East region
of India. The North-East region contains more than one third of the country#s
biodiversity and is one of the 25 global biodiversity hot spots. The threats to the natural
environment in the region stem from deforestation, mining and quarrying, shifting
cultivation, open grazing, overharvesting of forest produce, etc. The project will be
implemented in two districts each in Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura. The
districts are:
 Mizoram       -       Aizawl and Lunglei
 Nagaland      -       Peren and Tuensang
 Sikkim        -       South, West and 15 Panchayat wards of East District
 Tripura       -       West and North Districts

 8. The North East region is home to over 200 of the 635 tribal communities in India.
The tribal population constitutes about one-fourth of the population of the region.
Mizoram and Nagaland are predominantly tribal, with 94% and 90% of the ST population
respectively, while 20% of Sikkim and 31% of Tripura populations are tribal.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Priti Kumar (SASDI)
   Ms Kalyani Kandula (SASGP)
   Mr Kumar Amarendra Narayan Singh (TWISA)
   Mr Varun Singh (SASDS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                           X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
9.      An Environmental Assessment and Environment Management Framework
(EA/EMF) was undertaken by the Ministry for the Development of North East Region
through a consultant firm for the proposed NERLP. The EA/EMF has been prepared
based on lessons learnt from the International Fund for Agriculture Development
(IFAD)-supported North East Regional Community Resources Management Project for
Upland Areas (NERCOMP). The methodology for preparation of the EA/EMF involved
collection of information through field visits and secondary reviews for generating a
baseline of environmental conditions, reviews of legal and regulatory provisions at
national and state levels and of lessons learnt from past projects and finally consultations
and workshops.

 10. The project area lies within an ecologically fragile and biologically rich region
that is prone to climatic changes. More generally, the North East Region is located within
trans-boundary river basins. The rural population in the project area are chiefly dependent
on agriculture (shifting cultivation is the mainstay in Nagaland and Mizoram and tribal
dominated hill areas in Tripura), piggery, poultry, dairy, fishery and forest-based
activities to sustain their livelihoods. The study identified the following key
environmental issues that impact livelihoods: shifting cultivation with short cycles
leading to forest degradation, soil erosion and loss of soil nutrients; lack of pasture and
grazing land; water scarcity affecting availability for drinking and irrigation; poor water
quality; and construction of roads and new infrastructure without regard to geology or
slope. In addition to Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), the safeguard policies on
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), and Pest Management (OP/BP
4.09) have been triggered in view of the ecological richness of the region and the
importance of integrating sustainable management practices in forest-dependent and
agriculture-based livelihoods.

  11. The project will provide investment support to Self Help Groups (SHG), SHG
federations, Community Development Groups (CDG) and Producer Organizations (PO)
against livelihood and community development plans. Even though no severe or long
term negative environmental impacts are expected due to the proposed project activities,
the above policies are triggered to ensure due diligence given the nature of the region.
Natural resource management is identified as one of the strategies of the project. Village-
level CDGs will be supported for undertaking activities for the development of natural
resources (community-based forest management, fisheries conservation, water
harvesting, etc.) and the EMF has a provision for integrating natural resource
management plans into the Community Development Plans that CDGs will prepare. In an
overall sense, the project is thus likely to contribute to better environmental quality.

 Social

  12. The MDONER has undertaken a social assessment (SA) study for the proposed
NERLP, through a consultant. The OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples is triggered, as
tribal people are present in all the project states. Nagaland and Mizoram have
predominantly tribal population at 89% and 94% respectively, while in Sikkim and
Tripura, the tribal groups are around 20% and 30% of the state population respectively.
The key social safeguard issue is ensuring geographic and social outreach, informed
consultations and broad community support, sustained mobilisation and empowerment of
the tribal people, including primitive tribal groups like the Reang in Tripura, to
participate in the project processes and benefit significantly from project interventions,
and their social and cultural suitability. Tribal people will be the main beneficiaries (in
Nagaland and Mizoram) and targeted beneficiaries (in Sikkim and Tripura), and are
significant stakeholder of NERLP. The tribal people in project villages will be
empowered through social mobilization in community institutions such as
SHGs/federations, CDGs, YGs and POs. They will improve their access to i) savings,
credit and banking services; ii) agriculture, forest, livestock and other nonfarm
livelihoods; iii) high priority community infrastructure and local markets; and iv)
essential government services and programmes. OP/BP 4.12 is not applicable as the
project components do not involve involuntary land acquisition by the borrower.
However, there remains potential for minor adverse impacts from the community
subprojects involving land, forests, and natural resources.

  13. The social assessment has highlighted higher poverty and exclusion among the
tribal people in Sikkim and Tripura and other vulnerable social groups in remote upland
communities, scheduled and other backward castes, shifting cultivators, households in
traditional occupations, women headed households, and small and marginal farmers in
the project states - and high unemployment among the rural youth. Limited transport
services and connectivity, hilly and difficult terrains have led to physical and social
alienation of the rural poor from public services, infrastructure and markets. Government
programs have not been able to reach out to and mobilize the rural poor effectively,
particularly in far off villages. This is mainly due to limitations of staff availability,
implementation capacity, budgets and emphasis on targets. Community mobilization and
transparency in functioning and information sharing continue to remain weak in
government programs like SGSY. Inaccurate identification of beneficiaries and
capturing of project benefits by the #literates# and #better informed# have also excluded
the rural poor. Existing SHGs in the project districts are weak in social cohesion and
group functioning, driven more by subsidies, with low repayment rates and low bank
linkages. Lack of information, low awareness, and illiteracy has constrained the access of
the poor to essential social and livelihood services and infrastructure. The poor have low
capacity to effectively participate in economic, social and political life. At the village
level, participation of the rural poor in village planning and governance is low, both in
traditional and statutory governance structures and processes. Women have limited role
in decision-making bodies, particularly in Nagaland. Civil and ethnic disturbances have
hampered the pace of human and social development in the region.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
14.      The main strategy of the project is to build community institutions for economic
empowerment and livelihood enhancement. The Environment Management Framework
(EMF) of the project # through procedural requirements and capacity building # ensures
that the community institutions (SHGs, SHG federations, CDGs and POs) integrate
environmental management as part of the livelihood enhancement activities. It is
anticipated that with this experience and enhanced capacity, these institutions will be able
to apply sound environmental management even in their future activities. No long term
adverse social impacts caused by project activities are anticipated.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
15.    Not relevant. Adverse social or environmental impacts are not expected.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
16.     An Environment Management Framework (EMF) for the project comprises a
detailed strategy and procedures for mainstreaming environmental management/appraisal
into the Investment Plans of SHGs, SHG federations, CDGs and POs. The environmental
management planning exercise will be undertaken as part of the process of development
of Investment Plans with support of the field-level project facilitation teams (PFTs) and
specialized resource institutions (e.g., NGOs). The EMF includes a list of regulatory
requirements that indicates activities that are not permissible under the project. A
screening tool is available that aids in the classification of permissible activities into low
and high impact activities based on the magnitude of adverse environmental impacts.
Activities having low impact are expected to follow the environmental good practice
guidelines, while activities with high impact are expected to follow the Limited
Environmental Appraisal (LEA) procedures. Furthermore, as part of the Community
Development Plan, a Natural Resource Management Plan (NRMP) will be developed that
identifies actions at the household and community levels for sustainable management of
the natural resources, training and extension support requirements, institutional
arrangements and potential areas for convergence with existing government schemes.
The interventions in the NRMP have to follow the environmental appraisal process
depending on the magnitude of impacts specified earlier. POs will develop locally
relevant Codes of Practice. Finally, the EMF includes a provision to pilot good
environmental practices in livelihood activities with a view to scaling up.

 17. The EMF describes institutional arrangements and capacity building and
monitoring plan to enable adoption of the environmental appraisal procedures. A Project
Manager (NRM & Environment) in the Regional Project Management Unit and a
Coordinator (NRM & Environment) in each of the District Project Management Units
will be the key staff responsible for ensuring effective implementation of the EMF. They
will facilitate and ensure that the capacity building requirements of the project personnel
and community institutions on environmental management are met, in accordance with
the EMF. Periodic internal monitoring of the implementation of the EMF will be
undertaken by the project staff at regional and district levels through both desk review
and field visits, and includes a focus on assessing cumulative environmental impacts of
the livelihood interventions. A process audit at the end of first year and independent
external audits at the end of the second and fourth years are included in the EMF. A set of
performance indicators has been developed to monitor the effectiveness of EMF
implementation. The above arrangements are expected to ensure that the existing capacity
of the borrower is adequately built for effective environmental management of the
project.

 18. Based on the SA and feedback from stakeholder consultations, a social
empowerment component, community mobilization strategy, gender strategy and tribal
development strategies have been prepared. The project has developed tribal
development frameworks (TDF) for Sikkim and Tripura. The TDF includes a
consultation and participation framework with provisions for informed consultations with
the tribal and non-tribal community, prioritization of tribal villages, tribal focused
information and communication campaign, representation of tribal households in
community institutions, targeted livelihood assistance, community based grievance
redressal mechanisms, and sensitization of project staff and partners on engaging with the
society and culture of tribals in the project states. Customary institutions as well as
formal governance structures will be engaged in grievance redressal, conflict resolution
and participatory community planning processes. The community-planned subprojects
involving land, forests and other natural resources will be designed through participatory
decision making process, and will be screened and mitigated for potential adverse
impacts on beneficiaries, especially vulnerable households.

 19. The social development staff in the RPMU, DPMU, and PFTs will supervise the
implementation of the mechanisms on social mobilization, tribal inclusion, grievance
redressal, conflict resolution and gender equity. The TDF will be anchored with the
project manager (social, gender and community mobilisation) at RPMU, and will be
implemented through the district social coordinator, BPFTs and community service
providers. Capacity building of project staff, as well as community institutions, on social
mobilization, tribal development, social impact screening, tribal development, gender,
conflict resolution and grievance redressal will be undertaken. The PIP and COM will be
supported by necessary training modules, implementation guidelines and manuals.
Specific need based training, exposure visits and cross learning events will be organized
to adapt project implementation strategies and enhance the effectiveness of the project.
The key monitoring indicators on social inclusion and TDF implementation will be
incorporated in the project M&E and the MIS. Community monitoring will be
institutionalized in the project districts. In addition to internal monitoring, the RPMU
and DPMUs will undertake third party monitoring that would cover process monitoring,
external audit of TDF implementation, and thematic studies.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
20.     The process of development of the EMF involved extensive field consultations in
25 villages of the nine project districts. The consultations included focus group
discussions and interviews with Villages Council Chairmen/Presidents, SHGs and SHG
Federations, Community Development Groups (CDGs), Youth Groups, NGOs as well as
with relevant line department staff at State and District levels. The EMF has been
disclosed through the websites of the Ministry for the Development of North East Region
(MDONER), the Northeast Council, the State Departments of Rural Development, and
on Bank#s Infoshop. RPMU will hold multi-stakeholder workshops to disseminate the
EA/EMF in the project states.

 21. The key stakeholders of the project are rural poor in the Mizoram, Sikkim,
Nagaland and Tripura, specially men and women from tribal and non-tribal people in
remote upland communities, scheduled and other backward castes, shifting cultivators,
households in traditional occupations, women headed households, and small and
marginal farmers. The Social Assessment involved household survey, extensive
community consultations, district and state level meetings in all the four project states.
Consultations were held with the targeted beneficiary communities, BPL households,
women, scheduled tribes (STs), scheduled castes, community leaders, village councils,
PRIs, government departments, NGOs and academics. The SA/TDF report has been
disclosed on the website of MDONER, the State Departments of Rural Development and
Bank#s InfoShop, and is being made available in local language in the project areas. The
RPMU will also hold dissemination workshops on the SA/TDF in the project states.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 06/02/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             06/02/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/03/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 06/02/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             06/02/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/03/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 06/02/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             06/02/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/03/2011
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?           Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)       Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the       Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of    No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other     Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                        Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                       No
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or      N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                     Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed      Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   No
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           N/A
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        N/A
provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s          No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project      Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the              Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                 Name                Date
Task Team Leader:                     Mr Nathan M. Belete                  06/20/2011
Environmental Specialist:             Ms Priti Kumar                       06/20/2011
Social Development Specialist         Mr Varun Singh                       06/20/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Mr Sanjay Srivastava                  06/20/2011
  Comments: cleared. Please refer to email dated 06/09/2011 for details.
Sector Manager:                      Mr Simeon Kacou Ehui                  06/20/2011
  Comments: Cleared
