                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/04/2011                                      Report No.: AC5829
1. Basic Project Data
Country: India                                Project ID: P102627
Project Name: India - Bihar Panchayat Strengthening Project
Task Team Leader: Yongmei Zhou
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 15, 2011       Estimated Board Date: September 30, 2011
Managing Unit: SASGP                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Sub-national government administration (90%);Other social services
(5%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (5%)
Theme: Decentralization (25%);Rural services and infrastructure (25%);Rural policies
and institutions (24%);Public expenditure, financial management and procurement
(13%);Participation and civic engagement (13%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            120.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                        0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective of this project is #support Bihar#s capacity to
promote and strengthen inclusive, responsive, and accountable Gram Panchayats in
selected districts across the state.#

 Project beneficiaries include: (i) elected officials and functionaries at the Gram
Panchayat level, who can become stronger leaders; who listen to their constituents and
solve their problems, protect the vulnerable, fairly resolve local conflicts, and capable of
mobilizing resources and support and take initiatives; (ii) rural residents in the target
PRIs of the six districts, who are more effective in monitoring fulfillment of government
obligations and can enjoy better and fairer government services and undertake effective
collective actions to solve local problems.


 Key performance indicators include:
  #     Increased percentage of active participants from socially disadvantaged groups
(SC, ST and women) attend regular Gram Sabha meetings in project districts.
  #     The regular meetings of GP Standing Committees focus on implementation of
their priority thematic programs.
  #     Increased percentage of GP project beneficiaries are from socially disadvantaged
groups (SC, ST and women).
  #     Increased number of GPs submits annual financial statement within four months
from the end of fiscal year for external audit.
  #     Increased percentage of people from all social groups perceive that the Gram
Panchayat is increasingly #inclusive, responsive, and accountable# in helping to address
their individual and community issues.

3. Project Description
Component 1: Gram Panchayat Sarkar Bhawan (US$40 million): This component
involves construction and operationalization of gram panchayat sarkar bhawans in
approximately 300 Gram Panchayats.

 Component 2: Capacity building for gram panchayats (US$ 27.5 million): This
component builds panchayats# core institutional competencies and empowers them to
achieve substantive development outcomes. The component also engages communities
and citizens, through training, mobilization, and media, to participate in local governance
and to hold panchayats accountable.

 i.     Institutional Strengthening: This will involve building the core institutional
capacity of panchayats, including basic administrative, planning and financial
management capacity. It will also include mass media communications and community
mobilization to increase people#s knowledge of their rights and responsibilities in
relation to PRIs, to mobilize community participation in PRIs, and to assist communities
in seeking redress in the event of grievances involving PRIs.

  ii.   Nurture development-oriented panchayat leadership and local initiatives: The
approach is to, on the one hand, raise awareness among local leaders and communities
about important behavior changes and local actions that can improve health and
livelihood; and on the other hand, to facilitate their access to government program
resource to finance community priorities. The project will focus on developing GP#s
capacity to plan and implement initiatives that improve results in at least one of the
following areas: natural resource management, nutrition status of women and children,
quality of drinking water, and village sanitation. This component will be implemented
with close partnership with the Public Health and Engineering (PHED), Rural
Development and Social Welfare Departments.

 2.    Component 3: Strengthen the State Government capacity to manage a gradual
decentralization and empowerment process (US$ 2.5 million):
 i.     Establish regulatory framework on PRIs: Develop and issue financial
management rules, procurement and accounting manuals, and revenue administration
guidelines.
 ii.    Panchayat capacity building curriculum: Develop a quality assurance mechanism
for an emerging curriculum for gram panchayats and pre-qualify a panel of providers to
support field implementation, experimentation, evaluation, quality assurance, and
operational adjustment.
 iii. Monitor panchayat finance and performance: Establish and build the capacity of
the Panchayat Finance and Performance Monitoring Unit in the BSGSYS so that a
Panchayat Finance and Performance database is operational and regularly updated to
capture a comprehensive picture of panchayat revenue, spending, development and
governance performance in the six project districts.
 iv. Build research capacity: training & academic exchange so that in house analytical
capacity in the BSGSYS is created and an annual report of the State of Panchayats is
produced either in house or in collaboration with an academic institution and widely
disseminated and a research program is built up over time.
 v.     Expand annual audit coverage: Strengthening the capacity of the Local Funds
Examiner (external auditor of Panchayats) for increasing audit coverage of panchayats in
the project districts

 Component 4: Panchayat performance grant (US$ 23 million)

 The annual Best Panchayat Grant will reward exceptional panchayats that are inclusive,
responsive and accountable. The recipients of the grant will be selected on a competitive
basis. The competition criteria will include core institutional quality indicators related to
how a panchayat runs its administration, how it interacts with its citizens, and how it
manages resources and promotes local development. The competition will be based on
objective information collected through the project information system with a validation
and appeals process. Annually, the project will recognize the best gram panchayat in each
district and block and award them block grants, which are significantly higher than what
they currently receive. The project will support this league of good panchayats to develop
high-impact initiatives that the grants will finance. These grants will be provided after
appraisal of the specific investments proposed by such panchayats and the project will
monitor the end use of such grants. The Bank fiduciary and environment requirements
will be adhered to by the panchayats in implementation of the grants. Detailed description
of the competitive selection process and evaluation criteria is provided in the Project
Implementation Plan and Operational Manual.

 Component 5: Project Management and Coordination (US$ 15 million):

  GoB has established a Bihar Gram Swaraj Yojana Society (BGSYS) as the
implementation agency for the project. The Society is expected to play four critical roles:
(i) A catalyst role: public awareness campaign, policy advocacy, innovative capacity
building for visible development results, proactive partnership with NGOs to stimulate
demand for accountability and improve PRI responsiveness; (ii) A technical support role:
to support partner line departments to establish capacity in managing the devolution
process and building PRIs capacity in the relevant service delivery area; (iii) A
coordination role: coordinate, monitor and report on the devolution and PRI
strengthening process; and (iv) A fiduciary role vis-a-vis IDA: Project financing
management, procurement and reporting. This component will finance staffing and
operational cost of the society.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The BPSP project will be implemented in 6 select districts of South and North Bihar.
Some of the salient environmental characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis are:
  #     The northern project districts (Saharsa, Supaul and Madhepura) fall under the
agro-climatic zone Zone II # North East Alluvial plains with jute and rice based cropping
systems. Even though the lands are fertile and plenty of water resources are available the
productivity of this region is very low due to floods, unscientific cultivation methods,
lack of irrigation, etc. The southern project districts (Patna, Nalanda, Bhojpur) fall under
Zone III B # South Bihar alluvial plain with rice and wheat based cropping systems. Crop
production is good, however parts of this zone are prone to moderate and severe
droughts.

 #      The Northern project districts have very good rain fall of 1450 mm, while the
Southern project districts have 1115 mm. There are abundant surface water resources in
the state with 14 river basins. The level of ground water exploitation is considered safe.
However, there is high dependence on tubewells for irrigation.

  #      73% of the geographical area of the state is flood-prone due to heavy rainfall in
the catchments of the rivers that originate in neighboring countries, heavy siltation
leading to breaches of bunds, shifting river courses, etc. Floods are annual phenomenon
in the Northern project districts (the Kosi belt with Saharsa, Supaul and Madhepura
districts). Water logging affects over 1550 sq km of land in the state.

 #      Bihar has very small areas under forest (6.87%). Nalanda district has maximum
forest cover with 2.66% of geographical area under forest.

 #      Tube wells are the major source of drinking water in Bihar. Quality of drinking
water is a concern with fluoride, arsenic, nitrate and iron contamination. Arsenic and
nitrate contamination is observed in Bhojpur and Patna whereas Supaul has fluoride
contamination. Iron contamination is found in Bhojpur, Patna, Supaul and Saharsa.

 #      Only about 20% of households in the state have toilet facilities. Diarrhea,
schistosomiasis, cholera and jaundice are the most common sanitation related diseases in
Bihar with high spread during post flood situations.

 Some of the salient characteristics relevant to social analysis are:

 #      Bihar is one of the largest and poorest states in India. Per capita income is about
one-third of the national average. Out of its 83-million population, 70% live in rural
areas. Agriculture employs 80% of Bihar#s labor force and contributes to 40% of the
state Gross Domestic Product (GDP). However, despite fertile land and abundant water
resources, agricultural productivity is low. According to the latest data from 2004-5,
poverty incidence is over 40% among the rural population and people living in small and
medium towns, comparable to the highest in the developing world . Literacy rates are
56% among men and 35% among women. 38% of rural households have no literate
member . In 2006, 56% of children under the age of five were stunted, 56% were
underweight, and 27% were wasted. 45% of the women aged 15-49 suffer from chronic
malnutrition, two-thirds of the women in this age group and 87% of children under the
age of three suffer from anemia. Basic access to sanitation is very poor. Only 16% of
rural households have toilets. Quality of drinking water is a big problem, as a result of
poor sanitation and fluoride, arsenic, nitrate and iron.

  #      There are deep rooted inequalities in Bihar. Land distribution is very unequal ,
with a large proportion of landless or marginal farmers. Among the rural population, 28%
belong to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (SC/ST), who typically live in deeper
poverty. Poverty incidence is 64% among the SC population and 56% among the ST
population. Median land ownership for an SC/ST household is 0.03 ha. 60% of SC/ST
households are engaged in agricultural labor. 70% of the heads of SC/ST households are
illiterate. While the past two decades have seen the political rise of backward castes,
SC/ST continues to face social oppression and have limited economic opportunities.

 #     The government that came into office in 2005 provided for positive
discrimination for women, SC/ST and extremely backward castes in the Bihar Panchayat
Act (2006). Because of these provisions, the 2006 panchayat elections had ensured a
much larger role for marginalized sections of the population in local governance.
Currently, 55% elected panchayat members are women, 14% are SC, and 0.66% are ST.
The demographic profile of GP ward members mirrors those they represent # many of
them are poor, illiterate and uneducated. The reservation policy created an unprecedented
opportunities for poor people#s voice to be heard.

 #      Deep rooted social inequality, especially along gender and caste lines, limits the
degree of participation of all social groups in a panchayat. The legal framework in India
and Bihar provides many opportunities for villagers to participate in local governance and
to hold authority to account, for example, gram sabhas, social audit, and Right to
Information. In reality, it will take a long time for hitherto suppressed social groups to
gain confidence and skills to occupy meaningful seats in local governance.

 #     Activities that the project will finance include approximately 350 bhawans out of
1312 Gram Panchayats in 6 select districts of South and North Bihar. Construction of
each Panchayat Bhawan is likely to require 0.3-0.5 acre of land.

 #     The share of tribal population in the project districts is less than 1% and
dispersed.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Priti Kumar (SASDI)
   Ms Sangeeta Kumari (SASDS)
   Ms Kalyani Kandula (SASGP)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environment safeguard:
  As a part of project preparation, an environmental assessment study was undertaken by
the Government of Bihar through a consultant for the proposed BPSP project. The
objective of the study was identifying environmental issues associated with the proposed
project activities and to design an appropriate Environment Management Framework for
enhancing the positive impacts and mitigating negative impacts. This assessment study
included collection and collation of secondary data, analysis of policy and legal
framework, consultations and field study in 33 Gram Panchayats (GPs) in 6 districts. The
assessment suggests that the project will not have any significant adverse and/or
irreversible environmental impact. Hence, the project has been classified as belonging to
environmental screening category B.

 The BPSP project will finance a key training module (under Component II) that
supports development-oriented Gram Panchayat leaders to undertake effective initiatives
and improve development indicators in the areas of water, sanitation, nutrition and
natural resource management. Thus, the project is expected to have an overall positive
environmental impact # through facilitating improvements in water supply, sanitation and
natural resource management.

  Social safeguard:
  The development objective of the project is to promote inclusive, responsive and
accountable gram panchayats in six districts. So the social inclusion and accountability
issues are addressed by the project as a whole and not just by the safeguard measures.
  The Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) of the World Bank’s safeguard policies is
triggered. The Panchayat Sakar Bhawan component will construct offices for
approximately 350 gram panchayats in six districts, with land requirement of 0.3-0.5 acre
each. Preliminary data from some districts suggest that in most GPs, the bhawans will be
built on suitable common government land (Gairmajurwa). In some GPs where such land
is not available, community members may donate land. But there may be exceptional
cases where the Government needs to purchase land/acquire the land too. Such land takes
can cause involuntary resettlement. Displacement is unlikely to be significant, but could
involve the following scenarios: (i) removal of encroachments and squatters leading to
loss of livelihood and/or shelter; and (ii) land acquisition leading to loss of private land,
house, trees, other immovable assets and livelihood.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The project is expected to have an overall positive environmental and social impact #
through promoting inclusive, responsive and accountable gram panchayats and
specifically facilitating improvements in water supply, sanitation and natural resource
management.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Several mitigation alternatives to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts are proposed in
the Environment Management Framework (EMF) such as:
 #      Emphasizing adherence to country systems (national and state legislation) that are
known to be comprehensive.
 #      Capacity building of Gram Panchayat functionaries for sustainable management
of natural resources.
 #      Mitigation measures include institutional arrangements and capacity building at
all levels for project staff.
 #      Internal monitoring and external audit of implementation of the identified
mitigation measures.
 #      Demonstration of the feasibility and advantages of good environmental practices.

 Alternative design options for construction of Panchayat Bhawans have been prepared
under the project to reduce the land requirement under the project. The current land
requirement ranges from 0.3-0.5 acre.

 The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) developed under the project provides
guidelines for screening of potential sites from social impact and equal access point of
view. For the likely project affected people if any, an entitlement framework is also
developed based on all applicable legal and policy frameworks of the country and World
Bank OP 4.12 requirements.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Since neither the exact locations nor the types of the projects to be funded could be
identified prior to appraisal, an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been developed as an output of the
environmental assessment study. The purpose of the EMF is to ensure that the project
interventions are environmentally sustainable and are in compliance with all the
regulatory requirements (of the Government of Bihar, Government of India and safeguard
policies of the World Bank).

  The EMF consists of procedures and tools that assist in the environmental appraisal and
preparation of environmental management plans for the GP Bhawans and for activities
taken up with the Performance Award by Gram Panchayats. While environmental
appraisal for project-supported activities is mandatory, its application to other (non-
project supported) activities of Gram Panchayats will be promoted as good practice
through capacity building efforts. Environmental appraisal involves checking to ensure
that no activity on the environmental negative list is included in the GP plan (screening).
This is followed by the preparation of an environmental management plan which involves
referring to the given environmental guidelines for identifying the potential issues and
mitigation measures. The environmental guidelines are developed for the GP Bhawans,
agriculture, animal husbandry, fisheries, forestry, housing, roads, promotion of non-
conventional energy, small scale industries, etc. The identified mitigation measures are
included in the activity plan, along with additional costs if any. They will also be
included in the contract documents for the work execution (wherever applicable),
ensuring that the contractors are legally bound to implement the mitigation measures
included in the formats. The environmental appraisal will be done by the Block
Facilitator # Environment Natural Resources Management (ENRM) / District ENRM
Coordinator in consultation with the relevant Standing Committee. The appraisal of
activities requiring more detailed assessment will be undertaken by the District ENRM
Coordinator.

 Since the selection of GPs for the bhawans will not be complete before appraisal, a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared by Government of Bihar to
guide the social impact assessment and preparation of a resettlement plan for any GP
where bhawan construction will result in involuntary resettlement. The RPF is consistent
with all applicable laws and policies the Government of Bihar and the World Bank,
including: (i) The Land Acquisition Act (LAA) 1894, (ii) National Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Policy, 2007 (NRRP-2007), (iii) Bihar Land Acquisition Resettlement and
Rehabilitation Policy-2007 (BLARRP-2007) and (iv) WB Operational Policy 4.12 on
involuntary Resettlement. Specifically, the RPF outlines the policy, procedures and
institutional arrangements for preparation and implementation of GP-specific
resettlement plans. The draft RPF was disclosed through the website of the Department of
Panchayati Raj, Government of Bihar. A consultation workshop on the RPF was
conducted at Patna on February 3, 2011. The final version of the RPF is planned to be
disclosed on the Bank Infoshop.
 The EMF and RPF include a capacity building strategy that involves provision of
orientation to all project staff, detailed training of District and Block level specialists, and
detailed orientation to the relevant GP Standing Committees on environmental and social
safeguards.

  Internal monitoring of the EMF and RPF implementation at the block, district and state
levels by the project staff is planned. Key aspects of monitoring include implementation
of capacity building programs, integration of environmental management into GP
planning process, environmental appraisal of GP bhawans and GP activities,
implementation of mitigation measures, promotion or implementation of environment
friendly activities by the GPs, etc. Independent external audit will be done twice during
the project duration (3rd and 5th year) for assessing the overall implementation and
effectiveness of EMF and RPF.

 The roles and responsibilities for ensuring the implementation of the EMF and RPF
have been detailed at the state, district, block and GP levels. The financial requirement
for the implementation of the EMF has been worked out and has been included in the
project budget.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The EMF development process included consultations with key stakeholders
(representatives of the PRIs, line departments, representatives of NGO/CBO, etc.),
including field consultations in 33 GPs in 6 districts. A state level consultation workshop
was organized on 15 November 2010 and the draft EMF was circulated to key line
departments for feedback. The final version of the EMF and RPF incorporates the inputs/
comments/suggestions received from the stakeholders during the consultations. The EMF
has been disclosed on the website of the Panchayati Raj Department, Government of
Bihar and will be circulated to the project districts.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                        Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                        06/02/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    06/01/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                     06/17/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                        Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                        06/02/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    06/01/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                     06/17/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Ms Yongmei Zhou                     06/17/2011
Environmental Specialist:            Ms Priti Kumar                      06/17/2011
Social Development Specialist        Ms Sangeeta Kumari                  06/17/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Sanjay Srivastava                 06/23/2011
  Comments: cleared. Please see email date 04/13/2011 for details.
Sector Manager:                     Mr Joel Hellman                      06/30/2011
  Comments: approved
