                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/24/2011                                    Report No.: AC2708
1. Basic Project Data
Country: India                               Project ID: P100304
Project Name: India: Uttar Pradesh Health Systems Strengthening Project (UPHSSP)
Task Team Leader: Vikram Sundara Rajan
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 16, 2011 Estimated Board Date: November 17, 2011
Managing Unit: SASHN                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Health (100%)
Theme: Health system performance (80%);Child health (10%);Population and
reproductive health (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            152.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                          18.00
                                                                     18.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective of UPHSSP is to improve the efficiency, quality and
accountability of health service delivery in Uttar Pradesh by strengthening the State
Health Department's management and systems capacity.

3. Project Description
The project would finance the following two components: (i) strengthening the
Department of Health's management and accountability systems; and (ii) improving the
Department of Health's capacity to perform its quality assurance role and more
effectively engage the private sector. A summary of the two components is provided
below:

 Component 1: Strengthening the Department of Health's management and
accountability systems will support: (i) strengthening strategic planning functions in the
Health Department, working closely with the recently established Health and
Knowledge Resource Center (HKRC) in the Family Welfare Department;; (ii) improving
use of data for program management in collaboration with the existing Electronic Data
Processing (EDP) Cell in the Department and expanding its scope to function as a Data
Resource Center; (iii) strengthening the use of financial information for improved
decision making through the existing accounting and auditing systems for treasury and
society funds, and strengthening of procurement and supply chain management systems;
and (iv) introducing and strengthening action research to introduce community
assessment of health and health care at the local level and introducing provider incentives
in the public sector. This would also include the services of the procurement agent,
technical assistance provider and the project support unit which would support
institutional capacity building and project implementation.

 Component 2: Improving the Department of Health's capacity to perform its quality
assurance role and more effectively engage the private sector will support: (i)
strengthening the institutional capacity for service quality improvement and regulatory
capacity, which would include establishment of, and capacity building for, the Quality
Assurance (QA), Environment Management (EM) and Public Private Partnerships (PPP)
Cells in the Directorate of Health; (ii) improvement of quality of service delivery at
public sector hospitals to enable accreditation under the National Accreditation Board of
Hospitals (NABH); (iii) contracting with the private sector for delivery of diagnostic
services and non-clinical support services; (iv) and ensuring the availability of the full
complement of human resources required for accreditation at each selected facility, and
health managers at the facility level.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The State of Uttar Pradesh (UP), India.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Meera Chatterjee (SASDS)
   Ms Ruma Tavorath (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
ENVIRONMENT: The project, as envisaged does not have any immediate safeguard
impacts, given that the focus is on the establishment of an institutional framework for a
coordinated and multi-sectoral management of environmental issues related to health
sector. There are also no civil works presently anticipated under this project. If any civil
works are to be supported under accreditation of hospitals, the project would develop and
use safeguard procedures agreed with the Bank.

  SOCIAL: As the state of UP does not have a significant Scheduled Tribe population
O.P. 4.10 is not triggered. However, there are a few scattered tribal people (recognizable
by their special customs) among the state's very large (200 million) population. These
people would be among the vulnerable communities covered by the Equity Plan (EP)
prepared for the project. The purpose of the EP is to ensure that the systems
strengthening carried out under the project takes into account inequalities in access and
use of health care, and in health outcomes. This should result in the long run in improved
access and outcomes amongst the vulnerable, including tribal people. O.P. 4.12 is not
triggered as there would be no civil works construction requiring land under the project.
No negative impacts related to either O.P. are expected from the project.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
ENVIRONMENT: The project will institute processes and systems to improve the
coordination, implementation and management of environmental issues related to health
service delivery.

 SOCIAL: The project is expected to develop systems and plans to improve health
services for vulnerable people, which would help to improve health outcomes in the
longer term. No negative impacts (direct or indirect, short- or long-term are expected.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
ENVIRONMENT: The project considered the traditional approach for management of
health care waste linked to health service delivery. However, this was revised towards a
more upstream approach focused on systems strengthening, keeping in line with the
project development objective. The project will establish an Environment Management
Cell which will be responsible for coordination and management of environment issues
related to the health sector.

 SOCIAL: A direct health service improvement project was considered. However, it
was changed in favor of this project, based on the recognition that an enabling
environment needs to be created and systems strengthened to achieve the vast
improvements necessary in UP's health system, develop a pro-poor focus, and improve
equity in health in the state.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
ENVIRONMENT: The borrower has prepared an Environment Management Plan
(EMP)which details the proposed activities under the project. The objective is to
constitute an Environment Management Cell (EMC) which will be responsible for
coordination of environment related activities of the Medical, Health & Family Welfare
departments. The EMC will be established within the Directorate of Medical and Health
by issuance of a Government Order and will be funded from the state budget resources,
including NRHM. The EMC will comprise officials from the Department of M&H, and
deputed officials from other relevant departments (such as the UP Pollution Control
Board). Based on a needs assessment, the EMC will develop a road map for management
of healthcare waste and infection control activities and other environment related issues,
including management of minor and major civil works. After a mid-year evaluation at
end of year 4, a revised Roadmap for subsequent roll-out across the state. The EMP,
which defines the above activities has been approved by the GOUP and the Bank and
disclosed.

 SOCIAL: The Borrower carried out a Social Assessment (SA), including consultations
with vulnerable communities, service providers and non-governmental organizations, at
the beginning of project preparation. A brief recent update has been provided by the
GOUP, along with the Equity Plan (described above) which would ensure that vulnerable
people are addressed in the activities implemented under this project. While some
Borrower capacity exists for this purpose, it would be strengthened through the proposed
system development and management improvements and the provision of Technical
Assistance.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
SOCIAL: The key stakeholders are the citizens of UP, especially the poor, and health
care organizations and providers in the public and private sectors (including NGOs).
They would continue to be consulted on a regular basis during project implementation
through workshops and field exercises to provide inputs to and feedback on project
activities. An important activity in the project is the development of social accountability
mechanisms to improve the responsiveness, efficiency and quality of health service
delivery, as well as enhance positive household health behaviors. All stakeholder groups
would be involved in these efforts.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?          Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                          04/13/2011
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                      08/08/2011
 Date of submission to InfoShop                       08/10/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name                      Date
Task Team Leader:                    Mr Vikram Sundara Rajan                    08/18/2011
Environmental Specialist:            Ms Ruma Tavorath                           08/18/2011
Social Development Specialist        Ms Meera Chatterjee                        08/18/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Sanjay Srivastava                        08/18/2011
  Comments: cleared. Please see email dat 08/18/2011 for details.
Sector Manager:                     Ms Julie McLaughlin                         08/24/2011
  Comments: Cleared
