                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/04/2013                                   Report No.: AC6240
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Indonesia                           Project ID: P121842
Project Name: Research and Innovation in Science and Technology Project
Task Team Leader: Dandan Chen
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 21, 2011      Estimated Board Date: March 28, 2013
Managing Unit: EASHE                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: General education sector (100%)
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            95
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                     0.00
                                                                      0.00
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project will be aligned with the higher level objective of improving Indonesia's
competitiveness in the knowledge economy. The project is aligned with the GoI's
medium term priorities to strengthen the national innovation, by creating a "National
Science and Technology System to make a real contribution to people's welfare and
advance civilization through institutional strengthening, network strengthening, research
and development improvement and science and technology application system
improvement", as stated in the GoI's Medium-Term Strategy Document (RPJM).

 The development objective of the proposed project is to create an enabling policy
environment for R&D in science and technology, to improve the public R&D institutes'
performance, and to improve STI human resource capacity.

3. Project Description
The project has the following four components:

 Component 1: Improving Innovation Policy Framework and Performance of Public
Research Centers. This component aims to support the ongoing efforts to strengthen the
national innovation system through a series of policy reviews and analyses that provide
concrete recommendations on designing and managing an effective National Innovation
System (i.e., improving coordination among stakeholders, using funding and incentive
mechanisms more efficiently, linking to regional needs through Regional Innovation
Systems). The component will support RISTEK and the National Innovation
Commission's (KIN) goals to improve the coordination of the innovation system and
develop effective policy tools to promote innovation. More concretely, the studies and
activities under this component are in line with the analytical background needed by
RISTEK in their mandate to draft a revision of Law no. 18/2002 concerning the national
innovation system and the application of science and technology. Therefore, in addition
to broadening the analytical base on innovation in the country, a key contribution of this
component will be building consensus among policy makers on the key reforms needed.

 This component also aims at: (i) Strengthening the capacity of public research centers at
to contribute to Indonesia's needs; (ii) Improving institutional conditions of public
research centers; and (iii) Improving framework conditions of public research centers.

  Component 2: Strengthening Public Research Funding. Component 2 will improve the
public research funding system by strengthening the capacity of RISTEK management to
enhance the quality and relevance of strategic industry-research consortium funding, and
by helping RISTEK design a new competitive research funding system. More
specifically, the component will support: i) the feasibility study and design of a national
research foundation; ii) the strengthening of RISTEK's institutional research funding
program; iii) the establishment of industrial and global research linkages; and iv) the
improvement of monitoring and evaluation of publicly-funded research. The Bank
financing will focus on improving the management of the scheme, but will not directly
fund the research grant itself. The government will continue to support the research grant
through Rupiah budget allocation.

 Component 3: Developing S&T Human Resources Capacity. The objective of this
project component is to strengthen human resources and enhance the performance of
RISTEK and public agencies functioning as research and technology institutes (LPNK);
specifically their ability to contribute to Indonesia's economic and social development
through knowledge and technology. The human resource capacity is a key aspect of
RISTEK and LPNK institutional assessments, and HR development plans is a critical
element of the overall RISTEK and LPNK institutional development plans. Therefore,
implementation of this component is closely linked to the key activities of component 1.

 Component 4: Project management. This component will support the operations of the
project committee and implementation units.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The proposed project will focus on research and development capacity and human capital
strengthening of key CENTRAL agencies.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Indira Dharmapatni (EASIS)
   Mr Andrew Daniel Sembel (EASIS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                    X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project will support degree and non-degree training in science and technology areas
including nuclear science. Indonesia is a member state of the International Atomic
Energy Association (IAEA) since 1957, has signed the Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1970,
and ratified it in 1979.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Bank funds will not finance research grants under this project, but aim at strengthening
the management of the grant scheme. The technical assistance to be financed by the
Bank will include introducing international Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS)
guidelines and best practices in managing research projects.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
N/A


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       N/A
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          N/A
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            N/A
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Dandan Chen                              03/01/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Andrew Daniel Sembel                     03/01/2013
Social Development Specialist       Ms Indira Dharmapatni                       03/01/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr James A. Stevens                         03/01/2013
  Comments:
