                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/09/2011                                  Report No.: AC5033
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Indonesia                           Project ID: P111034
Project Name: Jakarta Urgent Flood Mitigation Project
Task Team Leader: Fook Chuan Eng
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 19,      Estimated Board Date: January 17, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: EASIS                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Flood protection (100%)
Theme: Natural disaster management (67%);Other urban development (33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           150.50
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                     38.90
                                                                      38.90
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to contribute to the improvement of the
operation and maintenance of priority sections of Jakarta's flood management system.
The PDO will be achieved through: (a) Dredging sections of selected key floodways,
canals and retention basins (waduks) to improve their flow capacities, and disposing the
dredge material in proper facilities; (b) Rehabilitating and constructing embankment in
sections of, and repairing or replacing mechanical equipment in, the same selected key
floodways, canals and retention basins to sustain and improve their operations; (c)
Establishing institutional coordination between the three responsible agencies to
encourage coordinated development, and operations and maintenance (O&M) of Jakarta's
flood management system, and (d) Strengthening the capability of the responsible
agencies to improve the operations, maintenance and management of Jakarta's flood
management system.

3. Project Description
The Project consists of two components:
  Component 1 - Dredging and rehabilitation of selected key floodways, canals and
retention basins. This component will support the dredging and rehabilitation of 11
floodways / canals and four retention basins which have been identified as priority
sections of the Jakarta flood management system in need of urgent rehabilitation and
improvement in flow capacities. The dredge material will be transported and disposed
into proper disposal sites. The 11 floodways / canals are estimated to have a total length
of 67.5 km, while the four retention basins estimated to cover a total area of 65.1
hectares. About 42.2 km of embankments are expected to be rehabilitated or constructed
within these floodways, canals and retention ponds. Where necessary, mechanical
equipment (pumps, gates, etc) will be replaced or repaired.

 Component 2 - Technical assistance for project management, social safeguards, and
capacity building. This component will support contracts management, engineering
design reviews, construction supervision engineers for the dredging and rehabilitation
works and technical assistance. Technical assistance includes support to improve
institutional coordination for operations and maintenance of Jakarta's flood management
system as well as the establishment of a Floods Management Information System
(FMIS). Provision has been made for the cost of implementing required Resettlement
Action Plans, as well as the establishment and operations of a project Grievance Redress
System and a Panel of Experts.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Fifteen priority floodways, canals and retention basins included in the scope of JUFMP
works are sections of the following: Ciliwung-Gunung Sahari Floodway, Waduk Melati,
Cengkareng Floodway, Sunter Floodway, Cideng Thamrin Drain, Sentiong-Sunter Drain,
Waduk Sunter Utara, Waduk Sunter Selatan, Waduk Sunter Timur III, Tanjungan Drain,
Lower Angke Drain, West Banjir Canal (WBC), Grogol - Sekretaris Drain, Pakin - Kali
Besar - Jelakeng Drain, and Krukut Cideng Drain.

 The disposal sites for the dredged sediment and solid waste material removed from
JUFMP dredging activities are not financed by the project, however, they are considered
an integral part of the project. These disposal sites are: (i) the Ancol Confined Disposal
Facility (CDF), which is part of an ongoing reclamation effort in the Ancol area of north
Jakarta (for the disposal of non-hazardous dredge material), (ii) the PPLi Hazardous
Waste facility in Bogor, West Java (for the disposal of hazardous dredge material, if any
are found), and (iii) the Bantar Gebang landfill in Bekasi, West Java (for the disposal of
solid wastes).

 Ten sites were identified as hydraulically and directly connected with the floodways,
canals and retention basins under JUFMP i.e., (a) K. Item, Kalibaru and Sunter
Kemayoran (linked to the Sentiong Sunter Drain); (b) Ancol Kp. Bandan and Ancol Long
Storage (linked to the Ciliwung-Gunung Sahari Floodway); (c) Canal along Jalan Kayu
Putih Timur (linked to the Upper Sunter River Drain); and (d) Ciliwung Kota, the canal
along Jalan Tubagus Angke, PHB Bandengan Utara and Waduk Pluit (linked to the Pakin
Drain- K. Besar Drain- Jelakeng Floodway). The government currently has no specific
plans for rehabilitation works at these sites. However, if activities are carried out during
the JUFMP implementation period and they satisfy the relevant criteria, these will be
considered linked activities and DKI Jakarta will apply the requirements of OP 4.12 in
carrying out these activities. These criteria are that the activities are (1) directly and
significantly related to JUFMP, (2) necessary to achieve JUFMP objectives, and (3)
contemporaneous to JUFMP.

  All the floodways, canals and retention basins, disposal sites and identified linked sites
are located in the DKI Jakarta province, except for the Bantar Gebang landfill and PPLi
Hazardous Waste facility which are located within the Greater Jakarta Metropolitan Area
(so-called 'Jabodetabek'). DKI Jakarta is a highly urbanized area with high population
densities. DKI Jakarta covers an area of about 650 km2 with a population of about 9
million. The Jabodetabek area covers an area of about 7,500 km2 with a population of
about 23.7 million (2005). Administratively, the project sites are located in 57
kelurahans (urban villages) as part of 19 kecamatans (subdistricts) in four municipalities,
i.e. North Jakarta, East Jakarta, Central Jakarta, and West Jakarta. About 1.8 million
people live in these 57 kelurahans. Average density is 166 persons per hectare. The
population in linked sites is estimated at about 173,000. There are substantial traffic
congestions within DKI Jakarta and Jabodetabek areas. Measurements of noise indicated
prevailing ambient noise to be frequently above local standards. The air quality is
relatively poor (due in part to emissions) but air quality measurement at project sites
indicated these are still within local standards.

 The Jabodetabek area is surrounded by several dormant volcanoes whose slopes form
the upstream catchment areas of the 13 major rivers that flow northwards through DKI
Jakarta into the Java Sea. DKI Jakarta is located in the lowest lying part of this basin.
Forty percent of DKI Jakarta lies below sea level, including most of north Jakarta. The
13 rivers, together with a large number of drainage channels, form the macro drainage
system of DKI Jakarta. Due to inadequate maintenance and poor solid waste
management, there is significant sediment and solid waste build-up in these channels.
Water quality measurements at project sites showed that prevailing conditions frequently
did not meet local standards. However, significant testing of the sediments at project
sites has not identified sediments that are hazardous (following local standards, which are
based on international practices).

  Out of the 15 project sites, six locations are identified to involve resettlement (Project
Affected People, or PAP sites). This includes one waduk, i.e. Waduk Sunter Utara, and
five floodways/canals, i.e. Upper Sunter River Floodway, Sentiong-Sunter Drain, West
Banjir Canal (WBC), Pakin-K.Besar-Jelakeng Drain, and Krukut Cideng. All are located
in the low-lying areas between central Jakarta and the Java Sea in the north. The potential
affected structures and persons are located on or at the edge of the main water bodies and
on the embankments that are planned to be rehabilitated or reconstructed. The majority of
affected structures are low-standard houses occupied by poor people. About 72% of the
structures are semi permanent or temporary structures, and the remaining are permanent
structures. Ninety-five percent of these structures are located on government land, with
lack of basic services and infrastructure. Most of the affected settlements have been in
place for more than ten years.

  About 53% of families in these PAPs sites have lived there for more than 10 years, 66%
held Jakarta identity cards, and 45% were living on non-permanent structures. About
82% own their structures and 8.5% are renters. About 82% of the families work in
informal sectors (e.g., laborers, drivers, farmers, fishermen, traders and small business
owners). A key characteristic specific to the PAPs who reside in WBC is that their
livelihoods are significantly dependent on the site. They are fishermen who come from
outside Jakarta and people whose livelihoods are related to the fishing activities. This
site is also an informal boat mooring site. There is constant flux with more people at the
site during the fishing season. Some fishermen stay in their boats off-season to guard
their boats and equipment.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Juan Martinez (EASIS)
   Ms Indira Dharmapatni (EASIS)
   Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASTS)
   Mr Rambat Sakwan (EASIS)
   Mr Andrew Daniel Sembel (EASIS)
   Mr Kian Siong (EASIS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is expected to yield positive environmental and social outcomes. Alleviating
flooding will reduce the environmental impact and public health issues caused by
overflowing and stagnant flood waters and reduce disruptions to communities in project
areas - particularly to the predominantly poor communities living in flood-prone areas.
Solid waste and sediments in the drains, if not removed, would be flushed uncontrolled
into the estuary and bay area. Over the longer term, the flood information management
system (FMIS) that is being introduced by the project would provide DKI Jakarta the
information based planning tool needed to sustainably manage the network well beyond
the life of the project and to continue to reduce the incidence of flooding in the area.

 However, there is also potential for adverse environmental impacts e.g., from the
sediment material and solid waste that would be generated, if they are not handled,
stored, sorted, transported and disposed of properly. Involuntary resettlement has also
been identified as required in six project sites. For these reasons, the project triggers the
World Bank's Environmental Assessment Operational Policy (OP4.01), and as per this
policy's requirements is assigned an EA category of A. The project also triggers the
World Bank's Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP 4.12).

 The environmental impacts associated with JUFMP works activities mainly stem from
the dredging and embankment works, the significant quantities of dredge material and
solid waste that would be generated, and how these dredge materials would be handled,
temporarily stored, stockpiled, sorted, transported, and finally disposed in urban areas
that are densely populated and that are surrounded by surface and sea water. Potential
significant environmental impacts from these works include:

 - traffic disruption from equipment mobilization and the transport of significant
quantities of dredge material and solid wastes to their respective disposal sites
(approximately 3.4 million m3 of dredge sediment and 95,000 m3 of solid waste).

 - spillage of material along transportation routes.

 - foul odors and reduced air quality from ongoing works due to exposure of dredge
material, construction dust and emissions from construction machinery [e.g., carbon
monoxide (CO) and sulphur oxides (Sox)].

 - increased noise levels and vibration from ongoing works due to construction
machinery, piling works, etc.

 - reduction in surface water quality in canals and related estuaries during ongoing
works, due to temporary increase in discharge of residue sediment material during the
dredging process.

 - potential environmental and health hazards from hazardous material if these are
improperly handled (although extensive testing during project preparation indicates that
hazardous material are unlikely to be found in the project sites).

  The environmental impacts associated with the Ancol CDF disposal site (currently
being constructed) mainly stem from the construction and reclamation activities,
including: (i) changes in tidal and current patterns, (ii) increased sedimentation around
the CDF, (iii) degradation of sea water quality from filling and reclamation activities, and
(iv) disturbance to the sea biota. There is also the potential for adverse off-site impact at
the source locations and transport route of sand (8.6 million m3) and laterite (400,000
m3) required for the construction of the CDF (although the use of JUFMP dredge
material to part replace sand material requirement - thus reducing sand requirement from
an initial 12 million m3 to the current 8.6 million m3 - is in itself a measure to reduce
potential off site impacts).

 The environmental impacts from the project to the existing and ongoing operations of
the Bantar Gebang sanitary landfill and the PPLi secure landfill are expected to be small.
The estimated 95,000 m3 of total solid waste generated from the project over its expected
4 year duration will make up an insignificant percentage of normal loads being received
at Bantar Gebang . Hazardous material is not expected from JUFMP (confirmed by
sampling tests) and even if some are found, the amounts are well within the capacity and
handling norms of the PPLi secure landfill.

 The potential social impacts include resettlement-related impacts and non-resettlement
related impacts. At present, six of the 15 project sites are identified to include
involuntary resettlement, affecting a total of about 1,109 structures and 5,228 persons.
More than 90% of affected structures and PAPs are located in four sites i.e., Sentiong
Sunter (about 104 structures), West Banjir Canal (WBC, about 593 structures), Kali
Pakin-Kali Besar-Jelakeng (about 127 structures) and Krukut Cideng (about 180
structures). The largest concentrations are found in WBC and Krukut-Cideng where
about 70% of affected structures and PAPs are located.

  Relocating such a significant number of PAPs could create potential large scale,
significant and irreversible impacts if the process is not properly planned, managed and
tailored to the capacity and needs of the PAPs. The PAPs may relocate to other sub-
standard housing in illegal settlements if proper compensation or access to affordable
public housing isn't provided. Disruption to social cohesion among family members and
to community networks may result if resettlement is not done properly. The PAPs'
livelihoods may be disrupted if restoration is not well-designed, consulted and
implemented. Furthermore, any lack of transparency and consultation may create
conflict between the PAPs and the local government of DKI Jakarta (there are precedents
of chaotic situations from past relocation exercise by DKI Jakarta due to lack of
information dissemination / socialization, full consultation with the PAPs, and fair
compensation). Any problems in resettlement will eventually impede and delay the
project implementation.

  Potential social impacts (beyond involuntary resettlement) of dredging and embankment
rehabilitation at the project sites would mostly occur during construction, such as
disturbances during the mobilization of heavy equipments and transportation of the
sludge materials to the disposal sites (including solid wastes); noise; odor; heavy traffic,
and traffic accident; and damage to local roads. Project works may also involve an influx
of a sizeable daytime workforce into these already congested areas and management of
these groups from sanitation to social interaction with the temporary host communities
could pose additional issues.During construction there would be temporary loss of
income for boat scavengers who pick garbage from canals, and for 19 operators and
owners of crossing boats at four sites, i.e. Cengkareng drain, Lower Sunter river
floodway, Ciliwung-Gunung Sahari Floodway, and Grogol-Sekretaris drain. As the
impact would be temporary on a relatively small number of boat operators/owners in
each of the above-mentioned canals, contractors will carry out intensive consultations
with them to find practical solutions during construction so that they will be able to the
extent possible continue their activities.

  Project linked sites were identified based on hydraulic and direct physical linkages to
JUFMP sites. DKI Jakarta currently has no specific plans for rehabilitation works at
these linked sites. Without specific plans, it is not possible to determine the number of
affected persons at this time. Based on a rapid survey carried out in 2009, a rough
estimate of the structures that could be affected is 8,150 (90% of which is in a single
linked site i.e., Waduk Pluit). This should be considered a hypothetical maximum - the
number of affected structures would be smaller once impact minimization consideration
is taken into account in designs, and especially if Waduk Pluit is not included. So far,
DKI Jakarta's maintenance activities (e.g., garbage collections and maintenance dredging)
has always avoided damage or the need to relocate structures during the maintenance
activities by using appropriate equipments and avoiding areas where structures are
present. For example, it was reported that in 2010 that two linked sites, i.e., Tubagus
Angke and Anak K. Ciliwung Utara, were maintenance dredged with backhoe and
manual equipment in selected sections to avoid any impacts on overhanging structures.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Maintenance activities (e.g., garbage collections and maintenance dredging) are being
planned and can be expected at project sites to continue beyond the life of the project.
These activities form part of the integrated management approach for the floods
management system of Jakarta. If these maintenance operations are not carried out at the
required intervals or are ineffectively done, new sedimentation and blockages will result,
seasonal flooding will return and the project benefits will eventually be lost. The impacts
from maintenance activities are expected to be similar to those during project
implementation, except that the magnitude would be smaller and less intensive. For
example, DKI Jakarta's maintenance activities has so far always avoided damage or the
need to relocate structures by using appropriate equipments and avoiding areas where
structures are present (as described in the previous section above).

  The reclaimed area of the Ancol CDF is expected to be utilized in the future for
commercial and residential development. The use of non-hazardous dredge material
from the project to partly fill the reclamation area has been assessed to pose no
significant impacts or restrictions on the future use of the reclaimed area. In any event,
the likelihood of contact between the dredge material and future resident population is
minimize or avoided by the containment of the facility through a confined facility (using
appropriate dykes) and the final capping of the surface with laterite (red soil) of a
specified minimum depth.

 While resettlement will results in cleared sites for dredging and embankment repairs and
constructions, securing such sites in the long-term from new encroachment and
occupation will be important. Sheet piles for embankments and maintenance of the
cleared sites would lead to the sustainability of the cleared sites to allow proper operation
and functioning of the floodways, canals and retention ponds.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The sections of the Jakarta flood management system included in the project have been
identified by the Government as in priority need of urgent rehabilitation and
improvement in flow capacities. Prioritization was made based on previous studies under
the Bank-financed Western Java Environmental Management Project (WJEMP) and
various earlier studies on flood control and flood mitigation in Jakarta area. The project
scoping also took into account the inclusion of all responsible institutions as a means to
encourage and establish the required long term integrated and sustained routine
maintenance system. Environmental and social complexities at each potential work site
were also important considerations for project scoping, especially given that the project is
expected to introduce new principles and methods for sound environmental management
and equitable resettlement practices. The final project scope balances between a set of
works large enough for the project objectives to be achieved, and one that is manageable
in environmental and social complexities to increase the likelihood of success in
demonstrating the improved environmental and social practices.

  Given the chosen project scope, the analysis of alternatives focused on alternatives for
mitigation or other impact management approaches. In particular, various mechanical
dredging options and methodologies to reduce impacts associated with these types of
activities were considered. Engineering design focused on minimum designs required to
restore the sections to appropriate operational levels, and methodologies that can dredge
around existing structures, minimize the required construction space (e.g., dredging using
floating pontoons).

 With respect to the choice of the main disposal site for non-hazardous dredge material,
multiple options and alternatives were considered. During past dredging operations,
excavated material was usually dumped on any vacant land owned by DKI (Jakarta
Provincial Government). In some cases sediments are placed on embankments and not
otherwise disposed of, which results in sludge returning to waterways. The JUFMP
provides the first opportunity for DKI Jakarta and the Government of Indonesia (GoI) to
coordinate and dispose dredged materials in a defined and managed disposal area, and to
introduce best-practice management principles. Several disposal sites and management
alternatives were initially assessed:

 (a) Taman BMW: Large site with many informal communities that were evicted in the
past. The site is very visible along the toll road.
 (b) Under Toll Road (Pluit Karang): Located on the toll interchange. The site is very
visible and there are concerns about the aesthetic and odor aspects if utilized as a disposal
site. There were many informal communities with fisheries and banana plantations in
this site.
 (c) Kamal Muara: Very small location with nearby industry and housing (open lot).
 (d) Kapuk Muara: Already converted into a housing development.
 (e) Pluit: Small location next to fisheries.
 (f) Rorotan: being utilized as a temporary solid waste disposal area along the river and
near industrial activities.
 (g) Cakung: Next to Rorotan (above). A small lot next to industrial areas.

 These initial alternatives were rejected due to their minimal disposal capacity,
resettlement issues, aesthetic and odor issues, and supervision difficulties.

  Three sea-based disposal locations were also considered at Muara Kali Adem (MKA),
Marunda, and West Ancol. The MKA is located next to the West Banjir Canal but the
access road to the site is very limited and frequent traffic congestion is observed.
Marunda which is located at the edge of East Jakarta was not selected because of the
spatial plan for the area. Finally, the site at West Ancol was strategically chosen for its
accelerated preparedness, size and capacity (capable of receiving almost three times the
dredged materials of the project, or approximately 12 million m3), and central location
along the coast of Jakarta Bay. It is also important to note that the Ancol site also had the
advantage that it was already an approved ongoing reclamation project. The utilization of
the Ancol site is considered a 'win-win' scenario. The other two sea-based locations
considered would have had to be constructed, at considerable costs and with the effect of
displacing more near-shore area with additional environmental impacts and the need to
remove existing fish farms (keramba ikan). At the same time, the utilization of non-
hazardous dredge material for the Ancol site reclamation will reduce the negative impact
from use of other material (sand) which would have been sourced from quarries.

 The project seeks to avoid or minimize (if avoidance is not possible) both resettlement
and non-resettlement related social impacts. This is done through limiting works to
priority sections, careful selection of dredging approaches and equipment technology,
reducing the rights of way of the inspection areas to minimum allowable standards for
maintenance and security, and detailed engineering designs (DEDs) geared towards
minimizing impact. Significant efforts have been made to minimize the number of PAPs
through an iterative process to adopt engineering designs and selection of works
methodology to minimize impact. Such efforts between December 2010 and April 2011
has resulted in the reduction of PAP-sites from seven to six, and a corresponding
reduction of the number of affected structures from 2,513 units (occupied by 6,507
persons) to 1,109 units (occupied by 5,228 persons). These efforts will continue during
project implementation. The sequencing of works will also allow sufficient time to
prepare, consult and implement RPs, as well as provide for the establishment of a project
grievance redress system and the appointment of a panel of experts ahead of major
resettlement implementation.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower has undertaken a comprehensive environmental impact assessment
(including social impact assessment in the AMDAL) process that has informed the
project design of the potential risks associated with project activities. Various
alternatives to either avoid these risks altogether or to reduce them to acceptable levels
have been considered in these assessments. As part of this process, the project has
designed a set of mitigation and oversight monitoring measures to ensure that the project
will comply with both the national and sub-national level requirements, as well as the
World Bank's own safeguards policy requirements.

  The project implementation responsibilities will be aligned with the existing
institutional and sector responsibilities, to help ensure long term sustainability, including
of the environmental and social safeguards measures introduced by the project. There are
three Project Implementing Units (PIUs) at both central and local government levels: (i)
the Directorate General for Water Resources (DGWR) of the Ministry of Public Works
(MoPW), (ii) the Directorate General for Human Settlements (DGCK) of MoPW, and
(iii) the local government of Jakarta (DKI Jakarta). Each PIU will be responsible for
carrying out the dredging and rehabilitation works in the selected key floodways, canals
and retention basins that come under their respective institutional and legal
responsibilities. DKI Jakarta will be responsible for all project social safeguards
arrangements, whilst each municipality will be responsible for the implementation The
three JUFMP dredge material disposal locations are operated by separate entities
independent of the JUFMP. Ancol CDF is operated by the concessionaire and operator
of the reclamation project, PT. Pembangunan Jaya Ancol (PT. PJA). The Bantar Gebang
landfill is managed by the Sanitary Agency of DKI Jakarta through a private operator,
while PPLi is a private commercial provider of hazardous waste disposal services.

 A Project Management Unit (PMU) has been established by DGWR to oversee and
coordinate the overall preparation and implementation of the project by the three PIUs.
The PMU will also implement common activities, including (i) the overall construction
supervision consultancy i.e., the Supervision Consultant (SC), (ii) the Panel of Experts
(POE), (iii) the Floods Management Information Systems (FMIS), and (iv) support to
DKI Jakarta related to involuntary resettlement and the project's grievance redress
system. These common activities are of key importance to provide capacity support, and
to supervise and monitor the project environmental and social safeguards measures.

 A sequenced implementation design has been adopted as a key implementation risk
management mechanism for the project. Phase 1 works (proposed 4 sites to be
implemented in 3 works contracts), which do not involve resettlement, are expected to
commence during the first year of the project. Phase 2 works (proposed 11 sites to be
implemented in 5 contracts) are expected to commence later - around 12 to 18 months
after project approval. This sequencing will avoid the PMU/PIUs and their supervision
consultant (SC) from being overburdened during the first year when detailed actual
implementation processes, procedures and routines are established and operationalized.
The sequencing will also allow time for DKI Jakarta to complete the necessary
resettlement instruments and arrangements in applicable Phase 2 sites, as well as the
establishment and operationalization of the project grievance redress system and the
appointment of a panel of experts. Two project linked sites i.e., Ancol Kp. Bandan and
Ancol Long Storage are linked to Phase 1 work sites (no involuntary resettlement is
expected in the event that linked activities are carried out at these two sites), and the
remaining are linked to Phase 2 work sites.
  The environmental impact assessment process in Indonesia (referred to as the AMDAL)
has also followed and is aligned with the JUFMP Phase 1 and Phase 2 works packaging
structure. An AMDAL package consists of the (i) ANDAL, which is synonymous to the
Environmental Impacts Assessment in the World Bank's Environmental Policy OP 4.01,
(ii) RKL, which is the Environment Management Plan, and (iii) RPL, which is the
Environment Monitoring Plan. The AMDAL for Phase 1 works has been prepared by the
PMU. This AMDAL was consulted upon, reviewed and approved in March 2010 by the
provincial level environmental agency (known as the BPLHD) as required by national
and sub-national regulations of Indonesia. The World Bank has also reviewed the
AMDAL and has provided extensive comments resulting in the PMU preparing a JUFMP
Phase 1 Supplementary Report. This supplementary report includes further
recommendations which will also be applicable to the project. This ensured that the
AMDAL and supplementary report for Phase 1, combined, complied with the World
Bank environmental safeguards policy requirements. The PMU has also prepared the
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) which has been reviewed by
the World Bank. The ESMF will guide and manage the process for preparing the
environmental safeguards documents required for the Phase 2 works.

  Construction of the boundary walls for the confined disposal facility (Ancol CDF) is
ongoing at the time of project preparation. The confined facility is currently expected to
be completed at the end of calendar year 2011. The first AMDAL for the Ancol
reclamation works prepared by PT. PJA, was approved by BPLHD in February 2006
where 12 million m3 of sand and 400,000 m3 of laterite were proposed as the fill
material. This was prior to the proposal for the JUFMP project.The AMDAL was
subsequently updated to provide for non-hazardous JUFMP dredge material to be utilized
as part fill material for the Ancol CDF, reducing sand requirements to 8.6 million m3.
The updated AMDAL was reviewed and approved by BPLHD in March 2009. It is
worthy to note that the Ancol reclamation project was planned to be implemented
irrespective and independent of whether JUFMP proceeds or not. The primary objective
of PT. PJA as a concessionaire as stated in the AMDAL is not to receive JUFMP disposal
material but to reclaim about 119 hectares of land in Jakarta Bay for future commercial
residential developments (as is typical of this area of Jakarta Bay since 1964). This
notwithstanding, Ancol CDF is an integral part of JUFMP. The World Bank has
reviewed the Ancol AMDAL documents. The review included assessment of a proposed
design change of the northern boundary (dyke) of the CDF in March 2011, for which the
recommendations of the World Bank review of the proposal was acknowledged and
adopted prior to the approval of the change by BPLHD. To address gaps found in the
Ancol AMDAL documents, the PMU has prepared an Ancol Updated RKL/RPL
Supplementary Report. This supplementary report contains the additional measures
which will also be applicable to the project. This ensured that the AMDAL and
supplementary report for Ancol CDF, combined, complied with the World Bank
environmental safeguards policy requirements with regards to the disposal of JUFMP
material.
  Solid waste material from JUFMP will be transported to the Bantar Gebang sanitary
landfill, while hazardous sediment material (if any are found) is planned for disposal at
the PPLi secure landfill in Bogor. The Bank team visited both facilities in December
2010. Bantar Gebang landfill had the capacity to receive the solid wastes expected from
the project and that the site has a valid operating permit and is in compliance with local
regulations. Current disposal is about 5,000t/day (about 20,000 m3). The total amount of
solid waste estimated from project is about 95,000 m3 over a four year period i.e.,
equivalent to less about 0.3% of the normal average existing solid waste receipt. The
PPLi secure landfill in Bogor is a 50 hectare landfill with a total capacity of over 3
million tons and capacity to process 22,000 tons of waste annually. About 2 hectare of
the landfill had been utilized. A double composite liner, constructed of bentonite clay
and high-density polyethylene (HDPE), lines the landfill's base, which prevents any
leachate from contaminating the surrounding environment. New waste is covered with
soil or a synthetic material on a daily basis. Once an area of the landfill fills to capacity, it
is capped with clay and a HDPE liner to prevent water from seeping into the closed
landfill cell. Based on rapid site assessment, it was confirmed that the PPLi facility
meets the national and sub-national regulation, and is adequate provision to accommodate
any reasonable amount of hazardous material which may be found at JUFMP sites.

 Preliminary social assessment study has been carried out in 2008 (SA Study). In
addition, social impact assessments were also carried out in 2009 - 2010 as part of the
AMDAL processes. In addition to standard AMDAL consultation processes, specific
Focus Group Discussions (FGDs) were also carried out in each project site to obtain
deeper information on the environmental and social impacts of the project and to obtain
support from the communities. Both resettlement-related and non-resettlement related
potential social impacts were identified in these assessments and processes. DKI Jakarta
has prepared the project Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to clarify the principles,
procedures and organizational arrangements to be applied to the preparation of RPs for
Phase 2 sites that involve involuntary resettlement. The RPF has been reviewed and
found satisfactory by the World Bank.

  The RPF seeks to address the gaps between the current legal framework on land
acquisition and resettlement of Indonesia and compliance with OP 4.12. It clarifies
principles, procedures and organizational arrangements that will guide DKI Jakarta to
prepare Resettlement Plans (RPs) in project sites where involuntary resettlements are
required, including linked sites. In particular, the policy framework (a) confirms that it
applies for the project sites as well as linked sites; (b) identifies the likely categories of
PAPs; (c) outlines the process of development of RPs including preparation, review,
approval, and disclosure; (d) addresses the entitlements of PAPs who are occupants of
state or government land as well as entitlements of PAPs affected by the acquisition of
privately owned land; (e) specifies the rationale for compensation for lost assets at
replacement cost, specific measures to address vulnerable groups, and assistance for
livelihood restoration; (f) specifies the organizational arrangements for the
implementation of the RPF and RPs; (g) outlines the project grievance system; and (h)
monitoring and evaluation for RPs.
 Given the sequencing of project implementation into two phases, i.e. Phase 1 and Phase
2, it is expected that the various Phase 2 works will commence later - around 12 to 18
months after project approval (see above for a description of sequencing as a key
implementation risk management mechanism). The project is set in a dynamic and fluid
environment. Poor operations and maintenance and inadequate local drainage
management would result in unpredictable damages from flood events (especially since
these events have been increasing in severity and been more damaging during the past
decade) and the continuous surrounding heavy urban activities. Hence, design changes in
response to the continuously changing conditions should be expected during
implementation, requiring associated revisions to the safeguards documents.
Consequently, the quality of implementation and the environmental and social outcomes
related to Phase 2 works may only be assured through a similar sequencing of their EIAs
and RPs preparation, disclosure and implementation.

 All applicable environmental safeguards documents related to Phase 1 works (including
those related to the Ancol CDF, currently under construction) have been disclosed. In line
with the sequenced two-phase implementation approach, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will
cover the environmental and social management requirements of Phase 2 works, and will
guide the preparation, finalization and implementation of Phase 2 related EIAs and RPs.
The ESMF and RPF have been disclosed. The completion of EIA and RPs for Phase 2
works will be done during project implementation and will be reviewed by the Bank prior
to finalization and public disclosure, given that with the sequencing of project
implementation the various Phase 2 works are only expected to begin from around 12 to
18 months after project approval. Any related works will not commence upon
satisfactory implementation of the approved RPs (except for activities to be implemented
during and after construction).

 For JUFMP works, the primary responsibility for implementing the environmental
measures detailed in the AMDALs and the JUFMP Phase 1 Supplementary Report lies
with the civil works and dredging contractors. The requirements are embedded as
contractual obligations of the contractors. Environmental specifications (equivalent to an
Environmental Code of Practice) have been developed to be included in the biding
documents. This includes requiring contractors to prepare and implement an acceptable
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) - which will also embed a
Transport Management Plan (TMP). Additionally, contractors will also directly consult
and agree with the PAPs who are temporarily affected during construction and provide
compensation as agreed by both parties. To ensure adequate supervision and monitoring
capacity, the project Supervision Consultant (SC) is tasked with the supervision of the
contractors (including adherence to required environmental measures). The Terms of
Reference of the SC requires that the consultant team includes environmental expertise
with the capacity in supervising activities that addresses environmental impacts. Also,
given that the selected drains and canals lie in the province of Jakarta and run across sub-
provincial jurisdictional city boundaries, the local environmental agencies (the BPLHDs)
at both the Provincial level (i.e. the office that reviewed and approved all the AMDALs)
and the municipal level BPHLD (i.e. Walikota level) will also be undertaking their
mandated routine direct monitoring of works. Further, the Panel of Experts will monitor
and evaluate the preparation and implementation of the project safeguards instruments
(including the EMPs, RPF, RPs, and the project grievance redress system) and advise the
PMU on any actions to be taken to improve compliance.

 The primary responsibility for supervision and oversight monitoring of the works at the
Ancol CDF will be with the BPLHD agencies at the Provincial and Municipal Levels.
PT. PJA has also agreed for the JUFMP project Supervision Consultant (SC) to carry out
supervision and oversight monitoring of the Ancol CDF works (including activities at
off-site locations) during the life of the JUFMP project. The technical and financial
capacity of the provincial BPLHD was assessed during project implementation and
determined to be adequate to undertake their mandated monitoring responsibility. The
primary responsibility for supervision and oversight monitoring of the ongoing operations
of the existing Bantar Gebang and PPLi facilities lies with the respective city and
provincial BPLHD. The project supervision consultant (SC) will also supervise and carry
out oversight monitoring of project related activities at Bantar Gebang and PPLi.

  The implementation of the resettlement-related activities is the responsibility of the DKI
Jakarta, particularly its Environmental and Social Working Group (ESWG), Project
Management and Quality Assurance Working Group, and the Monitoring and Reporting
Working Group. At the operational level, particularly in preparing and implementing the
RPs, the ESWG will be teamed up with the staff of the relevant municipalities
(resettlement team). Currently (i.e., for financial year 2012), DKI Jakarta has allocated a
budget of about Rp1bn (approx. US$120,000) for technical assistance to support the
preparation of site-specific RPs.

 All project sites will be screened for PAPs and an RP prepared in accordance with the
RPF where PAPs cannot be avoided. The RPs will identify affected people and lay out
the framework for compensating and restoring the livelihoods of entitled households with
a clear and agreed timeline between the PAPs and DKI Jakarta. All RPs will be reviewed
by the World Bank. The World Bank review will focus on ensuring that the RPs have
been prepared in accordance with all the provisions of the RPF and the adequacy of
implementation arrangements, e.g., implementation plans and budget. The RP will
require the World Bank's 'no objection', be publicly disclosed and satisfactorily
implemented (except any elements related to post-resettlement activities) prior to any
works commencing at the associated site. DKI Jakarta will establish a project Grievance
Redress System (GRS) that will function, amongst others, to receive and address / resolve
resettlement-related complaints.

 Based on preliminary social impact assessments and censuses carried out in parallel
with the preparation of the RPF and the Detailed Engineering Designs (DEDs),
preliminary drafts RPs have been prepared (at the seven sites initially identified as PAP
sites). With the finalization of the RPF and the completion of the DEDs, DKI Jakarta
will proceed to further develop and prepare the preliminary RPs (now in the currently
identified six PAP sites), including re-verifying the initial census and drawing and
announcing formal cut-off dates. The RPs will be completed, subjected to World Bank
review and no-objection, disclosed and satisfactorily implemented prior to the
commencement of the associated (Phase 2) works.

 Given the previous history of evictions practices, the adoption of the RPF represents a
step change and transformatory progress in DKI Jakarta's approach to handling
involuntary resettlement. The transformatory nature of the project approach to handling
resettlement as embodied in the RPF also poses significant implementation challenges.
The preparations of the RPF and preliminary RPs thus far have been supported by project
preparation consultants retained by the PMU. While DKI Jakarta has shown commitment
to improve its social safeguards practices by taking difficult decisions to formulate the
RPF and establishing the EWSG, the implementation (especially in the initial period) of
the RPF and associated RPs will inevitably have to contend with inconsistent and
previously established practices, procedures, and regulations. With this new challenging
approaches and tasks, DKI Jakarta staff particularly the ESWG's awareness and capacity
in implementing the RPF and RPs have to be continuously improved. Greater supports to
implement the new approach for handling involuntary resettlement as specified in the
RPF from the DKI Jakarta's parliament need to be continuously harnessed. PMU and the
Bank will continue to provide technical assistance and advice during project preparation
and implementation. In order to minimize this potential implementation bottleneck, DKI
Jakarta is currently engaged in an intensive consultation and dissemination exercise
specifically with the four relevant Jakarta municipalities who will carry out the day-to-
day implementation of the RPF and RPs. These efforts are aimed to strengthening the
understanding and support from these municipalities towards the completion and
implementation of the RPF and RPs.

  The Supervision Consultant (SC) will play a key role to monitor, supervise and provide
technical assistance to the ESWG in preparing and implementing the RPs.The SC will
provide hands-on training to the ESWG during the preparation and implementation of
RPs. Budgets for preparing and implementing the RPs (except for the consultant) will be
borne by DKI Jakarta. This would include operational costs for the ESWG and the
resettlement team, compensation for assets, resettlement assistance and rehabilitation
supports. This SC will also be responsible to ensure that DKI Jakarta implement the RPs
consistently and in line with the RPF, and to support DKI Jakarta in establishing and
managing the project Grievance Redress System (GRS). The SC will monitor project
linked sites and areas adjacent to project sites and report any relevant activities -
especially those that could involve resettlement. The procurement of the SC is ongoing in
order for planned mobilization at the start of the project implementation, with setting up
and managing the project GRS being an early activity of the SC.

 It should be noted that there are existing and well established complaints handling
systems in DKI Jakarta, operating through various channels. In most cases , persons or
communities who felt disturbed, being treated unfairly or are unhappy about any project
can file a complaint to the head of RT (neighborhood level) who will then put forward it
to the head of RW (hamlet level). If the complaint cannot be solved at the RT/RW level,
the heads of RT and RW will take the case to the kelurahan level (where the case is
handled by the Section of Governance Affairs and Public Order). The case will be
officially registered at the kelurahan level. The parties in disputes (e.g. citizen,
communities, contractor or other government institutions), the kelurahan council and staff
will discuss and try to resolve the case. If no resolution is agreed at the kelurahan level,
the case is sent to the higher kecamatan level (sub-district level), and finally to the
kotamadya level (municipal level) if still unresolved at kecamatan level.

 The PMU will also retain a Panel of Experts (POE) who will monitor and evaluate the
preparation and implementation of the project safeguards instruments (including the
EMPs, RPF, RPs, and the project grievance redress system) and advise the PMU on any
actions to be taken to improve compliance. The final draft TOR for the POE has been
prepared. The recruitment of the POE is expected to begin soon after appraisal, in order
for them to be mobilized to start their activities when the project implementation begins.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholders involved in this project can be categorized into four levels. At the central
level, there is a Joint Steering Committee, chaired by the National Planning Agency
(BAPPENAS), who is responsible for policy decisions. For project management at the
national level, a Project Management Unit (PMU) has been established in the Directorate
General of Water Resources (DGWR) of the Ministry of Public Works (MoPW) to
coordinate the preparation and implementation of the project, including environmental
and social safeguards-related issues. The PMU coordinates the activities of three Project
Implementation Units (PIUs): (i) the Directorate General for Water Resources (DGWR),
(ii) the Directorate General for Human Settlements (DGCK), and (iii) the local
government of Jakarta (DKI Jakarta). Each PIU will be responsible for carrying out the
dredging and rehabilitation works in the selected key floodways, canals and retention
basins that come under their respective institutional and legal responsibilities. The
Environmental and Social Working Group (ESWG) of the PIU DKI Jakarta is responsible
for coordinating the preparation and implementation of safeguards-related issues in the
project. Implementation of DKI Jakarta's policies are carried out by each of the city
administration (Jakarta has five city administration, or municipalities). Therefore, the
implementation of the RPF and RPs will ultimately be carried out by the four city
administration where the project sites are located. The most important stakeholders of
the project are the potential PAPs in six project sites.

 Consultations on the AMDALs is a key pre-requisite for compliance with both
Indonesia and World Bank requirements and these have been occurring and will continue
to occur on an ongoing basis going forward into project implementation. Broader
consultations between DKI Jakarta, government agencies, academia, civil society and
other stakeholders on many issues be they technical, engineering, planning or social, have
also been occurring in parallel over several years and will also continue going forward.
With respect to the AMDAL process for the Phase 1 Sites and the Ancol CDF,
consultations with potentially affected people took place over various time horizons in
which the project details were explained and the AMDAL findings in terms of potential
impacts on them and the planned management measures and project grievance redress
system were all discussed and explained. These are recorded in detail in the AMDAL
reports for both the Ancol CDF and the Phase 1 sites and the Consolidated Summary of
Environmental Impact Assessment. In general it appears that the potentially affected
people and their communities favored the objective of the project which is to alleviate
seasonal flooding which causes them tremendous hardship and significant economic
losses, but also expressed concern about the construction related impacts and nuisances,
and the likelihood of even further worsening of traffic congestion and delays during the
construction period. The project design found these discussions extremely useful and
informative and took these into account in the following ways: (i) Establishing an
accessible project grievance redress system, (ii) improvements in RKL and RPL
implementation, and (iii) simplification for oversight monitoring of the construction
activities. The project will continue to review these on an ongoing basis and will institute
changes if community feedback shows that they need improvement.

  The consultative process for the project has been widespread over the period of project
preparation (mainly 2009 - 2011) and has occurred at multiple levels depending on the
target stakeholders and issues being discussed. During project preparation, most of the
consultations were related to the AMDAL process (for both JUFMP and Ancol CDF),
and the preparation of the RPF and preliminary RPs. Public consultations (at least two
rounds) of the project proposal are mandatory in the AMDAL process, and these form
key pre-requisites for compliance with both Indonesian and World Bank requirements.
Broader consultations between DKI Jakarta, government agencies, academia, civil
society, and other stakeholders on issues ranging from technical, engineering,
environment, social, planning and implementation arrangements have also been
conducted and are expected to continue. During project implementation, interactions
with the local communities at and near the project sites are mandated with a minimum
number of contract required periodic meetings with the community included in the works
contracts. The project site offices (POSKOs) to be maintained as each project site will
amongst others serve as public information centers. These site offices will also serve as
an easily accessible venue to receive feedbacks (including complaints) about the project
from the local community as well as to carry out consultation as required.

  The various public consultations carried out during the project preparation covered
issues related to the project objectives and scope / components, institutional and
implementation arrangements, project timetables, environmental impacts and mitigation
plans, social impacts (including resettlement), other community concerns, and plans for
ongoing community consultations and involvement. Details of the AMDAL related
consultations are recorded in each approved AMDAL. In addition to AMDAL mandated
consultations, a series of Focus Group Discussions (FGDs) were also carried out covering
all kelurahans ('urban village' administrative areas within the municipalities) in which the
project sites are located. The purposes of the FGDs were to (i) update communities on
the status of the project, and (ii) obtain community feedback and aspirations. Participants
comprised representatives from the kelurahan offices, Board of Trustees of the
kelurahans, Community Guidance Officers (Babinsa), Head of the Family Welfare
Program (PKK), community leaders, heads of community neighborhoods (RT and RW),
and representatives of the communities of the project sites. Overall, there was broad
support for the project from the potentially affected people and their communities given
the project aim to alleviate seasonal flooding which causes them tremendous hardship
and significant economic losses. But communities also expressed various concerns,
mainly related to potential construction related impacts and nuisance (e.g., noise, odor,
traffic congestions, spillages, etc.), as well as potential involuntary resettlement impacts.

 These consultations were extremely useful and informative and the project design took
account of the feedbacks in various ways, including: (i) providing for regular community
interactions / consultation in the construction contracts, (ii) requiring contractors to
develop and implement traffic management plans to reduce congestions, (iii) requiring
contractors to implement good construction practices that minimizes spillages, odors,
etc., and (iv) establishing a project grievance redress system. The project will continue to
review these on an ongoing basis will institute changes if community feedback shows
that they need improvement.

  The community consultations, in particular the FGDs, were instrumental to help DKI
Jakarta prepare the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). A series of workshops and
dialogues with the ESWG and other relevant agencies were carried out during the
preparation of the draft RPF since 2008. Furthermore, two internal consultations and an
external consultation were carried out in 2010 to disseminate and obtain support and
feedback from government and other stakeholders for the draft RPF. The internal
consultations involved participants from DKI Jakarta province level to the lowest level
(representatives of the mayors from all four DKI municipalities, relevant DKI agencies
and bureaus, and sub-local governments down to the level of Kecamatan / Kelurahan).
The external consultations were attended by DKI Jakarta representatives as well as
NGOs, university representative and technical experts. The internal consultations are
now being followed up with intensive consultation and dissemination exercise
specifically with the four relevant Jakarta municipalities who will carry out the day-to-
day implementation of the RPF and RPs. In general, the participants of the two
consultation meetings appreciated and supported the new approach that will be adopted
by DKI Jakarta in addressing resettlement. The main concern expressed was on its
implementation, as in many aspects such as compensation for squatters, DKI Jakarta
needs to promote a breakthrough on the existing local regulation on orderly action. Other
main recommendations or concerns are (a) socialization of the RPF needs to be widened
and deeper to the PAPs; (b) the affected communities need to be involved in all stages of
development; (c) complaint handling system needs to be strengthened; (d) relocation has
to be minimized; (e) DKI Jakarta could learn or adopt what has been done by some
NGOs on relocation; (f) time frame to implement the RPF needs to be clear; and, (g) DKI
Jakarta needs to anticipate land speculators or opportunists once the RPF is well-
socialized on the ground.

 DKI Jakarta has also carried out consultations during the preparation of initial draft RPs
for the Phase 2 sites which have been identified to have PAPs. These initial socialization
activities were done with the local levels of government / community leaders (mainly
kelurahan, RT / RW) with this in turn being done either by group meetings at the
kelurahan offices or by multiple small meetings moving from RT / RW to RT / RW.
More intensive consultations with PAPs are planned after cut-off dates are announced,
among others to confirm the lists of the PAPs and the affected assets, to discuss and agree
on compensation and assistance options, dismantling and relocation schedules, etc., as
part of the RP preparation. Consultations with the PAPs are expected to be done either in
groups or plenary, depending on the specific situation in each site.

 The safeguards documents for Phase 1 works (i.e., the Phase 1 AMDALs and the
JUFMP Phase 1 Supplementary Report), Ancol CDF (i.e., the Ancol Updated RKL/RPL
and the Ancol Updated RKL/RPL Supplementary Report), the ESMF and the RPF have
been consulted with the relevant stakeholders, and reviewed and approved by the World
Bank. These documents have been disclosed in-country and at the World Bank's
InfoShop.

 The safeguards documents for Phase 2 works (i.e., the Phase 2 AMDALs and RPs
where needed) will be consulted with the relevant stakeholders, and reviewed and
approved by the World Bank prior to their disclosure. The RPs will be disclosed in the
DKI Jakarta's website and in the respective subproject sites. These consultations, reviews
and approvals (and the satisfactory implementation of RPs where needed) will be
required prior to the commencement of any works in the associated sites.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    07/28/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                07/29/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 07/29/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                 10/04/2011
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    04/25/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                07/07/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 07/08/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name     Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Fook Chuan Eng          10/24/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Andrew Daniel Sembel    10/24/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Indira Dharmapatni      10/20/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Juan Martinez           10/20/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):   Mr James Orehmie Monday    10/20/2011

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr John R. Butler          11/04/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Franz R. Drees-Gross    10/28/2011
  Comments: approved.
