                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC6728


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/07/2012

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Indonesia                            Project ID: P123907
Project Name: ID SPADA II
Task Team Leader: Fabrizio Bresciani
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 3,         Estimated Board Date: February 14, 2013
2012
Managing Unit: EASIS                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (40%);Public administration- Agriculture,
fishing and forestry (20%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%)
Theme: Rural policies and institutions (10%);Rural services and infrastructure
(35%);Rural markets (25%);Rural non-farm income generation (30%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           85
IDA Amount (US$m.):             0
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                           0.00
                                                                           0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The Project Development Objective is to increase the competitiveness of, and build
entrepreneurship in, targeted rural poor and disadvantaged areas in a sustainable manner. This
will be achieved by: (i) facilitating the development and scaling-up of demand-driven productive
partnerships with the commercial private sector; (ii) improving access to critical infrastructure
and key government support services; and (iii) improving the capacity of local governments and
service providers to deliver production and business development services. The overall goal of
the project is to reduce poverty, increase employment, and develop entrepreneurial skills in rural
poor and disadvantaged areas by enabling small rural producers to compete successfully in
national and international markets.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The project will have four main components, described below.

 Component 1: Productive Partnerships and Local Entrepreneurship
 The objective of this component is to facilitate the development of sustainable demand-driven
partnerships in clusters of villages within targeted districts, whereby clusters are identified on the
basis of common characteristics, such as agro-ecological zones or similar natural resource
endowments. Activities supported by this component are expected to lead to: (i) a sustainable
increase in employment and volume of sales through a demand-driven expansion of locally-
based small and medium-sized enterprises engaged in activities that integrate productive,
processing, and marketing activities along value chains that draw on an area's comparative
advantage in terms of natural and human resources; and (ii) development of a sound local
investment climate, leading to sustained local investment, technology development, and an
increase in nonfarm and farm jobs. These outcomes will be achieved through the following
subcomponents:

 1.1. Participatory Development Planning: value chain action plans for each of the targeted
clusters will be prepared by regional or local service providers (e.g. universities, NGOs or
consultants) contracted by the project through the involvement of local governments, producer
communities and private sector organizations. The value chain action plans will be consistent
with local development plans, including the Bedah Desa (accelerated rural area development
program) and the PRUKAB (kabupaten's potential commodities), both supported by KPDT as
part of its effort to coordinate and integrate local development planning with existing District and
Provincial Master Plans. The initial planning phase will allow identifying those value chains
whose competitiveness is underpinned by the local availability of natural and human resources.
Value chain action plans will be designed and monitored through the establishment of Local
Development Forums for each of the targeted clusters. The Forums will facilitate the dialogue
and coordination between local governments, the private sector, producer organizations, local
banks and microfinance institutions, and other actors in the preparation and monitoring of the
value chain action plans. The action plans will commit stakeholders to a set of coordinated
actions that are intended to address investment and technical capacity gaps and other bottlenecks
that have been identified as constraints to the development of the targeted value chains.

 1.2. The Development of Productive Partnerships sub-component will provide matching
grants to support the establishment of demand-driven partnerships between organizations of
small producers and private sector firms that are consistent with the value chain action plans
developed through the Local Development Forums. The grants are intended to develop
appropriate conditions for producer organizations (PO) to improve their access to technology and
start-up capital, and to develop linkages to markets by establishing, scaling up, or enhancing
market-oriented joint ventures or long-term contractual arrangements with private sector
partners. To maximize the incentives for the development of sound and commercially viable
partnerships, the grants will match resources internally provided by the partners, either through
own funds, in-kind labor or services (e.g. technical assistance), or loans from microfinance
institutions or rural banks. The grants will therefore be designed so as to maximize the
opportunities for POs to link, in addition to private sector counterparts, to local private and
public extension services, local R&D centers, rural banks, district and provincial Dinas, and
other relevant local providers of business services. They will be used to finance training, learning
activities, transfer of technology, acquisition of production facilities, and equipment. By acting
as a catalyst for interaction among local actors, the grants will therefore contribute to activating
local development networks in support of the targeted industries. Furthermore, this sub-
component will support the development of POs' capacity to manage their internal governance,
and financial and planning processes and to negotiate with private sector counterparts. The
strengthening of producer organizations will ensure that the partnerships supported by the project
will be perceived as fair and sustainable by the members of the producer organizations.

 1.3. The Improving the Local Investment Climate sub-component will build the capacity of
district governments in developing and operating One Stop Shops (OSS) where prospective
investors will be able to acquire information regarding local firms and POs, access digitalized
information and maps, and process the licenses required to operate a business more transparently
and expeditiously. The establishment of OSS will include a joint review with local government
planning authorities of local business regulations and implementation modalities of relevant
national legislation in terms of their impact on the business investment climate, in particular for
priority sectors.

 Component 2: Public Infrastructure Support

 This component will involve the provision of essential productive and market access
infrastructure to participating village clusters as identified during the preparation of the Value
Chain Action Plans developed under sub-component 1.1. The goal of the component is to
improve access to markets for enterprises involved in agricultural, livestock, fisheries and other
industries in line with cost effective, high-quality rural infrastructure through participatory
planning processes. To attract local government funding and to ensure ownership, the project
will provide grants to participating districts. Only inter-village infrastructure, (involving the area
of two or more villages), will be eligible for funding under the project (community-level projects
will be handled through other programs, such as PNPM-MP). In addition, funding will be
approved on the basis of a Memorandum of Understanding whereby District and/or Provincial
governments will clearly commit to allocating the funds required for the necessary O&M of the
infrastructure developed under the project as part of their multi-year local development plans.

 Component 3: Institutional Capacity Building

 An example of such project (e.g. Lampung Utara, rubber) are the 5 km access road between
farmers and the local market across different villages or the construction of small processing
plant to improve the quality of rubber (from bowl collected rubber to rubber-sheet) from the
farmer to the traders.

 The objective of this component is to improve service delivery of both national and local
governments in targeted districts through a program of technical assistance and training of
BAPPEDA staff and key Dinas (Agriculture, Infrastructure, Industry, etc.) in targeted local
districts to improve to their capacity to: (i) promote local sector investment; (ii) assist in the
preparation of cluster development frameworks, local value chain development plans; and (iii)
manage the procurement and monitor the implementation of infrastructure sub-projects.

 Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation
 Besides the more specific project management, a local-government system of monitoring and
evaluation will be developed to track project performance at the district and cluster level.

D. Project location (if known)
An initial list of 40 districts in14 provinces are being proposed by KPDT as the project's targets.
This list might be revised to a limited extent during project preparation. From the point of view
of achieving economies of scale and benefiting from simpler implementation arrangements,
provinces with adjacent districts would present an advantage. Nevertheless, as this is a demand-
driven project, it is impossible at this stage to identify precisely where the sub-projects supported
by the project would be located within the targeted districts.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The project will use a management structure supportive of local government participation and
capacity building in order to achieve the maximum impact of the activities and utilize the
resources most effectively. The project will build on the experiences of SPADA, EDFF, and
other livelihood and infrastructure projects from throughout the Indonesia such as Bedah Desa
and Prukab.

 Responsibility for project implementation will be at the Ministry for Disadvantaged Areas
(MinDA or KPDT). Day-to-day responsibility will rest with the Project Implementation Unit
(PIU), hosted by Deputy 5 for "Development of Special Regions" (which managed the original
SPADA). The PIU is in charge of policy, strategic monitoring, government reporting and overall
budget management and will be assisted by a National Management Consultant team (NMC) and
an Administrative Support Firm (PPA). A Steering Committee will be established with Echelon
One representatives from relevant ministries, including Deputy 3/KPDT, Ministry of
Agriculture, Ministry of Cooperation and SME, and Ministry of Trade. The Steering Committee
will oversee the project, coordinate activities and ensure that the PIU can provide quality
services to participating local governments and project beneficiaries.

  While institutional capacity of KPDT has improved during the past few years, remaining
challenges include grant disbursement and financial management, procurement, field supervision
and safeguards. Many of the weaknesses identified during SPADA implementation are related to
the capacity of regional and national consultants. It will be important to deliberatively select
consultant firms that have strong record and capacity in implementing various aspects of the
program, especially given the technical nature of the proposed project. This should be divided
between training, knowledge management/MIS, project delivery and administration and
safeguards implementation and supervision. It is proposed that a PPA is hired to manage day-to-
day administration of the PIU and that training of staff is managed by a professional training
firm.

 At the provincial level and district levels, project management will be with a Central Work Unit
(SATKER) based at Bappeda, with provincial and district management consultants providing
day-to-day technical assistance, implementation and safeguards support. This is similar to the
arrangement in SPADA and SPADA Aceh-Nias which has worked well. A district Steering
Committee will be established under Bappeda coordination that consists of district technical
agencies relevant to the project.
  For safeguard instruments during implementation, SPADA-2 could adopt the instruments from
previous KPDT project such as NIAS-LEDP and Aceh EDFF to use TIG (Technical
Implementation Guidelines) for environmental and social safeguards compliance. Lesson
learned and weaknesses in implementing such instrument shall be taken into consideration when
designing safeguard instrument for SPADA-2 especially about the development of SOP or ECOP
for potential significant aspect such as pesticide use, construction activities, cattle waste
management and the negative list enforcement. A workshop is being planned to develop such
instrument. Lesson learnt from other development project involving agriculture activities and
livelihood improvements, the assignment of a safeguard focal contact point at PIU or SATKER
level endorsed by KPDT who will work closely with the Bank's safeguard specialist might be
beneficial not only to guide the environmental assessment and land acquisition process but also
to design measures to mitigate risks associated with specific social and environmental issues and
to help improve the development of operations manual, technical guidelines, or to develop
training and monitoring and evaluation program. This is in accordance with para. 14 of OP 4.01
that such capacity building and assistance is required to be incorporated into project component
and a more detailed specification of resources requirement shall be evaluated during the
preparation mission.

  In addition, level of understanding on environment and social safeguard policies should be
improved especially at the PIU or SATKER level, therefore the training on safeguards
framework and practical guidelines and their applicability should be conducted at the very
beginning of the project implementation for institutions in all levels (from steering committee,
project management team at national or provincial level, consultants and also for contractors).

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Juan Martinez (EASIS)
   Mr Krisnan Pitradjaja Isomartana (EASIS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes         No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
    Based on the identification mission conducted on 25-27 April 2012 and learning from the
ongoing Bedah Desa or Prukab program of KPDT and from the previous SPADA project,
potential environmental and social risks of the program, particularly adverse impacts, will be
insignificant, on-site, not irreversible and manageable locally. An example (e.g. Lampung Utara,
rubber) of such project are the 5 km access road between farmers and the local market across
different villages or the construction of small processing plant to improve the quality of rubber
(from bowl collected rubber to rubber-sheet) from the farmer to the traders. Therefore at this
stage of project design, is expected that the environmental assessment category as per OP/BP
4.01 is "B". Physical relocation is unlikely and land acquisition by the project will be small-
scale. However, this will be further assessed during project preparation prior appraisal. As the
exact project types, scale and location are not determined yet an environmental screening tool
will be developed and a negative list established. Any proposed project that was found in the
negative lists or that would require a full environmental assessment shall not be funded. No
works will be undertaken that could affect protected or vulnerable natural habitats.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No          TBD

      The project that passed the first screening test would then be evaluated using PermenLH
13/2010 to assess whether it shall require UKL/UPL (EMP) or to just produce SOP with SPPL
letter (Surat Pernyataan Kesanggupan Pengelolaan Lingkungan) as stipulated in appendix 1 of
the PermenLH 13/2010. For projects that require UKL UPL, especially for activities which
would result in the expansion of, renovation of and change of production/manufacturing
technology, the requirement stipulated under Permen 13/2010 shall be fulfilled as well as
Bankpolicies (OP/BP 4.01) about public consultation. The use of SOP, ECOP and guide book
from previous PNMP project would probably constitute the environment instrument of the
project. A review and lessons learnt from the implementation and adequacy of the existing
"guide book" or "Picture book – the good and the bad infrastructure" shall be conducte prior to
appraisal. Based on the above review, the ECOP shall be prepared for aspects that are not
covered. During program preparation and appraisal, the Bank in collaboration with the KPDT
will update the Project Operations Manual to include guidelines on the use, implementation,
supervision and monitoring of the ECOPs (if any), guidelines on the use of pesticides/other
chemicals, and Picture Book, also the reporting schedule. In addition, the manual shall include
the exclusion criteria of the infrastructure which would cause potential adverse impact to natural
habitats and PCR. The process above could also be done in coordination with BLH at district
level/province.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                        X
     No works will be undertaken that could affect protected or vulnerable natural habitats. This
kind of proposed activities shall be eliminated during the environmental screening process.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                 X
     The project will not finance activities that would involve significant conversion or
degradation of critical forest areas or related critical natural habitats as defined under the policy.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                               X
     Although the project will not procure pesticides directly, partnerships supported by the
project may implement commercial agricultural activities involving the use of pesticides.
Indonesia has a long tradition in supporting IPM approaches in agriculture. The project will
ensure that the IPM practices are followed during project implementation and the same will be
included in the EMP/Operation Manual. There is no need for a standalone IPM.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                             X
     Project activities affecting archeological, paleontological, historical, religious, or unique
natural values as defined under the policy will not be eligible for support. Standard appropriate
clauses will be included in all construction contracts regarding the procedures to be followed in
the event of 'chance finds' of culturally significant artifacts. The operation manual shall include
the exclusion criteria of the infrastructure which would cause potential adverse impact to PCR.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                         X
     The team has conducted an initial screening by using the 2010 World Bank Study on
Indigenous Peoples mapping database and the two categories used by the Bank: (a) Masyarakat
Adat (MA)/Adat communities/Customary law communities; and (b) Komunitas Adat Terpencil
(KAT)/Isolated and Vulnerable communities (IVPs) to determine if the policy is triggered or not.
From the screening it was suggested that 29 out of 40 districts have IPs presence. Given the fact
that only some of village clusters will be decided prior to appraisal and the demand driven nature
of the proposed project, whereby the "partnership forum" (community producers, private sectors
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes            No          TBD
and local government) will propose subprojects to be funded by the project during project
implementation, the client will prepare an IPPF. The project will confirm the presence of the IPs
communities in the confirmed selected cluster villages prior to appraisal (if any), and in the case
there are IPs communities would be affected, the project will carry out social assessment and
prepare draft IPP prior to appraisal. The IPPF will be integrated in the project design and its
implementation will be elaborated in the Project Operations Manual.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
    Physical relocation is unlikely and land acquisition by the project will be small-scale.
However, given that the sitting of subproject locations cannot be known by appraisal, a
Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared. During project implementation, Abbreviated
Resettlement Action Plans will be prepared for subprojects that require small-scale land
acquisition resulting directly or indirectly from the subproject activities. In the case that there are
voluntarily land donation, Project Operational Manual will include a section on how to process
and document voluntary land donation.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                         X
    The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams, nor will it rely on the
performance of an existing dam or a dam under construction. To be confirmed during appraisal
mission.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                    X
    There are no known project components involving international waterways as defined under
the policy. None of the project sites will be in the international water boundaries.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                             X
    The project is not located in any known disputed areas as defined under the policy.


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 09/28/2012

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Five months from the start of preparation may be required to complete the needed safeguard-
   related studies.


1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                   Mr Fabrizio Bresciani                         06/28/2012
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan            08/07/2012
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                     Mr Franz R. Drees-Gross                       07/30/2012
   Comments: This version of the ISDS reflects my comments of 6/29/12. Approved.
