                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                         76933
Report No.:
Date prepared/updated: February 15, 2013

I. Basic Information
Country: Indonesia                               Project ID: P131815
                                                 Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Pro-Poor Planning, Budgeting and Monitoring (P3BM)
Task Team Leader: Hans Antlov, EASID
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 15, 2013 Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: EASID                             Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance
                                                 Loan
Sector : Sub-national government administration 60%; Other social services 40%
Theme : Other social development 50%; Other rural development 50%
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source:
 Borrower                                                                 0.00
        Indonesia - Free-standing Trust Fund Program                      1.665
                                                                          1.665

Environmental Category: C
Is this a transferred project                    Yes []                    No [x]
Simplified Processing                            Simple [x]                Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises           Yes [ ]       No [x]
and Emergencies)


2. Project Objectives:

The objective of Pro-Poor Planning, Budgeting and Monitoring (P3BM) is to improve poverty
targeting of local government expenditures and local government responsiveness to community
needs through the scale-up and institutionalization of the P3BM program. The underlying
development assumption is that the availability and use of reliable evidence and data can make
planning decisions more pro-poor and responsive to local needs.
The project will provide multiple benefits for a number of stakeholders:
      Local government stakeholders will be supported through a capacity building program
       i.e. cascade training, coaching and technical assistance, improved poverty data, and
       expenditure tracking and monitoring.


                                                1
      The program will strengthen PNPM by encouraging more funds to be allocated to
       poverty needs and by encouraging PNPM groups to be involved in the tracking of local
       government work plans. The project will collaborate closely with TN2PK to improve the
       quality of sub national poverty data – P3BM will be used by TNP2K as a key reference
       tool for poverty data.

3. Project Description:

The proposed Project has been designed on the basis of Phase One pilot and assessments funded
under the District Capacity Development Program (TF098107). Grant financed activities under
Recipient-executed funds, totaling $1.665.000, will be used to deliver the following components:

       Component One: Provincial cascade training (ToT) for Master Trainers ($ 171,000).
       The scale-up of P3BM will continue the cascade training began under Phase One. The
       national master trainers will train an additional 280 provincial master-trainers clustered
       into six larger regional events. Training of trainers will also be done at the national level
       to increase the number of National Master Trainers to facilitate province and districts’
       requests of P3BM training and technical assistance. The curriculum and material has
       been revised based on feedback from pilot provincial training in 2011-12. Training will
       be done not only on P3BM, but also on how the provincial master trainers in turn best can
       organize effective training sessions at the district level, thus including sessions on
       interactive training design

       Component Two. Technical Assistance for Provinces ($650,000). The P3BM master
       trainers (national and provincial) will respond to the needs of local governments to
       improve their planning, budgeting and public service monitoring. They will provide
       continuous technical assistance to district governments in terms of the utilization of the
       P3BM instruments to improve their development planning. 15 provinces will be selected
       for further support, based on a commitment to share costs for the training and technical
       assistance. In these 15 provinces, “P3BM Joint Secretariats? will be established,
       consisting of the pool of Provincial Master Trainers supported by a small secretariat

       Component C: Institutional Support and National Secretariat (834,000). A system to
       institutionalize and provide national information about the P3BM will be designed (cost
       for this component includes staff providing ToT, operating costs for the secretariat, and
       TA to provinces).


4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

Out of the 33 provinces that will have received P3BM training (5 from Phase One, 28 from
Phase Two), a proposed 15 provinces will be selected for further support. Specifically relevant to
the safeguards analysis is three main fields: poverty data management, providing directions for
pro-poor planning, and improvement of planning documents.

5. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

                                                 2
As a capacity-building project, the P3BM does not directly impact on safeguard issues. However,
the grant recipient shall ensure that the safeguards policies are taken into considerations during
the planning and implementation of the project, and specifically, that safeguard issues become
part of the training modules and part of material discussed in any forms of project activities.
Kemitraan is a non-governmental organization with a strong commitment to social and green
issues, and has an environmental unit that will be involved in project design.

6. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

  Mr Juan Martinez (EASER)
  Mr Dennie Stenly Mamonto (EASIS)


 7. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                           Yes            No
 Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                                    X
 Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                            X
 Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                     X
 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                X
 Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                 X
 Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                          X
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                    X
 Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                              X
 Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                         X
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                  X

8. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

Summary of Key Safeguards Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Since this project consists of training activities and there are no physical interventions, hence there
are no safeguard issues and impacts associated directly with the proposed project. The P3BM
Project is classified as Environmental Category C. The responsibility for Appraisal Stage safeguard
review and clearance was transferred on January 28, 2013 to the Sector Manager.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There are no significant long term potential safeguard impacts triggered by this project.
Nevertheless the P3BM project has strong linkage to PNPM in ensuring the trainings delivered
from this project will have proper understanding on safeguards policies, specifically the ones
triggered in the umbrella of PNPM Rural. The OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment and

                                                 3
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples as well as explained in Implementation Guideline for Social and
Environmental Safeguards (IGSES) shall be implemented in the project implementation.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
As a capacity-building project, the P3BM does not directly impact on safeguard issues. However,
the grant recipient shall ensure that the safeguards policies are taken into considerations during the
planning and implementation of the project, and specifically, that safeguard issues become part of
the training modules and part of material discussed in any forms of project activities, as follows:
    a. P3B Clinics. These clinics will provide technical assistance for district governments that
        have adopted the P3BM approach include the safeguards issues, managing P3BM related
        requests and questions from province and districts.
    b. P3BM Forum Data and Information Office. The P3BM Joint Secretariat together with the
        MDG Provincial secretariat will manage a MDG database and other poverty-related data
        needed for implementation of P3BM include data of implementation of safeguards policies,
        the issues and best practices to be lesson learnt.
    c. Civil Society, Media and Community Monitoring. To monitor the actual implementation of
        district plans and budgets related to MDG activities – to make sure that safeguards policies
        are actually implemented.
    d. Monitoring and Evaluation tool for Bappeda and TKPKD to assess SKPD’s actual
        implementation against planning and budgeting. Support will be provided (on a cost-sharing
        basis) for training and technical assistance (in collaboration with TNP2K) which also
        include module for safeguards knowledge.
    e. Refresher training for districts that have received P3BM training in the past, to update on
        recent development and renew commitment to use the P3BM approach include the
        understanding of safeguard policies.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key main stakeholders of the project are the qualified service provider (non-governmental) that
will administer the project management unit hosted by BAPPENAS. This intermediary firm will
provide administrative and management support to the project.

The Project will be under the supervision of BAPPENAS for the national delivery mechanism of
P3BM and a P3BM steering committee will be established to include other related institutions, ie.
TNP2K, MOHA, MPW, MoF, universities, and other development partners working on MDGs
targets.

During the implementation of the project, disclosure is mandatory to all stakeholders. The materials
which consider the safeguards issues, will be uploaded to the project website


                                                 4
.
    B. Disclosure Requirements

    Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
    Was the document disclosed prior to                     N/A
    appraisal?
    Date of receipt by the Bank
    Date of “in-country? disclosure
    Date of submission to Info Shop
    For category A projects, date of distributing the
    Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
    Directors
    Resettlement Action Plan /Framework/Policy Process:
    Was the document disclosed prior to                     N/A
    appraisal?
    Date of receipt by the Bank
    Date of “in-country? disclosure

    Date of submission to Info Shop
    *If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
    respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
    Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
    If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
    The safeguards framework (IGSES) for PNPM-Rural 2012-2014 was disclosed on September 17,
    2012. It is used as the umbrella framework for all PNPM-Rural operations.
.
      C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
      finalized by the project decision meeting)

       OP/BP/GP 4.01 – Environment Assessment
       Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                 No
       If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) review      N/A
       and approve the EA report?
       Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the             N/A
       credit/loan?
       OP/BP 4.10 – Indigenous Peoples
       Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)        No
       been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
       If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager   N/A
       review the plan?

                                                        5
      If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and   N/A
      approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?


II. APPROVALS

Signed and submitted by:               Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                      Hans Antlov                 February 15, 2013
Approved by
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:       Juan Martinez               21 June 2012
Comments:
Approved by:
Sector Manager:                        Jan Weetjens                April 03, 2013
Comments:




                                                   6
