                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC6188


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/27/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Indonesia                            Project ID: P122810
Project Name: PNPM Rural IV
Task Team Leader: Susanne Holste
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 27, 2011       Estimated Board Date: July 28, 2011
Managing Unit: EASID                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Water supply (20%);Irrigation and drainage (20%);Roads and highways
(20%);Primary education (20%);Sub-national government administration (20%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (55%);Participation and civic engagement
(31%);Rural markets (11%);Social analysis and monitoring (3%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):         700.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                         0.00
                                                                         0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
As under the ongoing PNPM Rural III operation, the Project Development Objective would
remain for villagers in PNPM-Rural locations to benefit from improved socio-economic and
local governance conditions.

 Key performance indicators for the PDO include:

 a)     Improved household (HH) expenditure rates and improved access to economic and social
services in a minimum of 4,100 sub-districts in 2012 (impacts taken from representative sample);
 b)     Economic Internal Rate of Returns (EIRR) greater than 30 percent for major rural
infrastructure works in PNPM kecamatan;
 c)     Greater than 80 percent satisfaction levels from beneficiaries regarding improved services
and local level governance in a representative subset of sub-districts.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
PNPM Rural IV is a #repeater# operation, channeling additional resources to a well-established
community-driven development operation in Indonesia that has evolved from a smaller-scale
Bank-financed project, to a national-scale Government program. To date, since 1998 and
starting with the KDP project, the Bank has provided financing totaling $2.2 billion to
KDP/PNPM. Under this fourth phase of support to the scaled-up national program, there will be
no substantial change to the program#s overarching objectives or components and the program
will continue to address poverty and improve local-level governance in rural areas, through the
provision of investment resources, decision-making and implementing authority directly to rural
communities.

 The objective of rural villagers benefiting from improved socio-economic and local governance
conditions will continue to be achieved through:
 (i) provision of direct grants to communities in a transparent manner to finance an open menu
of basic socio-economic infrastructure and revolving funds for women#s saving and loans
groups;
 (ii) support to communities participation in an open and inclusive planning process;
 (iii) enhancing the capacity of central and local governments to partner with community
organisations in service provision.

 The design also proposes that PNPM-Rural IV continues to include provision for quick post-
disaster response and crisis recovery, utilizing PNPM#s existing financial and institutional
platforms; and will maintain support to operational pilots that again build upon the main PNPM
platforms, testing operational hypotheses for greater impact and to inform longer-term policy and
design questions (e.g., PNPM Generasi; Papua RESPEK, etc).

  Project components will remain similar to the ongoing operation. Financing figures are
estimates, based on past experience and the Government#s annual budget, and would be
finalized during the preparation and appraisal process:
  i.    Component 1: Kecamatan Grants ($575m). Direct grants to sub-districts to support
community-driven planning and investment in social and economic infrastructure, education and
health, and revolving funds for women#s savings and loan groups
  ii.   Component 2: Facilitation Support ($75m). Development of community capacity for
planning, project and resource management through training, technical advice and support for
local level facilitators (technical and social, at kecamatan and kabupaten levels)
  iii. Component 3: Implementation support and Technical Assistance ($35m). Implementation
support, training and technical assistance at the national, provincial and district levels to manage
and oversee the program and strengthen capacity of local governments.
  iv. Component 4: Project Management Support ($15m). PNPM#s special programs/pilots
place several additional demands on normal government budgeting, particularly as the program
scales up. Most of these operational costs will be covered by Government through their national
(APBN) and local (ABPD) budgets; a minimal amount is financed from the loan.

D. Project location (if known)
As PNPM Rural IV will continue financing of a program that is national in scale, project
activities will take place in every rural kecamatan in the country and in over 61,000 villages
across Indonesia. Clearly this is a program that is substantial in scope, and which covers a
geographic area encompassing great topographic, ecological, biological and social diversity.

 As a repeater project with the same design and project components, no new safeguard issues are
anticipated. Experiences from the ongoing PNPM-Rural projects as well as their predecessor,
the Kecamatan Development Projects (KDP), indicate that any adverse environment impacts are
typically site specific, small in scale and can be managed locally by adopting screening criteria,
good engineering designs and construction practices. Every location is assisted by an
experienced engineer. Furthermore, there have been no significant adverse social impacts
registered in either the KDP series of projects or the ongoing PNPM program, including in
Papua, Kalimantan, Mentawai, and Nias, some of the more sensitive areas, where PNPM has
been adapted to reflect unique geographical and cultural conditions, including indigenous
peoples areas. Overall, social impacts of PNPM IV are expected to be positive, given the focus
on the needs of the poor; strengthening of social capital, voice and empowerment; and expected
improvements in improved quality of life through enhancing access to social and economic
infrastructure.

 Nonetheless, with the substantial scope of operations under PNPM Rural IV, and an
implementation area that spans environmentally and socially sensitive areas, ensuring sufficient
attention to relevance and application of Safeguards guidelines, and their adequate monitoring
and oversight, is a priority.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Implementation arrangements would remain the same as under the ongoing PNPM-Rural
portfolio. The responsibility for project implementation will rest with the Ministry of Home
Affairs (MOHA), with day-to-day responsibility under the Project Management Unit housed
within the Directorate General of Village Community Empowerment (PMD). The PMD
Secretariat is in charge of policy, monitoring, government reporting and overall budget
management and is assisted by the National Management Consultant team (NMC), as the apex
technical oversight body. This arrangement is mirrored at the provincial level and district levels.

  While this arrangement has created certain implementation challenges, in many ways, the
program has benefited from a cadre of officers with long experience in implementing
KDP/PNPM and therefore familiarity with both operational and Bank procedures, including
those relating to Safeguards. It is the responsibility of PMD and NMC to ensure that the
program will not implement activities that cause adverse impacts to environmental and social
aspects. However, recent management weaknesses highlight that an organizational review and
adjustments to capacity level and staff strength would now be needed in accordance with the
increased demands of a scaled-up program. Some positions have remained unfilled at the central
level for some time, and identification of clear functional counterparts, accountable for results in
key thematic areas, including Safeguards, has lagged.

 The existing PNPM project has an Environmental Category B classification, with community
subprojects subject to screening and simple impact assessment criteria as detailed in the project
Operational Manual (PTO) approved by the Bank. No adverse environmental or social impacts
have been documented to date, and the team does not foresee that continuation of the expanded
PNPM would trigger any new safeguard policies, nor raise the Category B classification, as it
would fund community subprojects similar in scale and scope, which have been demonstrated to
be small-scale, not irreversible and site-specific.

  With the scale-up, however, and with recent evidence from some program locations of patchy
quality in staff training and uneven oversight of Safeguards-related issues, the task team feels it
is timely and appropriate to assist GOI in a review of the existing guidelines in the operational
manual, to assess their efficacy and efficiency, to learn lessons from recent implementation, to
identify any capacity gaps and reflect these in updated operational documents and training
plans/modules. The task team is partnering with GOI to constitute a taskforce to lead this
Review and lesson learning. The results from this exercise would be examined during the
Appraisal process, and the team would be seeking assurance that key recommendations and any
adjustments to the PTO would be completed in time for Negotiations.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Juan Martinez (EASER)
   Ms Indira Dharmapatni (EASIS)
   Ms Catrini Pratihari Kubontubuh (EASIS)
   Mr Dennie Stenly Mamonto (EASIS)
   Mr Virza S. Sasmitawidjaja (EASIS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes           No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                               X
    PNPM Rural promotes the environmental improvement of rural villages through the
construction of rural infrastructure such as concrete pathways, drainage, water supply, bridges,
and the like. The environmental impacts from such civil activities is relatively small, localized,
non adverse and relatively easy to mitigate.

     All civil works have some impact on the environment although the works built by villagers
with assistance from PNPM-Rural are very small and have mostly negligible negative impacts.
Guidelines for management of environmental risks have nonetheless been established and
implemented in PNPM Rural as its Environmental Code of Practice. The same guidelines,
captured in the operational manual, are being updated to reflect lessons learnt through recent
implementation experience, and will continue to be applied for this project.

      Mitigation of minor negative environmental impacts requires improvements in facilitator
training on the awareness and knowledge of environmental issues, in the tools provided in the
Operational Manual and in improvements in the engineering design and construction of the sub-
projects. Intensified supervision, including the involvement of an environmental specialist in
supervision missions, is recommended and will be continued. An illustrated field manual of
good and bad practices in environmental management of small village infrastructures which is
expected to help facilitators and villagers to minimize adverse environmental impacts has been
published and distributed. The project will continue to internalize environmental impact
mitigation measures in all stages of the project activities in order to minimize the negative
impacts.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                             Yes          No           TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                          X
    The project will not finance sub-projects that would be undertaken in prohibited, critical
natural habitats (including of critical forest, coastal and marine habitats), nor will it result in
significant conversion of natural habitats. This will be clearly defined in the negative list of the
project. The OM will also provide specification for the management of small construction works
to avoid any potential degradation or conversion of natural habitats on a small scale.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                   X
    It is not foreseen that the project will affect critical forest areas or related critical natural
habitats. Activities will not affect the health/quality of forest or involve any forest management.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                              X
    It is not foreseen that the project will procure any pesticides, nor will an increased use of
pesticides result from the project.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                               X
    It is expected that the proposed project will not adversely affect any sites with archeological,
paleontological, historical, religious or of unique natural value as defined under the policy.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
    PNPM#s ongoing implementation has demonstrated some best-practice principles for
indigenous people#s involvement. Participation is entirely voluntary, and there are documented
cases of highly remote communities initially not accepting PNPM facilitators. Actions taken by
PNPM-Rural to mitigate social safeguard issues associated with inclusion of indigenous people
include: recruitment and tailored training for facilitators from the same ethnic groups; local
language translation; independent reviews by cultural specialists; and modifications to the
planning process to reflect more closely traditional social units.

      For ensuring indigenous peoples participation, two simple definitions will primarily be used
to fulfill the Bank policy: (1) Masyarakat Adat /Adat communities/Customary law communities.
These are based on lineage or locality and are bound by customary law. Characteristics of these
communities include: (i) self identification as a distinct indigenous cultural group, (ii) collective
attachment to ancestral territories and to the natural resources in the territories; and (iii)
customary cultural, economic, social, or political institutions; and (2) Komunitas Adat Terpencil
(KAT)/Isolated and Vulnerable communities (IVPs): This is a government-designated category
of customary law communities that live in isolated areas. The characteristics attributed to these
communities include: (i) collective attachment to ancestral territories and to the natural resources
in the territories; (ii) customary cultural, economic, social, or political institutions; (iii) an
indigenous language. They are also identified by government as: (i) having a subsistence
economy, (ii) using simple tools and technology, (iii) having a high dependence on the
environment and local natural resources, and (iv) having restricted access to social, economic,
and political services. It is noted, however, that should the task team or implementers identify
any communities as IPs, even where they are not officially identified as such according to the
above formal definitions, IP related guidelines would apply, including the documentation of free
and prior informed consultation leading to broad community support for the subproject, etc.

     As a project that is grounded in principles of grassroots participation and flexible project
designs/procedures determined through local planning and decision-making by communities
themselves, PNPM-Rural has been successful in involving indigenous communities as key
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes          No         TBD
stakeholders, participating and accessing project benefits, as documented in Bank supervision
visits and monitoring and evaluation activities. Experience has shown that incorporating
approaches for indigenous peoples in the planning processes of the operational manual is key to
implementation progress. The project will prepare some revisions and updates to the operational
manual based on the recent experiences under the scaled up program, to accommodate the
lessons learned. Additional training is also being included in the project to improve the quality of
facilitators.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                             X
    There is no use of eminent domain or government land acquisition in any PNPM project.
Community contributions (e.g., land, labor, materials) are voluntary and frequent. PNPM#s
operational manual includes a planning and verification framework to ensure that any land
acquisition is well-documented both in terms of its voluntary nature and the lack of any
significant economic impact on villagers.

     PNPM-Rural has a land acquisition/compensation guideline embedded in its Project
Manual. Application of the guideline, measured through field reviews of both KDP and PNPM-
Rural, reports generally good results from implementation of the policy. A recent review of
about 350 representative sites found no cases of involuntary displacement. Land acquisition
assessments are part of the proposal review process and must be approved by the district level
oversight engineer. Nevertheless the community must be continuously reminded that land
documentation and resettlement have to be recorded in the village registration and reviewed
during field supervision.

      If there are any cases where engineers do not adequately follow the safeguard review rules
or villagers have felt some pressure to contribute land, proposed works are canceled or
redesigned. PNPM’s training is being improved to strengthen facilitator skills and oversight by
district consultants. The project will review field application and update the Guideline for land
acquisition/compensation as necessary to accommodate lessons learned, particularly in the
proper phasing for submission of a letter of willingness for donation prior to the program
proposal verification, and to be revised once the proposal is agreed. The project also documents
land acquired through donations from villages.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       X
    The project will not finance dam construction or rehabilitation of any dams larger than one
meter.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                  X
    The project will not operate in or affect international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X
    None of the project components is located in any known areas under territorial dispute as
defined by the policy.


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   05/30/2011

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The government, supported by the Bank team, will be undertaking a review of safeguards-
   related implementation under the existing PNPM portfolio. Initial meetings to finalize the
   TOR have taken place in mid March, with the full exercise launched at the beginning of
   April, and completed, with an update of existing Operational Manual/Safeguards-related
   guidelines, by end of May.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Ms Susanne Holste                                              03/25/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan                             05/27/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Franz R. Drees-Gross                                        05/27/2011
      Comments: Approved.




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
