                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC908

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Jun-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Indonesia                        Project ID:      P115763
                            Project Name:       ID-HCFC Phase-out Project in the Foam Sector (P115763)
                            Task Team           Johannes Heister
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           20-Jan-2013                      Estimated        24-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASIS                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Other industry (90%), Central government administration (10%)
                            Theme(s):           Pollution management and environmental health (50%), Environmental policies
                                                and institutions (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      3.63                      Total Bank Financing:           0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:                  0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                       0.92
                              Montreal Protocol Investment Fund                                              2.71
                              Total                                                                          3.63
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           27. The PDO is to reduce the consumption of HCFC-141b in the foam sector in Indonesia in order to
                           contribute to the government’s efforts to comply with its phase-out obligations for HCFCs under the
                           Montreal Protocol.
                           C. Project Description
                           Priority Sectors: In accordance with the proposed national HCFC phase-out target of 133 ODP tons
                           by 2015, GoI selected three major sectors – the air-conditioning sector, the refrigerator sector, and
                           the foam sector – as the priority sectors that will enable achievement of this target. The fire
                         protection and solvent sectors, which consume a small quantity of HCFCs, will be addressed in the
                         subsequent phases of the HPMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         As per the decision of the 64th ExCom meeting, the phase-out target for Indonesia for the first phase
                         is 134.97 ODP tons by 2018. The agreement includes TA for refrigerant management from the
                         Government of Australia with a calculated ODP phased-out of 3.67 ODP tons. The ExCom approval
                         reflects the GoI’s strategy to meet its overall HCFC freeze in 2013, and to reduce HCFCs
                         consumption by 20% of the baseline by 2018.

                         PU Foam Sector: In the foam sector, the target is a reduction of HCFC-141b consumption by 10% by
                         2015, and an additional reduction of 10% of the baseline by 2018. The current foam sector plan
                         covers 34.1 ODP tons from the starting point for a sustained aggregate reduction in HCFC
                         consumption. By 2015, the foam sector is targeted to phase out a minimum of 18.9 ODP tons, which
                         represents about 55% of the targeted reduction of 34.1 ODP tones. The remaining phase-out of 15.2
                         ODP tons is to be delivered by 2018.

                         The overall HCFC-141b phase-out strategy in the PU foam sector is to adopt a sectoral phase-out
                         schedule following the MP’s HCFC phase-out schedule, except for the 2015 reduction target for
                         which an advanced reduction is required to make up for the slower rate of consumption reduction in
                         the service sector. Phase-out priority will be given to the sub-sectors where market incentives and
                         phase-out capacity exist.

                         Taking into account the feasibility of alternative technologies, market competition, technical and
                         financial capacity of foam enterprises, management capacity of the executing agency, and funding
                         availability from the MLF, it is strategically important that phase-out activities be limited to a select
                         group of sub-sectors. Criteria for selection of prioritized sub-sectors for HCFC-141b phase-out under
                         the Phase I PU Foam Sector Plan include:
                         a)       Successful experience in implementing the selected alternatives;
                         b) Technical, financial and management capacity of targeted enterprises; and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         c)       Availability of cost-effective options.

                         Technology and climate impact: In response to Decision XIX/6, the Phase I PU Foam Sector Plan
                         promotes the adoption of hydrocarbon technology wherever possible in order to yield maximum
                         climate benefits. However, for those enterprises for which hydrocarbon technology is not a viable
                         option other technologies with higher GWP will be considered.

                         In the Indonesian context, higher GWP alternatives are required as most foam enterprises are small
                         and medium size enterprises, for which hydrocarbon technology is not financially viable. Moreover,
                         due to domestic regulations on safety, hydrocarbon technology cannot be used at existing facilities of
                         most small and medium size enterprises. Relocation of the production facilities would require a
                         longer project implementation timeframe. Therefore, higher GWP alternatives are required in order
                         to ensure that Indonesia will meet its freeze and 10% consumption reduction obligations in 2013 and
                         2015.

                         Regarding the overall climate impact, the proposed 50% reduced HFC-245fa formulation will indeed
                         result in climate benefits in comparison with the HCFC-141b technology. Since HCFC-141b has a
                         GWP of 780 in comparison with GWP of 520 for 50% reduced HFC-245fa, the climate benefit per
                         MT of HCFC-141b phase-out is 260 tCO2equivalent.
                         Sustainability: To ensure sustainability of the phase-out and a level-playing field for enterprises in
                         the respective sub-sectors targeted by the Phase I HPMP, GoI will put policies and regulatory
                         measures in place to ensure a complete phase-out in these sub-sectors. Moreover, import control and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         restriction of imported HCFC-141b pre-blended polyol, including a further investigation into the
                         downstream use of imported pre-blended polyol will be carried out during the implementation of the
                         Phase I HPMP.

                         The proposed project can be considered a continuation of the ODS I Project as it will employ the
                         infrastructure and capacity established under ODS I to deliver the required assistance to beneficiaries
                         and stakeholders. Due to the similar nature of the proposed activities and those under ODS I, it is
                         proposed to replicate the project arrangements in ODS I. The project will therefore include a
                         combination of investment, TA, and policy and regulatory interventions, which will be carried out in
                         tandem in order to ensure timely achievement of project objectives.

                         Component 1: Investment in HCFC consumption reductions (US$ 2,514,187)

                         In accordance with the above criteria and a recommendation by the Foam Technical Working Group
                         (TWG), GoI has selected 26 eligible enterprises operating in the five priority sub-sectors shown in
                         Table 4.

                         The project will support phase-out in these enterprises by introducing an alternative, non-HCFC
                         consuming production technology. The project will achieve this through TA and a grant that will
                         cover a part of the enterprises’ co nversion costs. The scope of this component will include the
                         selected 26 enterprises, which will be revalidated at the start of the project, and possibly additional
                         enterprises, to ensure a total phase-out of 34.12 ODP tons of HCFC 141-b by 2018.

                         Component 2: Technical assistance, supporting policies and regulations (US$ 110,000)

                         The project will finance TA activities supporting HCFC phase-out. The activities will include,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         among others, (i) training, (ii) identification and testing of low carbon blowing agents, (iii)
                         development of guidelines for use of hydrocarbons in the different foam applications, (iv) revision of
                         existing foam standards to remove any barriers for HCFC-141b phase-out, and (v) introduction of
                         new low-carbon blowing agents. A list of TA activities with objectives, scope of work and costs for
                         the first two years of the project will be developed during the project preparation stage. Additional
                         TA activities beyond 2013 will be identified during project implementation. This flexibility will
                         allow the project to adapt to evolving technological needs and circumstances and take advantage of
                         the experience gained from the early phase of project implementation.

                         Policies and regulations at the national, provincial and sector levels will be established to support the
                         phase-out of HCFC-141b. Based on experiences from previous ODS activities, sustainable HCFC
                         phase-out in each sub-sector will best be achieved through a complete ban on the use of HCFC in
                         that particular sub-sector.
                         (i)      Policies preventing establishment of new foam manufacturing facilities using HCFC-141b
                         and expansion of existing HCFC-based production facilities will be developed and implemented
                         under the project.
                         (ii)     A complete ban of HCFC-141b usage in 3 out of 12 existing applications, or subsectors, will
                         be part of this component. Specific applications that will be subject to a complete ban will be
                         determined through the project.
                         (iii)    A HCFC import quota system will be introduced in 2013 to ensure that reduction targets will
                           be achieved and consumption levels stay below the agreed limits.

                           Component 3: Capacity building and project management (US$ 90,000)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           A Project Management Office (PMO) with full responsibility to implement the Phase I PU Foam
                           Sector Plan will be established. The PMO will support all sectors and phase-out projects regardless
                           of implementing agency. To maintain expertise and continuity, staff and experts of the PMO for the
                           CFC Phase-out Plan will be assigned to this new Office.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project covers 26 foam companies, which have been identified and which are domiciled in
                           different locations throughout Indonesia. It is expected that these companies will participate in the
                           project with their production facilities at their current location and no relocation will occur due to or
                           coincidental with the project. However, this will be confirmed during project preparation.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Ministry of Environment (MoE) will serve as the executing agency for the Project. The NOU in
                           MoE has accumulated extensive experience with World Bank policies, including on safeguards,
                           through the successful execution of the CFC Phase-out Project.

                           Of the 26 beneficiary enterprises, 20 enterprises were converted to the use of HCFC-141b from CFC
                           during the 15 plus-year history of MLF foam projects in Indonesia. Since the same implementation
                           modality will be used as for the previous CFC phase-out ODS project, these companies already have
                           relevant experience with Bank procedures.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Isono Sadoko (EASID)
                           Andrew Daniel Sembel (EASIS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              The project will include a series of investment
                           BP 4.01                                                activities in 26 foam companies at their current
                                                                                  production locations. No relocation is expected
                                                                                  due to or coincidental with the project.
                                                                                  However, this will be confirmed during project
                                                                                  preparation.

                                                                                  The project will have a positive impact on the
                                                                                  global environment by reducing the use of
                                                                                  HCFCs - ozone-depleting substances. HCFCs
                                                                                  are also greenhouse gases with a global
                                                                                  warming potential (GWP) ranging from several
                                                                                  hundred to several thousand times that of CO2.
                                                                                  While HCFCs have an impact on the global
                                                                                  environment, they have no adverse local
                                                                                  impacts as these chemicals are stable and not
                         considered toxic or otherwise dangerous for the
                         environment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will promote the adoption of
                         hydrocarbon technology, where possible, in
                         order to yield maximum climate benefits.
                         However, for those enterprises for which
                         hydrocarbon technology is not a viable option
                         other technologies with higher GWP will be
                         considered. In the Indonesian context, higher
                         GWP alternatives are required as most foam
                         enterprises are small and medium size
                         enterprises, for which hydrocarbon technology
                         is not financially viable. Moreover, due to
                         domestic regulations on safety, hydrocarbon
                         technology cannot be used at existing facilities
                         of most small and medium size enterprises.
                         Relocation of the production facilities would
                         require a longer project implementation
                         timeframe. Therefore, higher GWP alternatives
                         are required in order to ensure that Indonesia
                         will meet its freeze and 10% consumption
                         reduction obligations in 2013 and 2015.

                         Regarding the overall climate impact, the
                         proposed 50% reduced HFC-245fa formulation
                         will indeed result in climate benefits in
                         comparison with the HCFC-141b technology.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Since HCFC-141b has a GWP of 780 in
                         comparison with GWP of 520 for 50% reduced
                         HFC-245fa, the climate benefit per Mt of
                         HCFC-141b phase-out is 260 tCO2equivalent.

                         Hydrocarbon has a Global Warming Potential of
                         less than 25. Hydrocarbon (cyclopentane) is
                         classified as a Volatile Organic Compound
                         (VOC), but its use results in very low levels of
                         emissions of about 2-3% of the blowing agent,
                         which is minuscule for instance compared to
                         emissions from motorcycle traffic. Therefore,
                         there is no significant environmental impact
                         from the chemical Hydrocarbon itself.

                         The other chemicals involved in the foam
                         production are MDI, amine catalysts and fire
                         retardants. Foam enterprises normally purchase
                         pre-formulated polyol (blended with or without
                         HCFC-141b) and polymeric MDI (isocyanates)
                         for their rigid foam production. The probability
                         that a spill of polymeric MDI (PMDI) – a liquid
Public Disclosure Copy




                         at room temperature – contaminates the soil and
                         water is very low, because the floor of the foam
                         production areas normally consists of cement
                         coated with an anti-leakage low permeability
                         \chemical layer such as epoxy. In the case that
                         PMDI leaks into the soil, it will react with the
                         moisture/water, and the reaction would result in
                         CO2 and insoluble polyurea compounds, which
                         are not biodegradable but chemically inert. Fire
                         retardant and amine catalysts (very limited
                         amount) are mixed/pre-formulated in the polyol
                         at the System Houses (pre-blended polyol
                         suppliers), from which the foam enterprises
                         normally purchase pre-blended polyol and MDI,
                         so the foam enterprises will not handle these
                         toxic chemicals directly. Fire retardant and
                         amine catalysts will remain in the final foam
                         products and are not likely to be emitted to the
                         environment during the foam production or
                         later. Therefore, there is no legacy
                         environmental contamination issue associated
                         with the foam production.

                         However, safety requirements associated with
                         hydrocarbons due to its flammability may still
Public Disclosure Copy




                         present operational challenges for those
                         enterprises that will use them. For all operating
                         sites, occupational health and safety (OHS)
                         measures (such as prevention from inhalation of
                         MDI vapors which may cause skin irritation);
                         spill prevention, control, and countermeasures;
                         and fire risks (particularly due to the presence of
                         flammable chemicals) will be identified and
                         appropriate emergency preparedness and
                         response measures will be prescribed as
                         identified in The World Bank Group EHS
                         (Environment, Health and Safety) Guidelines.
                         Staff will be trained as needed.

                         If a due diligence review confirms the
                         environmental, health and safety issues noted
                         above, an environmental management
                         framework (EMF) will be prepared for the
                         project before appraisal, which will require that
                                                                 environmental management plans (EMP) be
                                                                 drawn up by each company with site-specific
                                                                 mitigation measures. Each participating
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 enterprise will be required to follow the
                                                                 provisions of their EMP in order to participate
                                                                 in the project activities and receive access to any
                                                                 funding. The EMP will include requirements for
                                                                 appropriate handling of other chemicals used in
                                                                 minor amounts for the foam production. The
                                                                 World Bank Group EHS Guidelines will be
                                                                 followed when preparing the EMPs.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    As the project will take place in existing
                                                                 industrial facilities, protected areas, known
                                                                 natural habitats, or established or proposed
                                                                 critical natural habitats will not be affected.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project will not include activities that would
                                                                 involve significant conversion or degradation of
                                                                 critical forest areas or related critical natural
                                                                 habitats as defined under this policy.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The policy is not triggered since the project (a)
                                                                 will not procure any pesticides, nor (b) will the
                                                                 use of pesticides increase as a result of the
                                                                 project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    The project will take place in existing
                         BP 4.11                                 enterprises. As such, the project will not
                                                                 adversely affect sites with archeological,
                                                                 paleontological, historical, religious, or unique
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 natural values.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    All project activities will take place be in urban
                                                                 or industrial areas with no ethnic minorities as
                                                                 defined under the Bank’s policy. Therefore, OP
                                                                 4.10 on Indigenous People is not triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    TBD   None of the covered enterprises is expected to
                         4.12                                    relocate the location of foam production that
                                                                 will participate in the project. Should contrary
                                                                 information become known during the project
                                                                 preparation phase, the task team will review
                                                                 when and how the land was or is being acquired
                                                                 and the enterprise’ relocation plan, including
                                                                 any involuntary resettlement issues, and a
                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework will be
                                                                 prepared.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No    The project will not finance construction or
                                                                 rehabilitation of any dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             There are no project components involving
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not located in any known areas
                                 7.60                                                                                            under territorial dispute.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Jul-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      No specific safeguard-related studies are expected to be conducted.

                                      If required, project information including environmental management framework and plans will be
                                      disclosed locally. If any population is affected by the project’s activities, they will be invited to
                                      participate in the identification and assessment of impacts as well as in the development and
                                      implementation of the mitigation measures. The environment and social safeguard documents
                                      (summarized versions) will be distributed among affected people (if any), placed in local public
                                      libraries and in the Bank InfoShop. The safeguards instrument (EMF) will is to be disclosed
                                      locally (in local languages) and in the World Bank’s InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Johannes Heister

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 11-Apr-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Fook Chuan Eng (SM)                                                                                                  Date: 28-Mar-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
