                                                                                  71912

                         INTEGRA TED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                  APPRAISAL STAGE


Report No.:

Date prepared/updated: August 8, 2012


I. Basic Information

1 Basic Project Data
Country: Indonesia                            Project ID: P 130632
                                              Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Improving Governance for Sustainable Indigenous Community Livelihoods in
Forested Areas (JSDF Grant)
Task Team Leader: Juan Martinez
Estimated Appraisal Date: NIA                 Estimated Board Date: NIA
Managing Unit: EASIS                          Lending Instrument: TF Grant
Sector: Environment
Theme: Indigenous People
JSDF Amount (US$m.):US$ 3 million consisting of

Recipient Grant Amount (US$ 2,857,143)
Bank Incrementai Co st Grant Amount (US$ 142,857)

Environmental Category: C
Is this a transferred project                    Yes [x]                No []
Simplified Processing                            Simple [X]             Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises       Yes []      No [X]
and Emergencies)                                                                 1




2. Project Objectives:

The development objective of this grant is to improve the livelihoods of 250 indigenous
communities (targeted to AMAN members) located in Indonesia's ten main forest provinces, and
to improve the capacity of indigenous communities to participate in, and benefit from, national
and international forest policy developments. This objective will be achieved by strengthening
community governance, improving institutions, and promoting income generation activities in
selected po or and marginalized forest areas, through four main components of activities: (1)
participatory planning of land use which will be conducted in 250 villages, and which will
identifY at least 30 poor marginalized communities where the other three components will be
carried out; (2) capacity building of indigenous village and organization representatives; (3)
forest resources and culturally-based income generation activities; and (4) project management,
monitoring, evaluation, and knowledge dissemination.
3. Project Description:

There are four components of capacity building activities to meet the objective:


Component 1. Participatorv Land Use Planning

This component will focus on the wider and systematic application of existing models of
participatory planning pro cesses. This component will support production ofindigenous peoples'
maps and land use plans and will promote these maps and plans for economic development and
PES initiatives. The activities will facilitate institutional leaming at different levels for
indigenous communities and their organizations. The activities also will ensure transparency, and
enable community-based organizations to take a lead role in PES schemes at the locallevel. This
component will finance the following activities: 1) Training communities on the effective use of
geographic information technology and participatory mapping, 2) Participatory land use planning
and design, and 3) Empowerment of Ancestral Domain Registration Agency (Badan Registrasi
Wilayah Ke/o/a Adat, or BRWA) offices.

Component 2. Development of Integrated Capacity Building Strategy for Community-Based
Organizations

This component will focus on capacity building actlvltles to strengthen the organizational,
technical and entrepreneurship skills oflocal community-based organizations engaged in forestry
and agroforestry activities at the village level. This component also will facilitate the dialogue
between local govemments and indigenous communities and organizations on issues related to
forest resource management. The selection of the organizations will be completely demand-
driven. Sub-regional organizations that are members of the AMAN umbrella organizations - in
consultation with other local partners and groups -- will select the beneficiary groups using clear
and transparent criteria. In addition, this component also includes a special focus on indigenous
women to ensure their full and effective participation in decision making pro cesses through
capacity building. This component will finance the fo llowing activities: 1) Technical support for
indigenous communities, 2) Training on forest resource management and training on potential
scheme of payment for environmental services, 3) Establishment of a leaming exchange
progrmll, and 4) Capacity building of indigenous women.

Component 3. Forest Resource and Culturally-based Income Generating Activities

The purpose of this component is to strengthen sustainable economic livelihoods of indigenous
peoples. This component will target highly isolated communities in forested areas and will
contribute to climate change mitigation initiatives, as weil as to poverty alleviation. This
component will finance the following activities in 30 villages within 4 to 6 demonstration areas:
1) Assessments of IP's forest and culturally-based resources for income generation, 2)
Development of community enterprises, 3) Indigenous enterprise financing, and 4) Facilitation
of access to markets. As part of the operational manual, specific criteria will be set up for
avoiding elite capture.
Component 4. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge Dissemination

Pmiicipatory Monitoring and Evaluation (PME) activities will support improved govemance in
the selected project areas by establishing procedures to facilitate dialogue and stakeholder
inclusion in a coordinated process. PME will enable local actors to identify priorities, make
decisions, and have the means to follow up in a timely fashion. The component will facilitate
leaming and adaptation to guide the other project components and potentially become an
important means to miiculate the voices ofbroader groups of organizations and donors and other
relevant financial agencies engaged in N atural Resource Management. By engaging local
organizations and communities in sharing and using information, PME will: (i) strengthen
demand for outputs from other existing monitoring systems; (ii) critically evaluate and ground-
truth their major findings; (iii) provide feedback to quantitative monitoring systems about village
needs.

The project funds will be administered by AMAN, which will be responsible for the
implementation of the project. Institutional arrangements for project execution are intended to
enable Village and Local Organizations to assume a primary role in project implementation.
AMAN was founded in 1999 and is a membership based social organization of 1163 indigenous
communities from across Indonesia working to create space for indigenous persons to recover
and assert their human rights, welfare, and dignity. AMAN can guide local villages and
community-based organizations through the management oflocal resources and procurement and
financial reporting pro cesses.

The project is centered on strengthening civil society organizations and will also seek to promote
formai and long-term alliances between these organizations and private sector enterprises,
certification agencies, research institutions such as ICRAF, and relevant NGOs. Rence the grant
will foster public-private partnerships that will be reflected in the institutional arrangements of
project execution.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

The project will target indigenous communities in ten key forest provinces. These provinces are:
Central Kalimantan, East Kalimantan, West Kalimantan, Papua, West Papua, Jambi, South
Sumatra, Aceh, Riau, and Central Sulawesi.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Isono Sadoko                        Social Development Specialist                         EASIS
Guntur Cahyo Prabowo                Environmental Specialist                              EASIS
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                        Yes            No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                 X
Pro.iects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. SUI1ll1lary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. ldentify and
describe any potentiallarge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

Ellviro/llllental Assessl1lent. Overall, the environmental and social impacts of the proposed
activities are expected to be positive, given the focus on the needs 0 f the poor, on strengthening
participatory planning pro cesses, voice and empowerment; and on improved quality of life
through culturally appropriate practices and increased access to entrepreneurship services.

Based on the screening for possible environmental and social impacts, the information reviewed
and the advice of the safeguards specialists in the team, the proposed activities do not pose a
substantial project safeguards risks. For this reason, the safeguards Category is "C".

Indigenous People.     lndonesian communities that are clustered as distinct, vulnerable, social
and cultural groups that are beneficiaries of the Project.

AMAN follows its own princip les for working with indigenous communities taking advantage of
their existing intemal mechanism for consultation. AMAN will ensure: (a) that ail activities are
evaluated and potential lndigenous Peoples' are identified and any issues which affect
lndigenous Peoples are handled before the commencement of any activities; and (b) the
participation and inclusion of various groups (including women, the poor and isolated and
vulnerable citizens) in locallevel decision making regarding the allocation ofresources.

Since the pro gram is designed for the sole purpose of benefitting indigenous communities, a
separate lndigenous Peoples Plan or Plmming Framework is not necessary. Nonetheless, to
ensure broad support for this initiative, AMAN has conducted an extensive consultation pro cess
utilizing the customary law principles of AMAN. As part ofthis pro cess, it has conducted three
major consultations with indigenous representatives from Sumatera, Kalimantm1, Sulawesi, Bali,
Nusa Tenggara and Maluku. Broad support from indigenous communities and organizations has
been documented. Moreover, the consultation process provided inputs for the finalization of the
project document and the project operational manual, including guidelines for social and
environmental safeguards.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long tenu impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:

Improved capacity in the communities and among indigenous people groups will lead to better
sustainable economic development, participatory pro cesses and sustainable livelihoods.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts:
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Pro vide an
assessment ofborrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

There are no significant outstanding environmental and social safeguards implementation issues
under proposed activities. However, to further localize the mitigation measures, AMAN has
agreed to develop an operational manual (OM) that meets Bank standards and that covers social
and environmental guidelines (ESG) for the implementation of grant activities to provide
guidance to AMAN and the communities for developing and implementing measures to address
necessary impacts. The task team has regular interaction with AMAN members to discuss the
applicability of the OMo To provide critical understanding and the context of what the projects
want to do the OM also incorporate the legal framework and land tenure situation of indigenous
peoples in Indonesia. The Operational Manual has been finalised and separately disclosed on
AMAN's webpage and in the InfoShop prior to departure of the appraisal mission. Measures for
mitigating possible negative impacts are included in the revised and improved version of the
project Operational Manual which includes Environmental and Social Guidelines, participatory
mapping procedures, field supervision and criteria for selection. This revised OM was submitted
and disclosed by AMAN on June 15th, 2012 at AMAN website, and the English version of the
OM has been disclosed at Infoshop on August 2nd, 2012

The ESG entails components as the following:

   •   Simple and illustrative guidance that could be easily understood by local communities on
       environmental issues that might be of concern during the pro cess of setting up small
       business es, such as proper handling of wastes, maintenance of rural roads, expanding
       rODlUS, sustainable abstraction of forest resources (for construction and production
       purposes).

   •   Elements of an IPP, social assessment, and consultation framework, that are accessible by
       project affected IP communities. The selection of participating IP communities will be
       carried out by AMAN based on a broad community support obtained through intensive
       consultation, as specified in the Operational Manual. The social assessment will be
       included as a requirement and will be part of the sub-project cycle as a demand driven
       pro cess and will be conducted as soon as AMAN launches the cali for proposaI
       preparation.
    •   Resettlement should be avoided and the project should ensure that this is prohibited and
        on a negative lis!. The OM should provide clear instructions and documentation of
        voluntary land donations to the voluntary project the community identified be weil
        documented.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

The project activities were designed in close consultation with Indigenous Peoples who are the
main beneficiaries of the gran!. AMAN carried out an extensive consultation process with IP
representatives to provide inputs to this pro gram and to build broad based support. Consultations
included a National Council Meeting, three Central Goveming Body meetings, three REDD
Working Group meetings, and a coordination meeting. IP representatives from Papua, Sumatra,
Kalimantan, Sulawesi, Bali, Nusa Tenggara and Maluku participated in these consultations.
This grant will target approximately 250 indigenous communities and villages, which are home
to approximately 250,000 direct and indirect beneficiaries in total. Individuals will benefit
directly from training, from small grant disbursements from participation in land use planning
and livelihood activities, and from the resulting positive impacts on rural livelihoods. A
conservative estimate assumes that 10 households will benefit from each land use plan. With 5
people per household on average in Indonesia, and 250 land use plans developed by the project,
the direct beneficiaries from grant inputs will be approximately 12,500 individuals. It is assumed
that individu aIs benefitting from training, capacity building, and small grant allocations will be a
subset ofthis number.

AMAN's diverse and representative govemance system contributes to its suitability to
implement this projec!. The organization's National Council consists of community members
from across the archipelago, representing diverse etlmicities, languages, religions (including
indigenous belief systems), and cultures. This diversity enriches AMAN's knowledge and helps
the organization understand the basic challenges faced by Indigenous Peoples in Indonesia.
AMAN's experience has contributed to the design ofthe project, including suggested approaches
for strengthening community-based indigenous organizations, and the introduction of practical
schemes for REDD+ applications in forested areas with indigenous communities.




B. Disclosllre Reqllirements Date
Environmental Assessment/AuditlManagement Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior 10 appraisal?                                      NIA
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                                         NIA
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                     NIA
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                                      NIA
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                                                                                     NIA
Resettlement Action Plan/FrameworkiPolicy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                NIA
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   NIA
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                               NIA
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                NIA
Indioenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                NIA
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   NIA
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                               NIA
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                NIA
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                NIA
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   NIA
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                               NIA
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                NIA
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and discIosed as part ofthe Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country discIosure of any of the ab ove documents is not expected, please explain why:


Note: AMAN has agreed to develop an operational manual that meets Bank standards which covers
social and environmental guidelines for the implementation of the grant activities to provide guidance to
AMAN and the communities for developing and implementing measures to address necessary impacts.
The operational manual, including the social and environmental guidelines, as updated in June 2012 the
Bahasa version has been posted on the AMAN website since Jnne 15'\ 2012. The English version has
been disclosed at the InfoShop since August 2, 2012

C. Compliallce MOllitorillg Illdicators at the COIporate Level (to be filled ill whell the ISDS is
fillalized by the project decisioll meetillg)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including             Yes [ ]        No []         NIA [X]
EMP) report?
If yeso then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [ ]         No [ ]        NIA [X]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management          Yes [ ]     No [ ]      N/A [X]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                 Yes [ ]     No [ ]      N/A [X]
Ifyes, has the PMP been reviewed aud approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? Ifyes, do es the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Phvsical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to            Yes [ ]     No []       N/A [X]
cultural property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Iudi!!euous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning             Yes [ ]     No [ ]      N/A [X]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the     Environmental and Social Guidelines
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional           are part of the Operational Manual.
Social Development Unit?                                    They have not yet been reviewed.
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntarv Resettlement
Has a resettlement planlabbreviated planlpolicy             Yes [ ]     No [ ]      N/A [X]
frameworklprocess fi-amework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy frameworklprocess framework?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis ofpolicy and institutional     Yes [ ]     No []       N/A [X]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                        Yes [ ]     No []       N/A [X]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arraugements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50 - Pro.iects on International Waterwavs
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?      Yes [ ]     No []       N/A [X]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying ail pertinent information on the      Yes [ ]      No []      NIA [X]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The Wol'id Bank Policy on Disclosure ofInformation
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [ ]      No   [1    NIA [X]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       The relevant project documents in
public place in a form and language that are                 Bahasa version has been shared and
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups     posted on AMAN's website on June
and local NGOs?                                              15'\ and has been disclosed through
                                                             the Infoshop in English translation
                                                             since August 2, 2012
Ail Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes []      No [ ]      NIA [X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         NIA
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the             NIA
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactOlY implementation arrangements been           NIA
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?
D. Approvals

 Siglled /lnd submitted by:                          Namel                                 Date
 Task Team Leader:               Juan MartÛlez
                                                                       •           t%lltJlI1hJ.çt !WI1/
 Environmental Specialist:       Guntur C. Prabowo "' ~                        ~" 0:'> Mdr -'4112
 Social Development Specialist   Isono Sadoko        ~
                                                                           ,
                                                                                    ...a:1Ar.I><:.T 2..4;.

                                                              ~"
 Additional Environmental and/or
 Social Development
 SpeciaIist(s):

 AooFoved bw                                         •
 Regional Safeguards
 Coordinator:
                                  Panneer Selvan L.VJll ). JII(/ u.
                                                   "<.\~/"\
                                                                                     ~\   \S\2el'J,.-
  Comments:
 Acting, Sector Manager:
  Comments:
                              1   George Sorayil
                                                         '\
                                                          ."... .,.J                P:7             ~1.
                                                           ,f
                                                          v
