                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/11/2011                                  Report No.: 112324
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Indonesia                           Project ID: P090990
Project Name: Western Indonesia National Roads Improvement Project
Task Team Leader: Mustapha Benmaamar
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 7, 2011      Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2011
Managing Unit: EASIS                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Roads and highways (80%); General transportation sector (20%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (40%); Decentralization (40%);Other
accountability/anti-corruption (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           250.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                    100.00
                                                                     100.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase the effective use of selected
sections of national roads along the Western Sumatera Corridor by reducing road user
costs.

3. Project Description
3.1. The Project is intended to finance a part of the DGH investment program for national
roads with particular focus on the western corridor of Sumatra. The project will cover a
three year investment program of betterment and capacity expansion of around 715 km of
roads and replacement including 194 meters of bridges.

 3.2. Preparation. AusAID proved about US$0.5 million Bank administered Recipient
executed trust fund for the additional preparation of feasibility studies, designs and
bidding documents to complement a US$1 million PHRD.

 3.3.   Project components. The project has four components:
 Component 1: Betterment and Capacity Expansion of National Roads (US$314.9
million), covering a three year investment program of betterment and capacity expansion
of 715.6 km including replacement of 194 meters of bridges.

 Component 2: Implementation Support (US$16.5 million). Providing support to the
MPW for the implementation of the civil works, including: (a) provision of Core Team
Consultants and Design and Supervision Consultants and road safety audits; (b) Project
management support and technical audits.

 Component 3: Road Sector Institutional Development (US$1.0 million) providing
support to Strengthen disaster risk mitigation in the road sector, including capacity
building support for the new environment/risk mitigation and road safety unit of DHG
capacity to conduct disaster risk assessments and planning, risk mapping of land-slides,
coastal erosion, earthquake and floods, and analysis of alternative designs for road
segments that pass through critical environmental assets and vulnerable areas.

 Component 4: Contingency for Disaster Risk Response (US$0). Providing
preparedness and rapid response to disaster, emergency and/or catastrophic events, as
needed.

  3.4. Lending instrument. The Project will be financed with a Specific Investment
Loan (SIL). The Borrower has selected an IBRD Loan with a Variable Spread Option,
final maturity of 24.5 years including grace period of 9 years and annuity principal
repayment, at a rate equal to LIBOR for the Loan Currency plus the Variable Spread.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The road along the West coast of Sumatra is one of the first paved roads of the island.
The land use immediately adjacent to the selected road sections is mostly agricultural
land (i.e., palm oil, tea, resin, rubber, coffee, coconut, and cinnamon). The selected
sections pass through 12 districts with a total population of more than 4 million. As the
road has been in place for some time, the environmental impacts have already occurred. It
is expected that WINRIP will lead to an increase of traffic (5%/year) and vehicle speed
(from 40km/h to 50km/h), but that this will have little incremental impact on eco-
systems.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Juan Martinez (EASIS)
   Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASTS)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed project will provide financing (approximately US$315) for the Betterment
and Capacity Expansion of National Roads in Sumatra. The works will include widening,
base strengthening, asphalt wearing course and storm drainage management for about
715km of National Roads which include 194 m of bridges. These selected road sections
are divided into 21 sub projects in three work programs, namely WP1, WP2 and WP3.

The potential adverse social and environmental impacts from the proposed physical
works on these 21 sub projects will mostly be associated with construction activities in
the form of soil erosion and sediment transport and deposition, management of large
volumes of spoil, quarry areas, construction camps and workers, stability of slopes in cut
and fill areas and issues of traffic and pedestrian safety. These impacts will mostly be site
specific as they would occur primarily along the alignment of these selected road sections
and bridges. Some impacts may also occur at offsite locations such as at quarries or spoil
disposal sites. The potential social and environmental impacts can either be readily
avoided, or reversed or otherwise mitigated through good construction practices and
adoption of readily available and tangible mitigation measures. The mitigation measures
will be contained in environmental codes of practice that will be attached to the civil
works contracts.

Also, following screening of the sub projects in all three work plans, and given the
current land use along the West Sumatra corridor, these works will not have cumulative
and/or induced impacts on any natural habitats or critical natural habitats. For this reason,
the Natural Habitats OP4.04 is not triggered.

Therefore, in compliance with Environmental Assessment OP4.01 which is triggered, the
Project as a whole is being categorized "B". To ensure these constructions related impacts
are either avoided or effectively managed consistent with both the World Bank’s own
requirements and those of the Government of Indonesia, the project has designed a
comprehensive Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) document in
line with the planned annual work plans during project implementation.
Project linkages: The objective of the Project is to increase the effective use of selected
sections of national roads along the Western Sumatra Corridor by reducing road user
costs. Therefore, the 21 road sections and 4 bridges in the Project were selected on the
basis of economic criteria and only economically viable sub-projects were selected. The
objective of the Project will be achieved without any additional interventions outside of
the selected 21 road sections and 4 bridges. Road-related works outside of these road
sections and bridges are not considered linked within the definition provided by OP4.12,
and they are not relevant for the Project to achieve its objectives. In one case, a bridge
(Way Magnia Bridge) is located within the Krui Biha road section sub-project included in
AWP-1. The improvement of this bridge is not included in WINRIP list of sub-projects
because DGH intends to finance the replacement of this bridge using its own budget. This
bridge is considered a linked project within the definition provided by OP4.12, and the
ESMF and the loan agreement will contain the commitment of the government to apply
the ESMF to this bridge. Although no similar situations are anticipated in AWP-2 and
AWP-3, the ESMF and the loan agreement will contain the commitment of the
government to apply the ESMF if any such cases are identified during detailed
engineering design.

Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10): The Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) was triggered for this
Project at the concept stage safeguards meeting held on February 25th, 2008 because the
PDO, scope and geographic coverage were broad. At appraisal stage the PDO focuses on
beneficiaries of a selected road sections along the Western Sumatra national road corridor
and the type of interventions is limited to betterment and limited capacity expansion;
hence points of realignment are few and have been assessed. A screening process for
indigenous peoples in the Project area was conducted and the results show that the OP
4.10 will not be triggered.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The selected road segments and bridges are unlikely to have any indirect and/or long term
impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The overall social, economical and environmental impact of the Project is expected to be
positive, as it will improve the travel conditions and times for a significant number of
beneficiaries. Localized negative social impacts will be experienced during construction
due to (a) disruption to travel; (b) land acquisition and resettlement associated with
capacity expansion and bridge components; and (c) possible exposure to HIV/AIDS by
migrant workers on the sites.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
During the feasibility study undertaken as part of the project preparation stage, only road
segments and bridges that do not pose significant adverse impacts on social, specifically
land acquisition and the environment including on natural habitats and critical natural
habitats were selected for inclusion in this project.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The DGH has prepared a thorough Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) document that establishes clear and tangible screening arrangements for the 21
sub projects which will lead to determining the appropriate level of environmental and
social planning to comply with both the GoI and the Banks own requirements, establishes
clear institutional arrangements supported by technical assistance and training to manage
the ESMF process.

The detailed engineering designs for the AWP1 sub projects have been completed and
have been screened against both the Government of Indonesia and World Bank
requirements. In the case of Social, the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will guide
the preparation of the Land Acquisition and Resettlement action Plans (LARAPs) to meet
the requirements of the Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP 4.12); for environment, the
use of environmental codes of practice contained in the ESMF will be enough to meet the
requirements of the World Bank's own Environmental Assessment OP4.01. These codes
of practice will be included the civil works contracts through special environmental
clauses. With respect to WP2 and WP3, the detailed engineering designs for these sub
projects will be done during project implementation and as part of this process the final
screening of WP2 and WP3 sub projects will also be undertaken in line with the ESMF.
Sub projects that would trigger Natural habitats OP4.04 will not be eligible for financing
under the project and this is clearly stated in the ESMF.


Land Acquisition and Resettlement Actions Plans (LARAPs): The improvements to the
the road sections will not require large scale land acquisition. LARAPs are prepared for
all the sub-projects included in AWP-1 by the Local Government at the district level and
are in compliance with LARPF and approved by DGH and the Bank. It is estimated that
the total affected assets include 9,395 square meter of land; 125 buildings; 233 other
structures, including fences, terraces; and 120 trees. The cleared LARAPs are signed by
the relevant authority (District Authority) as a commitment for their implementation. For
sub-projects under AWP-2 and AWP-3, the Resettlement and Policy Framework, RPF
will be used as a guide to prepare LARAPs where necessary.

With regards capacity of the client, the DGH has an in-house environment and social unit
that was established under a previous World Bank project that houses a team of national
environmental and social specialist. This team will be supported during project
implementation by a supervision consultant team that will inter alia, consist of
environmental and social specialist.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Consultations will continue to be an ongoing process throughout project preparation and
during implementation. The ESMF details plans for consultations to be undertaken as
part of the environmental and social planning process for each sub project/road segment.
Stakeholders for these subprojects include those affected directly or indirectly, as well as
the local governments and service suppliers, contractors and suppliers to DGH. For
stakeholders, in addition to individual household census and sample survey respondents,
several consultations and socialization activities were conducted and documented by the
district authorities.

For Consultation and Socialization of LARAP, the Directorate General of Highway has
conducted several activities regarding consultation and socialization in the three
Provinces where WP-1 subprojects will be implemented (West Sumatera, Lampung and
Bengkulu). The process of consultation includes meetings with different stakeholders
such as Head of Sub-Districts from respective sub-districts in Regency administration
area, Regional Development Planning Agency, Public Work Agency. Additionally, the
District Government has also conducted socialization programs in the districts through
which the road segment is located which was attended by the Sub-District Head and
Village Head representatives. When preparing the LARAPs, Government has undertaken
the socialization of the project plan and consulted on the desired type of compensation
with the project-affected people through direct interview, survey and focus group
discussions.

With regards the broader ESMF document, the stakeholders here would be the national
and sub national institutions with key responsibility for implementing this such as the
DGH and Kabupaten and Bappedalda in those areas. During the preparation of the
ESMF, the DGH and its consultants discussed the ESMF with the local level institutions
for the AWP1 sub projects/road segments.

 This process of consultations will continue during implementation of the proposed
project.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date –
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      12/23/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  12/23/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12/23/2010
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      12/23/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  12/23/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12/23/2010
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       NA
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                          NA
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  NA
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   NA
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  NA
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        NA
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   NA
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Mustapha Benmaamar                        03/19/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr James Orehmie Monday                      03/18/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Juan Martinez                             03/18/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Franz R. Drees-Gross                      03/20/2011
  Comments:
