                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.: 73304
Date prepared/updated: October 5, 2012

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data:
Country: Indonesia                                   Project ID: P131387
                                                     Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Barefoot Engineers III
Task Team Leader: Susanne Holste
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 8, 2012     Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: EASID                          Lending Instrument: Grant
Sector : Vocational Training (100%)
Theme: Participation and Civic Engagement (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source:

       PSF - Trust Fund                                              4,153,500
                                                                     4,153,000

Environmental Category: C
Is this a transferred project                    Yes [x ]                      No [ ]
Simplified Processing                            Simple [x]                    Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises              Yes [ ]      No [ x]
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:

The objective of this activity is to train approximately 300 technical facilitators for the PNPM-
Rural/RESPEK Program in the provinces of Papua and West Papua. This will help fill the gap of
available technical facilitators and improve the quality of village level small-scale infrastructure
built by communities under the PNPM-Rural/RESPEK Program. The project will not finance
any civil works.

3. Project Description:

Implementation of PNPM RURAL/RESPEK has been challenging due to the remoteness and
extreme cultural and ethnic diversity of the provinces, as well as a chronic shortage of qualified
facilitators, particularly engineers. The program requires about 560 technical facilitators for the
two provinces, but is only able to fill about half of the positions. In previous years, recruits have

                                                 1
often come from outside Papua but would leave after a short period of time because of the
difficult working conditions. In order to address this challenge, Government, with the assistance
of the PNPM Support Facility (PSF), designed a special program, Barefoot Engineers. The
training was conducted in 2003 and 2009 and graduated 334 students who were then deployed as
technical facilitators in PNPM Rural/RESPEK. Government has requested a new phase of the
training to fill vacant positions.

The proposed project consists of three components (i) training and mentoring, including a six-
month training program plus follow-up activities, such as refresher training and mentoring, (ii)
monitoring and evaluation, and (iii) implementation support. Activities financed by this project
are expected to start in October 2012. The training activities will incorporate all environmental
and social safeguards dimensions, by using best practice principles of the IGSES from PNPM-
Rural 2012-2014.

The Barefoot Engineers Training III will train about 300 participants in Jayapura. The successful
participants will be recruited and mobilized as sub-district technical facilitators in Papua and
West Papua.

An Indonesian NGO has been identified as the grantee, Yayasan Bursa Pengetahuan Kawasan
Timur Indonesia (Eastern Indonesia Knowledge Exchange, BaKTI). BaKTI was established in
August 2009 as a centre of knowledge and information exchange, covering 12 provinces in
eastern Indonesia.

The proposed project is rated as category C project because it will only conduct training
activities. No safeguard policies are triggered. The training will be conducted in a participatory
manner and most of the trainers, as well as the trainees, are from local communities and familiar
with local languages.

PNPM-Rural will be implemented by following the best-practice participatory principles, which
are incorporated into the Implementation Guidelines for Social and Environmental Safeguards
(IGSES) as a safeguard framework under PNPM Rural. The IGSES is incorporated into the
training modules and students will become familiar with it. This will benefit the implementation
of PNPM-Rural IV and the proposed PNPM 2012-2014.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

Jayapura, Papua. There are not social and environmental concerns related to this project which
does not involve any construction of infrastructure. As mentioned previously, the training
program will be implemented in a participatory manner.

5. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

Most of the trainers for the project are also the lecturers in Universitas Cenderawasih (UNCEN),
a prominent local university in Papua; and therefore local languages and local manners will be
used during the training program. The implementing agency, BaKTI, is a knowledge and
information exchange center for Eastern Indonesia and has extensive experience working in
Papua and West Papua, including collaborating with the World Bank and AIPD (Australia
                                                2
Indonesia Partnership for Decentralization). In implementing the project they will get support
from the PNPM Provincial project manager and consultants in Papua and West Papua, who are
already experienced with safeguard issues.

6. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

  Mr Juan Martinez (EASER)
  Ms Catrini Pratihari Kubontubuh (EASIS)
  Mr Dennie Stenly Mamonto (EASIS)


 7. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes             No
 Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                                   X
 Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                           X
 Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                    X
 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                               X
 Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                X
 Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                         X
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                   X
 Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                             X
 Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                        X
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                 X

8. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

  A. Summary of Key Safeguards Issues
  1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project. Identify and
  describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
  There are no safeguards issues and impacted associated with this project. It only consists of
  training activities and hence will not create any large-scale, significant, or irreversible
  environmental or social impacts because.

  Potential safeguards issues of PNPM-Rural have been addressed in that project’s
  Implementation Guidelines for Social and Environmental Safeguards (IGSES). This IGSES
  will be one of the training activities.

  Barefoot Engineers III project is classified as an Environmental Category C project.

  2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
  activities in the project area:
  There are no potential significant long-term adverse impacts triggered by this project.
  Mitigation against any negative impacts that might occur in PNPM-Rural can be managed
  through classroom and practical training.

                                                3
    3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
    adverse impacts.
    N/A
    4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
    an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
    During implementation of PNPM-Rural IV Government distributed the IGSES to all project
    facilitators. During preparation of PNPM 2012-2014 consultations were held on
    implementation experiences and these will be reflected in the IGSES updates.
    BaKTI was established in August 2009 as a centre of knowledge and information exchange,
    covering 12 provinces in eastern Indonesia. It has some experience in safeguard issues.
    5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
    disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    Project stakeholders are the trainees, PNPM-Rural provincial managers (satkers), and the
    national level program management unit, PMD. The ultimate stakeholders of the project are
    the communities which will benefit from better facilitation support through more and better
    trained technical facilitators.

    Stakeholder consultations were held for the update of the IGSES of PNPM-Rural 2012-2014.

.
    B. Disclosure Requirements

    Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
    Was the document disclosed prior to                 N/A
    appraisal?
    Date of receipt by the Bank
    Date of “in-country? disclosure
    Date of submission to Info Shop
    For category A projects, date of distributing
    the Executive Summary of the EA to the
    Executive Directors
    Resettlement Action Plan /Framework/Policy Process:
    Was the document disclosed prior to                 N/A
    appraisal?
    Date of receipt by the Bank
    Date of “in-country? disclosure

    Date of submission to Info Shop
    *If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources


                                                    4
         policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the
         Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain
         why:
         The safeguards framework (IGSES) for PNPM-Rural 2012-2014 was disclosed on September
         17, 2012. It is used as the umbrella framework for all PNPM-Rural operations.
.
         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS
         is finalized by the project decision meeting)

          OP/BP/GP 4.01 – Environment Assessment
          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                  No
          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) review       N/A
          and approve the EA report?
          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the              N/A
          credit/loan?
          OP/BP 4.10 – Indigenous Peoples
          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)         No
          been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager    N/A
          review the plan?
          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and   N/A
          approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?


II. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:        Name                              Date
    Task Team Leader:               Susanne Holste

    Approved by:
    Sector Manager:                 Jan Weetjens                      10/08/2012
    Comments:




                                                      5
