                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                          Report No.: AC4653


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/02/2012

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Indonesia                            Project ID: P117243
Project Name: Sustainable Management of Agricultural Research and Technology
Dissemination (SMARTD)
Task Team Leader: Patrick Labaste
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 17,         Estimated Board Date: May 8, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: EASIS                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (100%)
Theme: Other rural development (60%);Other accountability/anti-corruption
(20%);Global food crisis response (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           80
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                       20.00
        AUSTRALIA, Government of                                        6.00
                                                                       26.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The main objective of the SMARTD project is to improve the institutional capacity and
performance of the Indonesian Agency for Agricultural Research and Development (IAARD) in
developing and disseminating innovative technologies that are relevant to the producers and to
the agri-food system.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The Indonesian Agency for Agricultural Research and Development (IAARD) in the Ministry of
Agriculture (MoA) is the implementing Agency. The project interventions that are necessary for
attaining the objectives are grouped into the following components:

 Component A. Development and Management of Human Resources ($40 M).
 The objective of component A is to enhance and strengthen the capacities of and to improve
management of IAARD human resources. It is expected that agency capacity will be built by: (a)
improving the agency’s human resources through the development of the technical, managerial,
and leadership skills of staffs working in the core functional areas of the agency; and (b)
improving the internal operating environment through the enhanced ability of these staffs to
implement Bureaucracy Reform within the agency as well as the impact on organizational
culture and processes of sufficient numbers (or a ‘critical mass’) of skilled and reform-minded
staffs in the agency. Ideally these developments would be mutually reinforcing.
 Component A will comprise of three sub-components: (1) Scientific Training and
Communication; (2) Technical and Management Training; and (3) Human Resources
Management.

 Component B: Improvement in research infrastructure and facilities ($ 35 M)
 The main objective of the component B is to improve the research facilities and infrastructure
of IAARD to function at level that meet world standard based on ISO. Component B will
comprise of four sub-components: (1) Laboratory Improvement; (2) Field Station Improvement;
(3) Building Construction and Renovation; and (4) Grand Design of IARRD Facilities and
Infrastructure Beyond 2020 .

 Component C. Research management and policy support ($ 15 M)
 The objective of component C is to support the increasing efficiency and effectiveness of the
resources utilization of research and development through improved management strategies and
instruments. Component C comprises the following sub-components: (1) Research Priority
Setting, Planning and Programming; (2) Research Collaboration and Networking; (3)
Diversification of Research Funding; and (4) Improvement of Technology Dissemination
Systems.

 Component D. Project Management ($ 15 M)
 This component will provide support for the preparation of project implementation,
administrative support during implementation; and monitoring and evaluation and supervision
related to project implementation. The Project will provide the following supports:
 (1) Staffing, operational costs, equipment, and consultant support for a national Project
Coordination and Monitoring Unit (PCMU) to be established in the Secretariat of IAARD, to
prepare project implementation, support for consultant costs of preparing project reporting
formats and other project documents. A budget will be allocated to the PCMU to undertake these
activities.
 (2) Staffing, operational costs, equipment, and consultant support for project implementation
at the selected research centers/research institutes/AIATs.
 (3) Support for external audits and independent reviews. The PCMU will be provided with a
budget for the activities and will administer the budget.

D. Project location (if known)
The project will work in up to 33 Provinces nationally with research and outreach institutions
and will cooperate with provincial administrations at a policy and coordination level. It will also
work nationally with district-level extension institutions.

 From a physical environmental perspective, the project will cover a range of agro-ecological
production zones, including areas of differing natural resource related environmental stress. The
principal zones include: upland rain-fed mixed cropping; smallholder tree crops; and agro-
forestry. Within these zones, a wide variety of farming systems have evolved, many of which are
facing problems relating to monoculture, decline in soil fertility and ground water quality as well
as increasing incidence of pests resulting from poor farming practices. These issues will
inherently be addressed by developing the skills needed in research and outreach to provide for
more sustainable farm systems.

 Some of the project areas may have isolated vulnerable groups and all of the areas will have
vulnerable disadvantaged groups such as poor women, landless and minority ethnic farmers. The
project will not have a particular focus on any area but will develop skills and facilities to assist
all stakeholders.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Bank has implemented ARMP I, II with IAARD as the implementing agency and its
performance has been satisfactory. The project is not expected to have any negative
environmental or social impacts and is expected to be classified as a Category C. In fact, the
technologies to be disseminated will aim to enhance environmental safety and promote
sustainability of natural resources, including promotion of IPM for vegetables and cocoa,
development and use of biopesticides/biofungicides, improved management of wastes, alley
cropping in the uplands to prevent erosion etc.*) The project proposes will address existing
weaknesses via a combination of institutional strengthening measures including environmental
management for project implementing agencies, combined with additional capacity built into the
project’s own oversight and project management functions.

 The Borrower has been successful in addressing social safeguards aspects in several previous
projects including the DAFEP (1999-2005), which implemented farmer managed activities for
smallholders including women and disadvantaged groups and the follow on project FEATI
(2007-2012; ongoing) which is developing a nationwide system of participatory agricultural
extension , linked in particular to the commercialization of agriculture. The Borrower has been
relatively successful in encouraging grass-roots participation and the involvement of poor
women farmers.

 *)Indonesia: Second Agricultural Research Management Project, Impact Evaluation Study,
SEARCA, 2001.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Juan Martinez (EASIS)
   Mr Andrew Daniel Sembel (EASIS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                     Yes          No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                                      X
    The project is unlikely to have any negative environmental impacts, given a primarily
‘development software’ approach involving institutional and human resource development,
technology development and transfer, upgrading of research facilities, improvement of research
management capabilities and information systems. The project will be financing limited physical
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes          No          TBD
investments in laboratories and research facilities and mostly capacity building and training
activities.

     Potential environment impacts may likely come from the improvement of research
infrastructures (Component B involves civil works for two new laboratories, the rehabilitation
and/or the upgrading of laboratories, and field stations). Laboratories and field stations will be
designed and or improved meeting world standards (ISO) and ensured to have appropriate
wastewater treatment systems and that the cost of installing such systems is included in the
proposal. Civil works contracts will follow the current government regulations such as Permit to
Build (IMB = Izin Mendirikan Bangunan) that considers technical and environmental standards
and include clauses on proper housekeeping, waste management and occupational health and
safety.

     In using the laboratories, research activities may use chemicals that may have potential
chemical impact. However, use of chemicals will be very small scale and limited. In addition,
there are existing standards for laboratory operations, among others include waste management
and safety. With regards to the construction of civil works, the adverse impact will be very
minimal since: (i) buildings are simple and small (including new buildings); (ii) most
constructions are within the existing IAARD’s facilities; (iii) follows the current regulations on
construction permit (IMB).

     The project activities are not expected to lead to land conversion, the destruction of
environmentally sensitive areas or historically significant sites and/or other cultural resources.
The project will result in farmers achieving a greater level of control over farming techniques,
including the optimum application of agricultural inputs and technologies to address
environmental degradation such as minimum tillage, integrated pest management and the use of
organic fertilizers in rice production. The project will not finance agricultural inputs. Training
and awareness raising programs will place the need for agricultural development within the
context of existing environmental constraints and capabilities, with a specific focus on upland,
rain-fed, mixed arable zones which face wide ranging environmental constraints. The project will
assist the local institutions to develop their environmental training curriculum for training of
extension agents and will help develop the environmental content of extension services.

     The project will apply the following approaches to minimizing social and environmental
risks and maximizing environmental benefits:

     • Ensuring that environmental codes of practices (ECOPs) for construction activity is
included in the civil work contracts. The ECOPs addresses construction-related impacts
including clauses on proper housekeeping, waste management and occupational health and
safety. The ECOPs will be disclosed prior to appraisal.
     Ensuring that research and extension staff are sufficiently well trained to address the
environmental implications of the introduction of new cropping systems and farming.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                     X
    Project activities will not take place in any protected areas, known natural habitats, or
established or proposed critical natural habitats as defined under the policy.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                            Yes           No          TBD
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                   X
    Project activities will not take place in critical forest areas or related critical natural habitats.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                              X
    SMARTD being a research and R&D project, will be using limited quantities of chemicals in
the testing laboratories, as well as agro-chemicals in the field stations. Hence the reference to
international and national regulations ruling the use of these products. IAARD aiming at being
recognized as a world-class research institution and having already several of its facilities ISO
accredited, would expect strict adherence to these regulations.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                               X
    Project activities will not take place in or near sites with archeological, paleontological,
historical, religious, or unique natural values.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                        X
    The proposed project activities will not finance interventions which will affect indigenous
peoples. IAARD is composed of research centers and R&D institutes spread over the territory
of Indonesia, therefore in areas with isolated vulnerable groups as well as vulnerable
disadvantaged groups such as poor farmers, landless and minority ethnic minority farmers. It
does not mean that these groups would be "in the project".
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                  X
    The project documentation indicates that proposed new building/laboratories will be located
on land owned by Ministry of Agriculture so that no need acquiring new land. IAARD letter
confirming land ownership is available and included in the project document.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                            X
    The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams, nor will it rely on the
performance of an existing dam or a dam under construction
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                       X
    There are no known project components involving international waterways as defined under
the policy.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                X
    The project is not located in any known disputed areas as defined under the policy.


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 04/15/2010

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Social and Environmental Assessments will be carried out by February 2010.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                  Mr Patrick Labaste                                                         12/21/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr John R. Butler                                                          02/02/2012
      Comments: Acting Regional Safeguards Advisor
    Sector Manager:                    Mr Franz R. Drees-Gross                                                    01/11/2012
      Comments: Approved.




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
