                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSA355
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Apr-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Africa                                 Project ID:                      P126579
                              Project Name:                   Regional Eastern Africa Power Pool Program (APL1) (P126579)
                              Task Team Leader:               Paivi Koljonen
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 10-Apr-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:            21-Jun-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  AFTEG                                  Lending Instrument:              Adaptable Program Loan
                              Sector:                         General energy sector (100%)
                              Theme:                          Regional integration (90%), Infrastructure services for private sector development (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                     157.10
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                            684.00
                                   African Development Bank                                                                                               354.30
                                   FRANCE Govt. of [MOFA and AFD (C2D)]                                                                                    82.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                 1277.40
                              Environmental Category:         A - Full Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              Project objectives are to: (a) increase the volume and reduce the cost of electricity supply in Kenya; and (b) provide revenues to Ethiopia through
                              the export of electricity from Ethiopia to Kenya.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              3. Project Description

                              The project has two components:

                              Component A. Construction of a High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) transmission interconnection between Ethiopia and Kenya.

                              #            Sub-Component A1. Transmission Lines. Construction of about 1,045 km of bipolar 500 kV HVDC overhead transmission line and
                              towers.

                              #          Sub-Component A2. Substations. Construction of one AC/DC converting substation in each side of the line, one in Ethiopia and one in
                              Kenya. Each substation will have a capacity of 2,000 MW. These stations convert AC power into DC in Ethiopia and DC power into AC in Kenya
                              (and vice versa as needed).

                              #           Sub-Component A3. System Reinforcement. Reinforcements in Kenya of substations and transmission lines necessary to integrate
                              regional interconnections, while managing the increased demand at the commissioning time of the interconnection for reliable operation of the
                              Kenyan grid

                              #         Sub-Component A4. Environmental and Social Management. Implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Plans and
                              the RAPs.

                              Component B. Project Management and Institutional Capacity Building

                              #         Sub-component B1. Project Supervision and Management. Financing of the services of a Supervision Consultant, short-term
                              consultants for implementation units and project management.

                              #         Sub-component B2. Capacity Building. Technical assistance, planning studies, and capacity building to EEPCO and KETRACO,
                              focusing on HVDC operations and maintenance, power trading, project management, procurement and financial management, environmental and
                              social management.

                              4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                              Ethiopia:

                                                                                                                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         The project area is located in the Southern part of the country, in two Regional States; namely, Oromia and Southern Nations and Nationalities and
                         Peoples Regional States (SNNPRS). The transmission line starts from the outskirts of Sodo town in Sodo Zuria woreda in SNNPRS, where the
                         converter substation is located and terminates in Mega woreda of Oromia region along the border between Ethiopia and Kenya. The line route
                         inside Ethiopia is about 433 km and traverses eight Woredas and 34 rural kebeles in Wolyta Sodo, Humbo, Mirab Abaya, Arba Minch, Konso,
                         Yabello and Dire until it reaches the border with Kenya. The first section (204 km) of the transmission line is located in SNNPRS and the second
                         section (229 km) in Oromia region.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The first section of the line traverses mainly through rural areas without crossing a single urban center. Most of the rural villages are densely
                         populated with intensively cultivated farmlands, mainly crop production dependent on rain-fed agriculture, using traditional methods of cultivation
                         with very little land that is not cultivated. The second section of the line is mostly uninhabited with very low cultivation and thinly distributed
                         population.

                         While no potential significant adverse environmental risks are foreseen as a result of the erection of pylons and substations, and stringing of the
                         transmission lines, a ground-truthing visit on the Ethiopia side of the selected route for the transmission line in December 2011 had shown that
                         there could be potential threats to the Konso cultural landscape and the Konso-Gardula (Borena Administrative Zone) paleontological and
                         archaeological sites. In June 2011, the Konso Cultural Landscape was demarcated and declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO. The ESIA
                         consultants have sought advice from the Ethiopian Authority for Research and Conservation of Cultural Heritage (ARCCH) and have carried out
                         field work in the Borena Administrative Zone with the view of studying whether the transmission line could impact the historically and culturally
                         important water wells and living religious and burial places.

                         The transmission line will be rerouted away from the disclosed paleontological and archaeological sites (at bends 34 and 35) on the Ethiopia side
                         of the line. The line will slightly traverse a very small portion of the eastern edge of the demarcated Konso Cultural Landscape but the ARCCH and
                         the consultants who carried out the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) are of the opinion that any potential impacts arising from
                         construction of pylons and substations may be insignificant. The ESIA and Environmental and Social Mitigation Plan (ESMP) have proposed
                         appropriate mitigation measures and mitigation plans.

                         Kenya

                         The project area lies within the Rift Valley, Central, and Eastern Provinces of Kenya. The transmission line traverses the country from North to
                         South through Marsabit, Samburu, Laikipia, Nyandarua, and Nakuru Counties and terminates in Suswa, about 100 km west of Nairobi. The line
                         traverses mainly rural areas of the five Counties. The total length of the line is about 612 km. Most of the project areas are sparsely populated
                         except the settlement areas of Nyandarua and Nakuru Counties. Route selection has guarded heavily populated areas.

                         The project traverses two Important Bird Areas, Dida Galgalu Desert and Lake Ol Bolossat. The Marsabit National Park and Losai Natural Reserve
                         are also traversed by the line. Dida Galgalu and Lake Ol Bollosat are important bird areas that are recognized as such by the Birdlife International.
                         This implies that the two areas host avian diversity of significant conservation values. Marsabit National Park and Losai National Reserve are
                         gazetted protected areas of importance to conservation. The Marsabit National Reserve is located 560 km to the north of Nairobi in the Marsabit
                         County. The reserve covers an area of 1,600 km² in the middle of the desert wilderness, and includes a Forest Reserve on the forested Mount
                         Marsabit, (although the Transmission line will not traverse the forested part off the reserve). The region surrounding the Marsabit Reserve is of dry
                         and barren semi-desert character. The Marsabit Reserve is a protective area for large mammals such as buffalo, zebra, giraffe, cheetah, antelope,
                         oryx, greater kudu, elephants, rhinoceroses, lions, leopard and numerous species of birds. The Losai National Reserve is located to the south-
                         west of the Marsabit County, across the Kaisut Desert. The reserve is characterized by a semi-desert landscape with rugged terrains, seasonal
Public Disclosure Copy




                         rivers, a lava plateau with scattered volcanic plugs covered with thorn bushes, and a zone of impenetrable mountain forest on the north-eastern
                         edge of the central highlands, and, while now significantly degraded, includes the Melako Conservancy within the Reserve, which is attempting to
                         protect the habitats of the sand grouse. The Laikipia – Samburu ecosystem, also in the project area, cannot be considered a ‘biodiversity hot-spot’
                         in the sense of having a wide diversity of endemic and/or endangered species, although it is host to lions, wild dogs, Grevy’s zebra, eland,
                         elephants, reticulated giraffes and patas monkeys. The Longonot-Suswa area is prone to soil erosion and is currently under pressure from human
                         activities.

                         The project traverses a region of known paleontological and archaeological significance, which has not been systematically studied, necessitating
                         provisions for chance finds during construction.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Zarafshan H. Khawaja (AFTCS)
                         Noreen Beg (AFTEN)
                         Yasmin Tayyab (AFTCS)
                         Nyambura Githagui (AFTCS)
                         Edward Felix Dwumfour (AFTEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             Yes              This policy is triggered due to the construction of the interconnector, requiring the
                                                                                          identification, mitigation and monitoring of potential adverse environmental and
                                                                                          social impacts.
                                                                                          An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)/Environmental and Social
                                                                                          Management Plan (ESMP) has been prepared for both Ethiopia and Kenya.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                     Yes              This policy will not be triggered for Ethiopia since the project will not affect any
                                                                                          natural habitats on the Ethiopian part of the line. It is triggered in Kenya as the
                                                                                          project will traverse Important Bird Areas and will skirt Protected Areas and wildlife
                                                                                          corridors.



                                                                                                                                                                    Page 2 of 7
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                               No               This policy will not be triggered for either Ethiopia or Kenya side since no natural
                                                                                                 forests will be traversed by the line or affected by the erection of pylons and
                                                                                                 substations.
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                          No
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11           Yes              The Konso Cultural Landscape and the historically and culturally important water
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 wells and living religious and burial places in the Borena Administrative Zone in
                                                                                                 Ethiopia are located in the vicinity of the interconnector. The route has been
                                                                                                 diverted away from disclosed paleontological and archaeological sites (at bends 34
                                                                                                 and 35). While the line will pass slightly outside of the demarcated Konso Cultural
                                                                                                 Landscape, the Ethiopian Authority for Research & Conservation of Cultural
                                                                                                 Heritage (ARCCH) is of the opinion that potential impacts may be insignificant. In
                                                                                                 Kenya, the route traverses a region of known paleontological and archaeological
                                                                                                 significance, which has not been systematically studied; hence provisions will be
                                                                                                 made with the National Museums of Kenya (NMK) for possible chance finds during
                                                                                                 construction.
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                    No
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              Yes              The route of the interconnector, with 433 km in southwestern Ethiopia and 612 km
                                                                                                 in Kenya is being selected to minimize displacement of the existing population or
                                                                                                 direct impact on their economic activities. In Kenya, the project will affect about
                                                                                                 1,200 people (380 households), mainly residents of the Central and Rift Valley
                                                                                                 Regions. Of these, only 9 households will need to be relocated. A Resettlement
                                                                                                 Action Plan (RAP) has been prepared for the Kenya portion of Project consistent
                                                                                                 with the policy provisions of OP 4.12. In Ethiopia, current estimates indicate that
                                                                                                 about 5,743 people (1,165 households) will be affected by the Project. Since the
                                                                                                 precise routing of the RoW has not yet been finalized, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                 Framework (RPF) has been prepared consistent with the policy provisions of OP
                                                                                                 4.12 as a guide to the preparation of a RAP when the routing of the RoW has been
                                                                                                 finalized. They objective of the Kenya RAP and the Ethiopia RPF is to ensure that
                                                                                                 all affected people will be compensated for their losses at replacement cost and
                                                                                                 provided with rehabilitation measures to assist them to improve, or at least
                                                                                                 maintain their pre-project standard of living and income earning capacity.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        No
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP        No
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60            No


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                                 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant
                                 and/or irreversible impacts:

                                 Ethiopia

                                 Social

                                 Construction of the transmission line is expected to result in change in land use and land acquisition along its alignment. A major impact will be
                                 loss of farmland used to grow cereal and perennial crops such as bananas and mangoes. Permanent land acquisition for the right-of-way
                                 (RoW) will likely involve footing areas for the towers and the site of the substation in Wolyta/Solodo which will also affect people currently using
                                 the site for grazing purposes. Temporary land acquisition will be required for erection of towers and stringing of conductors. Given that the
                                 Project is linear in nature, only a portion of farmlands or irrigation structures will be affected, mostly in rural areas. The Project will affect about
                                 341 hectares of farming and pasture land. The construction of access roads will also affect farmlands, perennial crops and trees located within
                                 the right-of-way. The construction of tower foundations will be located in areas where there are no existing buildings.

                                 A household survey of the eight woredas transversed by the transmission line was initially carried out in June-August 2008. From July-August
                                 2011, another socioeconomic survey was carried out of households in the same eight woredas who reside within the 65 meters of the RoW and
                                 whose properties and assets are likely to be affected by the construction of the transmission line. On the basis of this survey, current estimates
                                 indicate that the Project will affect approximately 5,743 (1,165 households), who will either lose housing structures and/or farmland, trees or
                                 perennial crops located within the RoW. It is also estimated that the Project will affect 256 housing structures and a small number of public and
                                 community institutions that will lose different types of assets and property due to construction works. About 20 hectares of communal grazing
                                 land needed for the construction of a substation at Wolyta Soda is also affected. Potential social impacts are likely to take place within the 65
                                 meters width of the RoW for the transmission line. Most houses and structures will be shifted or “stepping back? from the alignment and within
                                 the existing village or farmland. People who lose part of their land will be able to continue farming activities in those areas where construction
                                 activities are not planned and once these activities are over, they will be able to continue to cultivate crops under the transmission line.


                                                                                                                                                                             Page 3 of 7
                         The alignment of the transmission line corridor has been determined, however, the precise routing of the RoW has not yet been finalized.
                         While the GoE has taken a preliminary census of PAPs and their lands and assets, they will not finalize the specific compensation for land take
                         and affected assets until shortly after they finalize the alignment of the RoW. The final alignment will take into consideration measures to
                         minimize impacts on land and structures. In view of which a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared to clarify land
                         acquisition and resettlement principles together with organizational arrangements under the Project. The RPF consistent with the World Bank’s
                         Operational Policy 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement will serve as a guide for the preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan when the routing of
                         the RoW has been finalized. The key objective of the RPF is to ensure that all affected people will be compensated for their losses at
Public Disclosure Copy




                         replacement cost and provided with rehabilitation measures to assist them to improve, or at least maintain their pre-project standard of living
                         and income earning capacity. Community participation and stakeholder consultation were an essential component in the preparation of the
                         RPF. Consultation with project affected people and key stakeholders was carried out in five different woredas who will be affected by the
                         project. The views and concerns of people, including the most vulnerable, expressed during these consultative meetings were taken into
                         consideration in the preparation of the RPF.

                         There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area in Ethiopia.


                         Environment

                         There are no potential adverse biophysical environmental issues likely to be associated with the construction of the project in Ethiopia. If any at
                         all, these may be associated with health and safety issues related to workers’ camp site activities which can be eliminated or reduced in a cost-
                         effective manner through simple and appropriate preventive and mitigation measures on site. However, there was anticipation that the project
                         could impact negatively on the Konso Cultural Landscape, which the transmission line was originally drawn to traverse at a section of its
                         eastern border. There is a need also to avoid disturbing the historically and culturally important water wells and living religious and burial
                         places in the Borena AdministrativeZone in Ethiopia. The sensitive Konso areas are to be avoided by rerouting the line away from the disclosed
                         paleontological and archaeological sites (at bends 34 and 35). ESIA and ESMP have been developed for use during the implementation phase
                         of the project on how to prevent impacts from occurring and to mitigate if they should emanate.

                         Kenya

                         Social

                         Similar to Ethiopia, the construction of the transmission line is expected to result in change in land use, land acquisition, loss of livelihood and
                         impact assets such as water tanks, gates, animal sheds, toilets, fences and business structures. Temporary and permanent land acquisition
                         will be required for erection of towers and stringing of conductors. People who lose part of their land will be able to continue to farm and use the
                         land for grazing purposes in those areas where construction activities are not planned or once construction activities are over. About 20
                         hectares of grazing land will also be required for the construction of the substation at Suswa.

                         Based on a socio-economic and census survey, the total affected population is 1,200 people (380 households) who are mainly residents of the
                         Central and Rift Valley Regions. Of these, nine households (45 people) will need to relocate. The total land area traversed by the ROW is
                         39.39 km2.

                         KETRACO has prepared a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the Kenya portion of the Project in full consultation with the potentially affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                         people and the relevant Kenyan institutions and consistent with the policy provisions of OP 4.12. The RAP identifies the principles, measures
                         and procedures to improve or at least restore the livelihoods of affected people.

                         In the initial screening of the project, OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) was triggered to take account of the possible presence of groups in Kenya
                         for whom the policy might be applicable. Based on subsequent further analysis, however, there are no groups in the area that meet the policy's
                         applicability criteria as interpreted in the past by the Bank in the Kenya context. OP 4.10 is therefore not triggered for the project.


                         Environment

                         There are four key environmental concerns. The first concern, specific to the routing of the line, is the impact on natural plant, animal habitats,
                         and bird migration routes as the selected route traverses the Marsabit National Reserve and the Losai National Reserve, and passes through
                         an Important Bird Area (IBA) - Lake Ol Bolossat.

                         The second is the need to limit encroachment on natural habitats, and avoid ecological hot spots and wildlife corridors that may be affected as
                         a result of construction of the pylons 4-6 km from the main road. The Bank has been informed that routing closer to the road is not possible
                         because of (a) resettlement costs and disturbance to the marginalized communities who depend on road traffic for their livelihoods, and (b)
                         town planning. Vision 2030 calls for an expansion of towns and villages along the route, so the transmission line must be sited some distance
                         outside the proposed expansion. Nevertheless, the surveyors will take every precaution to align the route away from ecological hot spots, while
                         at the same time avoiding populated areas to limit social impacts on local communities.

                         The third concern is the need to conserve water use, for construction and for workers, because much of the Project traverses severely water-
                         constrained areas, where scarcity of water is a potential source of conflict.

                         The fourth concern is the need to pay careful attention to the presence of paleontological and archaeological remains during final siting of the
                         transmission towers and construction activities and to consult with and involve authorities from the NMK because the project will traverse a
                         region of known paleontological and archaeological significance, which has not been systematically studied.

                         To minimize the Project’s impact on plant and animal habitats, KETRACO, in consultation with the Kenya Wildlife Service (KWS) and Kenya
                         Forest Service (KFS) will implement measures to limit non-critical habitat loss and degradation, in particular during construction. Ecological hot
                         spots (such as the habitats of the sand grouse within Losai Reserve) will be avoided, and construction will be scheduled to avoid wildlife
                         migration sections along the three portions of the proposed route that traverse migratory corridors. Construction contracts will reflect this
                         requirement. Guards will be posted at construction and campsites to ensure that wildlife are not poached and that precious woods such as
                                                                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 7
                           sandalwood are not chopped down for resale. KFS and KWS will continue to liaise with KETRACO in the implementation of the Environmental
                           Management Plan, particularly along migration corridors and ecologically sensitive areas, periodically monitoring the impact on biodiversity
                           attributed to construction and maintenance of the transmission line and substations. Care will be taken to disguise the pylons to limit aesthetic
                           damage to the landscape.

                           To minimize bird coll isions, KETRACO will take appropriate measures in the design and construction of the transmission lines to minimize the
                           risk of electrocution of birds in Important Bird Areas. More information on any bird migratory routes that may pass the line has been provided in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the ESIA, and appropriate bird warning devices (balls on the lines, platforms on the towers for raptors and nesting birds) will be used as
                           necessary and will be budgeted for in Project costs. Nature Kenya, the Ornithology Department of the Museums of Kenya and KWS will
                           provide guidance on which specific actions are appropriate.

                           Water use management plans will be incorporated in the EMP to ensure appropriate water use management practices are employed during
                           construction, and at worker camps, or in areas where there will be a short-term significant increase in population. Guidance will be sought from
                           the Water Resource Management Authority, as to whether permits for water use for construction purposes are required.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                             Provision of more jobs is likely to lead to less poaching, (although in the short term care will have to be taken to prevent poaching and tree
                           cutting at temporary worker camps) and government development plans would need to include development of boreholes and local electricity
                           provision, thereby limiting strains on existing sources of water supply that cause conflict, and may reduce the cutting of shrubs and grasses for
                           fuel.

                           The Konso Cultural Landscape (KCL) and the paleontological and archaeological sites in the Borena Administrative Zone continue to attract
                           tourists and paleontologists/archaeologists to the area. There is need for the ARCCH to develop a clear geo-referenced map of the areas
                           including the prescribed buffers, particularly for the KCL. Per agreement with EEPCo, qualified authorities of the ARCCH will be present during
                           final planning for positioning of the transmission towers and construction in the sensitive Konso area, and will be notified by the project owner of
                           any “chance find? during excavation works along the line. Work will stop until ARCCH has carried out full inspection of the area of the "chance
                           find" and provided its consent for work to continue.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                            Detailed line routing studies have been undertaken in 2009 and again in 2011, and the final line routing has been selected to avoid as much
                           as possible, crossing environmentally sensitive areas (such as the Matthews Forest range, the Aberdares, and local conservancies in Kenya
                           and to minimize resettlement in along the line). The ESIAs have been prepared based on the agreed route selection. A further rerouting at the
                           Ethiopian side of the line has been considered and agreed in order to stay away from the Konso Cultural Landscape and the identified
                           paleontological and archaeological sites in the Borena Administrative Zone.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                            The responsibility in the two countries to implement and monitor the ESMP and RAP will be with EEPCO in Ethiopia and KETRACO in Kenya.

                           EEPCO has adequate institutional arrangements in place to ensure the implementation of the Environment and Social Management Plan for
                           the Project components in Ethiopia. The implementation of the Resettlement Action Plan in Ethiopia will involve the Woredas (counties) along
                           the transmission line route. Each affected Woreda Administration will establish a Committee for the purpose of verifying and valuing
                           resettlement and compensation requirements in the presence of EEPCO staff. On the particular issue relating to the protection of physical
Public Disclosure Copy




                           cultural resources (i.e. Konso Cultural landscape and the archaeological and paleontological sites), EEPCO will be working closely with and
                           under the guidance of the ARCCH. ARCCH will conduct an orientation and training session for relevant project participants and construction
                           contractors to alert the latter to the cultural heritage aspects of the project’s impact area and to the characteristics and management procedures
                           for possible chance finds during construction.

                           EEPCo will liaise with ARCCH which will conduct an orientation and training session for relevant project participants and construction
                           contractors to alert the latter to the cultural heritage aspects of the project’s impact area and to the characteristics and management procedures
                           for possible chance finds during construction.

                           KETRACO’s Environment, Safety, Quality and Liaison Unit will implement the Environment and Social Management Plan for the Project
                           components in Kenya. KETRACO will set up a separate Resettlement Implementation Committee. Under the leadership of the Senior
                           Environmental Officer, the Committee will be in charge of the day-to-day implementation of the RAP. It will include District Commissioners from
                           the Counties along the transmission line and from each of the affected villages, a village chairman, elder, and a representative of women and
                           youth.

                           In addition, KETRACO will engage an Independent Evaluation Panel to monitor the progress of the RAP’s implementation. This external party
                           will conduct semi-annual audits and a close down audit. The Panel will consist of a firm or persons who have handled resettlement programs.
                           They will review the reports prepared by KETRACO on resettlement and will make site visits to obtain information from project affected
                           persons, and to verify the reports.

                           Under the ongoing IDA-supported Electricity Expansion Project (P103037), KETRACO is receiving capacity building in environmental
                           management and monitoring. It is the implementing entity for the Mombasa-Nairobi 220 kV high voltage line (financed by AfDB, EIB, and AFD)
                           and thus has experience in implementing environmental and social management activities. During project preparation, KETRACO’s
                           environmental and social management capacity was assessed and found to be adequate for its role as an implementing entity, although it is
                           recommended that more staff be added to address the heavy workload, particularly in terms of RAPs. KETRACO’s environmental and social
                           staff will be included in training visits to utilities that have implemented Bank safeguards. Funding has been included in the financing plan.

                           KETRACO will liaise with NMK which will conduct an orientation and training session for relevant project participants and construction
                           contractors to alert the latter to the cultural heritage aspects of the project’s impact area and to the characteristics and management procedures
                           for possible chance finds during construction.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                                                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 7
                             The safeguards documents have been prepared in consultation with the PAPs. Public consultation was a key element in the preparation of
                           the ESIAs, the Kenya RAP and the Ethiopia RPF. The objectives of the consultation process were to inform the affected households,
                           communities, local authorities and other interested stakeholders about the Project’s potential impacts and proposed mitigation measures;
                           collect their views to feed into the design of the project, if possible; and to enable the preparation of the environmental and social safeguard
                           instruments. The preparation of the ESIAs in Kenya and Ethiopia has included three sets of consultation with the project affected communities
                           to ensure that they understand and agree to the potential disturbances and the mitigation measures recommended in the ESIAs, RAP and
                           RPF. In Kenya a total of 11 community consultation meetings were held in the project affected area on the RAP. A diversity of community
Public Disclosure Copy




                           stakeholders including Government administrators (chiefs, village headmen, etc), village elders, farmers, teachers, men and women were
                           consulted in pre-arranged public meetings held in public institutions such as schools, markets and/or identified homesteads along the proposed
                           line route. The stakeholders were mobilized by chiefs, teachers and school management committee members. Teachers sent pupils to inform
                           their parents of the planned meetings. Chiefs deployed their assistants and village headmen to make announcements and post notices at
                           market centres informing the public about planned meetings. Similarly, in Ethiopia, consultations were carried out with project affected people
                           and key stakeholders on the preparation of the RPF in five different woredas which will be affected by the Project.

                           The ESIAs have been disclosed in Kenya, Ethiopia on January 28 and 29, 2012 respectively and at the Bank’s InfoShop in Washington on
                           January 30, 2012. The Kenya RAP was disclosed in Kenya and at the Bank’s InfoShop on March 26 and 27 respectively. The Ethiopia RPF
                           was disclosed in Ethiopia on April 4, 2012 and at the Bank’s InfoShop on April 5, 2012.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    24-Jan-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                27-Jan-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 30-Jan-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    25-Jan-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                26-Mar-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 27-Mar-2012
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]

                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                           If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]
                           habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                           Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on               Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]
                           cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                           If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the             Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]
                           plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                           Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                     Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]

                           Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language             Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]
                           that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                           Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for          Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]
                           the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                           Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                     Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]

                           Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard           Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]
                           impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                           Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same               Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]
                           been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
                                                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 7
                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                  Paivi Koljonen
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 25-Apr-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Sector Manager:                    Name Lucio Monari (SM)              Date: 18-Apr-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                       Page 7 of 7
