                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA416
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Dec-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Liberia                                 Project ID:                       P113273
                              Project Name:                   LR Smallholder Tree Crop Revitalization Support Project (P113273)
                              Task Team Leader:               Oliver Braedt
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 21-Nov-2011                                   Estimated Board Date:             22-Mar-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  AFTAR                                   Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Crops (60%), Agricultural extension and research (20%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%)
                              Theme:                          Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Other rural development (50%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                          0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                15.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                      15.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The Project development objective would be “to increase access to finance, inputs, technologies and markets for smallholder tree crop farmers in
                              Liberia, and to prepare a long term development program developed for the tree crops sector?.

                              3. Project Description

                              The Project development objective is “to increase access to finance, inputs, technologies and markets for smallholder tree crop farmers in Liberia,
Public Disclosure Copy




                              and to develop a long term development program for the tree crops sector?.

                              The project has three main components, each with sub-components as follows:
                              Component 1: Smallholder Tree Crop Revitalization. Component one has three sub-components focusing on cocoa, coffee, oil palm and rubber
                              revitalization. The activities to be implemented under the component include rehabilitation of existing small farms, new planting, investment in
                              small- scale cocoa, coffee and oil palm processing units, and promotion of improved marketing and value chain system.

                                         Rehab./Replanting (ha)         New Planting (ha)    Total (ha)
                              Cocoa      5,000    1,000     6,000
                              Coffee     1,500    -         1,500
                              Oil Palm: farmer-run          300         300       600
                              Oil Palm: outgrowers          300         300       600
                              Rubber 1,600        1,000     2,600

                              Other activities include the establishment and strengthening of farmer-based organizations (associations and cooperatives) at all levels, through
                              provision of training and technical and managerial advice, capacity strengthening of commercial banks to provide financial services appropriate to
                              the needs of smallholder farmers and development of nurseries and seed gardens at the village level. To enhance the Farmer Organizations (FOs)
                              bulking and marketing functions, the project would enhance FOs abilities to access finance from internal and external sources. The component
                              would also support limited infrastructure rehabilitation (approximately 160 km of access roads and related small bridges and drainage structures)
                              wherever it is critical to provide access to groups of farms; and the establishment of small scale processing facilities for the farmers' run plantation
                              -where no modern mills are present.

                              Component 2: Institutional Building and Preparation of Future Large Scale Tree Crop Development Program. The component has three sub
                              components: (a) Institution Building (b) Preparing Future Large Scale Smallholder Tree Crop Development Programs and (c) Project Preparation
                              Facility. The component's main aims are: (i) strengthening the main public and private institutions involved in project planning, coordination and
                              implementation, particularly: the MoA; the Cooperative Development Authority (CDA); the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA); institutions in
                              charge of securing access to land (Ministry of Lands, Mine and Energy -MLME; Land commission -LC) and of agriculture research; (ii) preparing a
                              follow-up large scale smallholder tree crop development program; and (iii) contributing to the strengthening and effective performance of the MoA's
                              Program Management Unit (PMU) that serves all projects implemented by the MoA, and of which the project coordination team would be part. The
                              large-scale project will include capacity-building for Integrated Pest Management (IPM) in the tree crops sector.

                              Component 3 Project Coordination and Management. This component has two sub-components: (a) Project Coordination and Management; and

                                                                                                                                                                          Page 1 of 5
                               (b) Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), and Knowledge sharing, with the objectives of : (i) ensuring the effective strategic and operational planning
                               and monitoring and implementation of the STCRSP; (ii) ensuring an efficient coordination between the components of the project on one hand and
                               the various sources of funding and implementation partners within and outside MoA on the other hand; and (iii) evaluating the final results and
                               impact of the STCRSP on smallholders.

                               4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                               The project activities cover 6 of the country’s 15 counties and involve the private sector, non-governmental organizations, government agencies
Public Disclosure Copy




                               and institutions, and farmer based organizations and their federations among others. The project location would be in selected districts in the
                               country’s main tree crop producing counties. Specific beneficiary communities would be identified at a later stage. Though there are similarities
                               among the counties, there could be peculiar variations in socio-economic lifestyles and standards amongst the counties, as well as in their
                               environmental characteristics. This will require both general and specific attention to the social, environmental and safeguards issues. The project
                               would, through the environmental, social and stakeholder analysis/assessment, identify these cases to be addressed during project
                               implementation.

                               5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                               Thomas E. Walton (EASIS)
                               Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS)

                               6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                   Yes        No      Explanation
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                ✖                 An Environmental and Social Management Framework has been completed,
                                                                                                    reviewed and cleared by the Bank and has been disclosed in country and at
                                                                                                    the World Bank infoshop. During project implementation, site specific ESMPs
                                                                                                    will be prepared and implemented after screening to address environmental
                                                                                                    issues and to mitigate identified impacts.
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                        ✖                 During implementation, site assessments will be conducted to ensure that no
                                                                                                    high value conservation areas will be converted and detailed procedures will
                                                                                                    be developed and will be applied to ensure that vegetation to be replaced by
                                                                                                    new plantings is not environmentally significant and implications of a possible
                                                                                                    cumulative effect will not be environmentally significance.
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                                 ✖                 Significant impacts are not expected from activities undertaken in the
                                                                                                    proposed project. Every project activity would follow all national laws and
                                                                                                    guidelines with regard to conservation operations, including obtaining all
                                                                                                    necessary permits.
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                            ✖                 The environmental analysis assesses the potential impact of pesticide use.
                                                                                                    Small amounts of some agricultural chemicals might be used and herbicides
                                                                                                    may be applied in some areas. EA will include an overall Pest Management
                                                                                                    Plan and a specific Pesticide Management Plan if required.
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                        ✖
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                 ✖      The IP policy is not triggered but this will be monitored during implementation
                                                                                                    and appropriate actions taken if any IP case is confirmed in any of the
                                                                                                    participating counties.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                ✖                 The policy is triggered due to potential but minor impacts on land acquisition
                                                                                                    for first phase activities which will include rehabilitation, feeder roads
                                                                                                    rehabilitation and development of nurseries. These activities are not expected
                                                                                                    to result in large scale impacts and that through consultations minor impacts
                                                                                                    can even be avoided. RPF has been prepared, reviewed and publicly
                                                                                                    disclosed in country and at the WB infoshop. Phase II may require land for
                                                                                                    new planting. In this phase proper screening and assessment will be carried
                                                                                                    out guided by the RPF and when required RAPs or ARAPs will be prepared,
                                                                                                    reviewed, cleared and disclosed in country and at the infoshop prior to
                                                                                                    implementation of those activities.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                     ✖
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                     ✖
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         ✖

                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  The proposed project does not envisage any large scale irreversible impacts.
                                  Potential adverse environmental impacts are: soil erosion and sedimentation from new planting and replanting operations and from feeder road
                                  rehabilitation, air and water pollution from small-scale processing facilities (batch processing units of maximum capacity 60 kg/hour for coffee
                                  and cocoa and 1 ton/hour for oil palm), water pollution from excessive fertilizer use, and environmental and health impacts of pesticide use (on
                                  cocoa farms only). Old rubber trees removed from plantations may be sold to charcoal and wood chip producers. The overall impact of this
                                  should be positive, a reduction of pressure on natural forests, but it will be monitored during project implementation in case there are

                                                                                                                                                                         Page 2 of 5
                           unforeseen negative impacts. All impacts can be avoided or adequately mitigated through development and implementation of ESMPs for each
                           sub-project.

                           The feeder road rehabilitation works are expected to be within the existing corridor and not likely to affect any adjoining farms or community
                           gardens. Where such farms exist, the contractor will ensure avoidance of destruction and other forms of impacts as much as possible through
                           effective discussions and collaboration. Where impacts cannot be avoided, the appropriate actions as per the RPF guidelines will be
                           undertaken in favor of affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project would not result in restriction of access to forest resources for community members and would not be expected to result in
                           resettlement or relocation due to large scale land take or large scale restriction of access to sources of livelihood under phase I. It is however,
                           possible that, small pieces of land might be required for the establishment of village nurseries and seed gardens. These activities might have
                           minor impacts on livelihood and restriction of access. However, these would be minimal and localized; mitigation measures can readily be
                           applied or impacts could be completely avoided through effective consultations and negotiations with traditional authorities, farmers and
                           community members.

                           For new plantings under phase II which may require land, all possible actions would be taken to avoid any large-scale displacements. In cases
                           of land acquisition for new plantings, the project would do proper screening, and follow proper land acquisition processes as per OP4.12 and
                           GoL laws where necessary. In such cases, the project would also prepare resettlement action plans (RAPs) or abbreviated resettlement action
                           plans (ARAPs) through effective consultations and alternative considerations to address possible land related concerns, minimize impacts or
                           address any other possible impacts. The RPF sets out the processes for developing a RAP/ARAP. In selecting sites for new plantings, the
                           project would follow the requirements of OP 4.36, avoiding locations where project activities could result in conversion or degradation of critical
                           natural habitat, and giving preference to non-forested land.

                           The indigenous peoples' policy is not triggered. However during implementation, the project will be monitoring and appropriate actions will be
                           taken in case any IP case is confirmed in any of the participating counties.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                           The project does not envisage any potential indirect or long term impacts in the future.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                           Since the exact location, nature and number of rehabilitations and new plantings of crops are not known, and the number, location of small
                           bridges and feeder roads to be rehabilitated are also not known, the GoL, through consultants engaged by the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA),
                           has drafted an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to address the potential environmental impacts and social impacts
                           other than land acquisition and resettlement. GoL's consultants have also prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to give guidance
                           on land acquisition and resettlement. In addition, land acquisition activities will be guided by GoL's policies and recommendations from the
                           study on " Securing smallholder land use rights" instituted by the project.

                           During implementation of project activities, proposed subprojects would be screened according to procedures established in the ESMF and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           RPF. Where required as per the RPF, appropriate RAPs or ARAPs would be prepared through a consultative process, disclosed and
                           implemented to address any site specific social impacts. The ESMF requires ESMPs for all subprojects that could have adverse impacts and
                           provides guidance for their preparation and disclosure. The screening procedure in the ESMF would also identify any subprojects for which
                           EIAs would be required by Liberia EPA under the Environmental Protection and Management Law.

                           The RPF elaborates specific information on the land tenure issues as outlined in the report on "securing smallholders land use rights". The
                           report outlines challenges, institutional collaboration and recommended actions for addressing them. Besides, the project will ensure that no
                           large scale displacements occur as a result of land requirement for any project activities under both phases I and II. All relevant stakeholders
                           from community to national level ( including paramount chiefs and NGOs) will be involved in determining land acquisition. This will be guided by
                           the OP 4.12 and the RPF. The RPF also considers that any possible future land acquisition for new plantings will be done in conformity with the
                           requirements of OP 4.12 and guidelines spelt out in the framework. Further details can be found in the report included in the RPF Annex.

                           The ESMF includes a pest management plan that emphasizes IPM but also covers training for pesticide handling. Small quantities of fungicides
                           and insecticides in WHO Class II will be procured for use on cocoa in accordance with OP 4.09 and PMP. Liberia EPA and MoA have in place
                           legal authority to regulate pesticide import and use, and the PMP and PIM will provide for access control and training for pesticide handlers.
                           Impacts on physical cultural resources (PCR) are not considered likely, and OP 4.11 has not been triggered. However, the screening procedure
                           requires a site visit for each subproject, and the screening checklist includes questions on the presence of PCR. ESMPs for any new plantings
                           will include a chance-finds procedure as an additional precaution.

                           The final draft ESMF and RPF have been reviewed by the Bank, and these have been publicly disclosed in country and in the InfoShop prior to
                           appraisal on December 2 and 5, 2011 respectively. During implementation and if required, RAPs or ARAPs, ESMPs and EIAs for individual
                           subprojects will also be reviewed by the Bank and disclosed prior to specific subproject implementation.

                           The implementing Ministry would be Ministry of Agriculture (MoA). However, there would be a Project Management Unit (PMU) which would be
                           directly responsible for the day-to-day operations. The safeguards capacity of MoA is low, but this would be addressed in a number of ways.
                           The capacity in the country and of other Ministries and Liberian based agencies can be tapped as part of the solution. More critically, a number
                           of basic and intermediate training workshops and capacity building programs on safeguards would be undertaken during implementation for
                           selected staff from the Ministry and designated Ministries like Land, Mines and Energy and PMU staff who would be the safeguards focal
                           persons for the project from the county to national project levels. The Bank is already assisting Liberia EPA in strengthening its monitoring and
                           regulatory capacity at central and county levels under the Urban and Rural Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project (URIRP) and would extend this
                           assistance with a focus on tree crops as part of this project. Implementing partners like NGOs and the private sector including representatives
                           of the smallholders would benefit from this training. This approach is to ensure that safeguards issues are integrated as socially and
                           environmentally sustainable activities which highlight their importance as preventive or mitigation measures. It would be considered an
                                                                                                                                                                    Page 3 of 5
                           important part of implementation of the project itself.

                           The safeguards documents clearly spell out the approach, institutional and implementation arrangements, cost estimates and timelines for the
                           training of all categories of people considered crucial for this capacity building exercise. The relevant people to benefit from this training are
                           identified in the respective safeguards documents -the RPF/ESMF. The training would use the prepared safeguard documents as its basic
                           reference in addition to other relevant documents and experiences from implementing safeguards from other projects funded by the Bank in
                           Liberia.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Capacity for Integrated Pest Management (IPM) is not well developed in Liberia. The project will begin to build IPM capacity, and the large-
                           scale project that will be designed in Component 2 will include activities to fully develop IPM in the tree crops sector.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders in the project besides the participating farmers and communities, are government agencies and staff, especially Ministry
                           of Agriculture (MOA), the Project Management Unit (PMU), District Agriculture Officers (DAOs), Farmer-Based Organizations (FBOs), traditional
                           leaders and community representatives, private sector companies involved in the business of the selected tree-crops, county officials and other
                           individuals including farmers considered key to the project design, implementation and monitoring. Consultations have been widespread with
                           these categories of interests during project preparation in general and development of the safeguards documents in particular. There have been
                           meetings, focus group discussions with a varied group of people, and key informant interviews in all participating counties and in selected
                           districts. Individual farmers participating in the farmer-field schools (FFS) and members of FBOs from participating counties have all made
                           significant input into project design and the development of safeguards documents.

                           In addition to these robust consultations, two stakeholders' workshops were held, one each on the draft ESMF and RPF and the Social Impact
                           Assessment. Among the key issues raised during these workshops are: land access and acquisition, land disputes, challenges facing the tree
                           crops sector, involvement of women and other vulnerable groups. Further consultations were held in a day's workshop to discuss the RPF and
                           ESMF as part of the in country disclosure activities. Where ESMPs and RAPs or ARAPs are prepared during implementation, further disclosure
                           and consultations will be done as part of preparation and implementation.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    24-Oct-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                02-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 05-Dec-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    24-Oct-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                02-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 05-Dec-2011
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    24-Oct-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                02-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 05-Dec-2011
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [     ]      No [   ]      NA [    ]

                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                           If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [     ]      No [   ]      NA [    ]
                           habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                           If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are                   Yes [     ]      No [   ]      NA [    ]
                           PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                           Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                                                                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 5
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the      Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                              Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for       Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              certification system?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Signed and submitted by:                                                Name                                                 Date
                            Task Team Leader:                    Oliver Braedt                                                            13-Dec-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                              13-Dec-2011
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                      Karen Mcconnell Brooks (SM)                                              13-Dec-2011
                            Comments:     I have reviewed the document and approve it.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 5
