                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA2317
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Feb-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Yemen, Republic of                Project ID:    P132116
                            Project Name:      Climate Information System and PPCR Coordination (P132116)
                            Task Team          Lia Carol Sieghart
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          16-Mar-2013                       Estimated   27-Sep-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSEN                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General information and communications sector (50%), Public administration-
                                               Water, sanitation and flood protection (50%)
                            Theme(s):          Climate change (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        19.00           Total Bank Financing:   0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                         Financing Gap:          0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                      0.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                                 19.00
                              Total                                                                                        19.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to improve the quality of hydro-meteorological and climate
                           services provided to end-users.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project would increase climate resilience – better managing water resources, increasing

                                                                       Page 1 of 6
                         agricultural productivity and reducing the risk of climate-sensitive diseases – by improving the
                         monitoring and assessment of climate variability and change and providing targeted and reliable
                         information for decision making. The project will have social and economic benefits by managing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         risk in weather-related disasters that disproportionately affect the poor and vulnerable populations
                         through improving forecasting, early warning systems and the observed climatology of Yemen. This
                         would be achieved by building up a National Framework for Climate Services as proposed by and
                         supporting the provision of data and information to the Global Framework for Climate Services
                         (GFCS), through: upgrading the existing meteorological and hydrological observing networks,
                         improving the timeliness and accuracy of weather and flood forecasts and warnings, and delivering
                         better weather, climate and water services. Activities funded through the project would help improve
                         climate-sensitive decision-making and planning in key vulnerable and water resources dependent
                         sectors, particularly agriculture, and contribute to building resilience for communities and sectors at
                         risk. Better uptake and use of weather, climate and water information would be achieved by
                         strengthening partnerships between the providers and users of weather, climate and water
                         information through dedicated climate working groups and existing community organizations. The
                         project would also improve coordination and information sharing between all of agencies responsible
                         for the collection of climate data, analysis and decision-support as well as maintain the oversight of
                         the overall PPCR program, particularly in regards to knowledge management, awareness rising and
                         information sharing with stakeholders of information developed throughout the program.

                         The project would consist of the following four components:

                         Component A: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building
                         Component B: Modernization and Expansion of the National Hydrometeorological and Monitoring
                         Networks
                         Component C: Enhancement of Service Delivery System
                         Component D: PPCR Program Management and Knowledge Sharing

                         Component A. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (PPCR Financing US$3.40 million
Public Disclosure Copy




                         including contingencies): This component aims to improve climate resilience in Yemen through
                         provision of weather, climate and water services that meet stakeholders’ needs by creating the
                         conditions that ensure institutional, staffing and financial sustainability of the key providers (CAMA/
                         YMS, MAI and NWRA). This includes revising and updating institutional strategies taking into
                         account new requirements for climate services. It will support revision and adoption of legal
                         frameworks and standard operating procedures, in line with international common practice to share
                         data and information to improve intra-government cooperation to cope with weather, climate and
                         water related hazards. It will build capacity through training providing access to new skills and
                         opportunities within each of the participating organizations. The component will also support the
                         technical design and implementation of the overall modernization program to ensure that the new
                         components can be integrated into the current operational systems.

                         Component B. Modernization and Expansion of the National Hydrometeorological and Monitoring
                         Networks (PPCR Financing US$7.55 million including contingencies): This component aims to
                         upgrade and expand the observations networks for meteorology, agro-meteorology and hydro-
                         meteorology, ensuring that these networks are interoperable between CAMA/YMS, MAI, NWRA
                         and the development authorities to enable the efficient and timely transmission of information that is
                         essential for management of disaster risks, agriculture and water resources. Collection and timely
                         communication of high-quality data is the foundation of producing reliable weather forecasts and
                         warnings as well as monthly and longer term climate outlooks based on a national climatology. The

                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                         modernization of the observing networks includes rehabilitating and extending the MAI and NWRA
                         agrometeorological and hydrometeorological networks; extending the CAMA/YMS weather and
                         climate surface and upper air network, and installing Doppler radar for enhanced precipitation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         measurement, severe weather and flood forecasting. It requires modernizing the communication and
                         ICT system to transmit data efficiently. The component also includes the design and pilot operation
                         of an environmental monitoring system.

                         Component C. Enhancement of Service Delivery System (PPCR Financing US$4.35 million
                         including contingencies): This component aims to enhance the delivery of weather and climate
                         services to end-users. It provides for the implementation of a systematic upgrade of the weather,
                         climate and water-related end-to-end services provided to all agencies, communities and individuals.
                         In particular, it will extend the forecasting, analysis and service delivery capabilities of CAMA/YMS
                         to provide guidance to agriculture, water resources and irrigation, DRM, media, civil aviation, health
                         and renewable energy. It will also provide demographic-specific services where differentiated
                         information targeted to specific vulnerable groups and individuals. Information specific to rural
                         women will be developed and highlighted because of their vulnerability in livelihood development.
                         Given the importance of warning systems for flash floods – two pilots will focus on implementing
                         end-to-end early warning systems developed together by CAMA/YMS, MAI, NWRA and CDA, on
                         behalf of the wider disaster risk management community, and in consultation with other DRM
                         efforts. This component will also help CAMA/YMS, MAI and NWRA improve the quality of their
                         services to their various stakeholders. It provides the foundation for a National Framework for
                         Climate Services, which would increase access to high quality climate information, facilitate sharing
                         of knowledge and know-how, and strengthen or establish community-level partnerships between the
                         users and providers to understand and use weather, climate and water information more effectively
                         and ultimately reduce vulnerability to climate change. Information will be delivered in a variety of
                         ways depending on the specific local circumstances ranging from radio and mobile telephone
                         messages that inform users directly to bulletins delivered through community based organizations.
                         All of which are standard procedures for existing weather and climate information.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component D: PPCR Program Management and Knowledge Sharing (PPCR Financing US$3.70
                         million including contingencies): This component will carry out the oversight of the PPCR
                         implementation, including synthesizing the main results achieved by the investments under the SPCR
                         to inform relevant decision-making. It will include monitoring and evaluation of gender sensitive
                         approaches to project implementation. Knowledge sharing will be carried out across all of the Yemen
                         PPCR investments to increase public awareness of climate variability and change and its impact on
                         day-to-day activities in Yemen. It would guide the initial development of the climate database
                         management system by establishing procedures to ensure open access to climate information by all
                         users. Public education and outreach activities will be geared towards improving information access
                         and awareness raising of the challenges caused by climate change. Particular attention would be
                         given to communities which need to take preparatory action to mitigate adverse consequences of the
                         climate and hydrometeorological hazards – improving community response to flood warnings,
                         improving management of surface water resources, improving food security, improving health
                         outcomes, improving climate-resilient coastal zone management, and improving rural livelihoods.
                         This component also supports and strengthens the PPCR-PCU to carry out the fiduciary
                         responsibilities and reporting in a timely and effective fashion as required by the legal and binding
                         agreement entered into between the Bank and the Government of Yemen.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                                                                      Page 3 of 6
                         All the project sites will be on public land. The Team has obtained a letter from the Government
                         confirming that the project locations will be public land only as recommended at the PCN review
                         meeting. Some of the sites have been identified during the preparation mission: upgrading marine
Public Disclosure Copy




                         observation will be done in three already established standard stations in Al Mukallah, Aden, and
                         Mokha; and a Doppler weather radar will be installed next to the monitoring station in Dhamar on
                         the existing government owned and already fenced-in land. Site visits by a local consultant who
                         prepared an Environmental Social Management Plan (ESMP) confirmed that all the sites are existing
                         government own land. The unknown sites are for hydromet stations which only involve simple
                         assembly of monitoring equipment and require only a piece of land which can be easily shifted. Site
                         selection criteria has been prepared as part of ESMP and the final locations will be approved in order
                         to ensure those stations will not be installed in sensitive areas. It was reconfirmed in the ESMP that
                         none of social safeguards policies are triggered.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (MNSSD)
                         Suiko Yoshijima (MNSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes                Installation of monitoring networks under
                         BP 4.01                                              Component B is expected to be small works with
                                                                              relatively minor environmental impacts due to its
                                                                              limited size and the nature of the work which is
                                                                              basically an installation of ready-made sensing
                                                                              equipment. This can be readily managed with
                                                                              simple environmental mitigation and monitoring
                                                                              procedures. An Environmental and Social
                                                                              Management Plan (ESMP) has been prepared and
                                                                              necessary precaution measures will be taken
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              using the ESMP.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No                OP4.12 is not triggered because the project sites
                         4.12                                                 will be limited to public land. The government
                                                                              submitted an official letter confirming that the
                                                                              project sites will be public land on December 8,
                                                                              2012.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No




                                                                      Page 4 of 6
                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The project will not result in any potential large scale, significant, or irreversible impacts.
                              However, in order to manage minor risks, site selection criteria was prepared to avoid any
                              sensitive sites, and mitigation measures were identified to manage risks during the installation of a
                              Doppler radar and monitoring equipment.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                There will be no indirect and/or long term impacts expected.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                Installation of monitoring equipment only requires a piece of small land which can be shifted
                              easily. Therefore, the locations are selected where none of the safeguards policies other than OP/
                              BP 4.01 is triggered based on the site selection criteria.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                EPA hired an experienced local consultant to prepare an ESMP. The risk on environmental and
                              social impacts will be managed during the implementation phase by following the mitigation
Public Disclosure Copy




                              measures and monitoring plan described in the ESMP. The main elements of the ESMP is
                              incorporated in the Project Operating Manual. Though EPA has little previous experience in
                              implementing Bank safeguards, EPA has qualified staffs who are experienced in reviewing
                              environmental assessment reports and applying national environmental legislation. Therefore, the
                              EPA should be able to learn quickly and successfully apply all relevant safeguard policies when
                              supplied with the necessary capacity support from the Bank team.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                Several public consultations with stakeholders were conducted in December 2012 in Dhamar,
                              Aden, and Hadhramout to present and get feedback on the ESMP. The group of stakeholder
                              included the government stakeholders, farmers, water users, fishers and women. In accordance
                              with World Bank disclosure policy and guidelines, the executive summary of the ESMP was
                              translated into Arabic and both versions were disclosed at the World Bank’s Infoshop on February
                              19, 2013. Those documents are also available on the project website.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                             Date of receipt by the Bank                                          10-Feb-2012
                             Date of submission to InfoShop                                       19-Feb-2012


                                                                         Page 5 of 6
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                              Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                            "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Yemen, Republic of                                               13-Feb-2013
                              Comments:
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Lia Carol Sieghart
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (SM)                  Date: 11-Apr-2013




                                                                        Page 6 of 6
