                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA2999
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bangladesh                          Project ID:    P128276
                            Project Name:      Coastal Embankment Improvement Project - Phase 1(CEIP-1) (P128276)
                            Task Team          Maria Sarraf
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          08-Apr-2013                         Estimated   19-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDC                               Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (60%), General agriculture,
                                              fishing and forestry sector (30%), Other social se rvices (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Natural disaster management (50%), Climate change (30%), Water resource
                                              management (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     400.00           Total Bank Financing:                  375.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 375.00
                              Climate Investment Funds                                                                     25.00
                              Total                                                                                       400.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The project development objectives are to (a) increase the area protected, in selected polder, from
                           tidal flooding and frequent storm surges, which are expected to worsen due to climate change; (b)


                                                                        Page 1 of 13
                         improve agricultural production by reducing saline water intrusion; and (c) improve the Government
                         of Bangladesh’s capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency.
                         These objectives will be achieved by strengthening and upgrading embankments as part of an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         integrated approach to improve the polder system in the coastal area.
                         3. Project Description
                         The Project has five components: four components are related to polder improvement and a fifth
                         component (with a provisional zero amount) has been included to allow for rapid reallocation of loan
                         proceeds during an emergency, under streamlined procurement and disbursement procedures:

                         A.     Rehabilitation and Improvement of Polders;
                         B.     Implementation of Social Action and Environment Management Plans;
                         C.Construction Supervision, Monitoring & Evaluation of Project Impact, Supervision of Social and
                         Environment Plans, and Coastal Zone Monitoring;
                         D.Project Management, Technical Assistance, Training and Strategic Studies; and Contingent
                         Emergency Response.

                         Component A – Rehabilitation and Improvement of Polders ($291 million).

                         Component A1: Rehabilitation and Improvement of Polder ($286 million). ($266 million from IDA
                         Credit; 20 million Grant from Climate Investment Fund- Pilot Program for Climate Resilience
                         “PPCR?). This component will finance activities that aim to increase community resilience to tidal
                         flooding and storm surges. Investments include: (i) rehabilitation of critical portions of polder
                         embankments including slope protection work, (ii) increasing embankment height in some stretches
                         to improve resilience, (iii) repairing and upgrading drainage and flushing systems within polders, and
                         (v) improving operations and maintenance (O&M). The upgrading and rehabilitation works will be
                         designed with improved standards so that protection is for both tidal flooding and frequent storm
                         surges. It is expected that about 17 polders will be rehabilitated under this component. Polders have
                         been selected based on technical, environmental, social, economic and geographic criteria. A list of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the polders considered for rehabilitation is presented in the table below .

                         Improving the embankment system will provide stronger protection to people living inside polders
                         from storm surges; hence reducing the recovery time after a natural disaster such as a cyclone.
                         Improving the internal drainage system will enhance agriculture production, which is the primary
                         source of livelihood for coastal population. Protecting assets and enhancing agricultural production
                         will bring in much needed economic growth to the coastal population.

                         Component A2: Afforestation ($5 million). Afforestation is important to the security of
                         embankments and the lives and livelihoods of communities by providing green belts of protection
                         from tidal flooding and storm surge. Pilot planting of selected mangrove and other salt tolerant
                         species are planned on BWDB owned land to demonstrate the critical role of a protective belt on the
                         tidal inundation zone on the riverside of the embankment. Planting of a range of commercial wood,
                         fruit and other shallow rooting social forestry tree species in phase with livelihoods needs of landless,
                         marginalized and poor villagers are proposed on the foreshore lower slopes of embankments.
                         Plantings would commence after resolving land ownership and competing land-use (fish and shrimp
                         ponds, rice paddies, livestock grazing, settlement, etc.) issues and the completion of earthworks to
                         restore embankments. The afforestation component will engage community participation in pro-poor
                         approaches to encourage ownership and benefit sharing in an attempt to achieve social,
                         environmental and economic sustainability. The component will finance effort to increase


                                                                      Page 2 of 13
                         community awareness of the protective and productive functions of planting trees and build capacity
                         of local government institutions, Water Management Organizations (WMOs), Non-Governmental
                         Organization (NGOs), community organizations and beneficiaries in secondary maintenance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         schemes for improved O&M, foreshore and embankment afforestation, social forestry and protection
                         of embankment toe against erosion. Key lessons from past embankment afforestation has been taken
                         into account in participatory planning, selection of afforestation types and species, selection of
                         participants and beneficiaries, post-planting O&M, plantation protection, harvesting of wood and
                         non-wood forest products and benefit sharing.

                         Component B–Implementation of Social Action and Environment Management Plans (US$56
                         million).

                         Component B1: Implementation of Social Action Plan (US$3 million). This component will support
                         consultation with and strengthening of polder stakeholders and beneficiaries. Polder Committees will
                         be strengthen or established in all Polders to determine the competing needs and uses for water
                         resources, and to decide on the operation of hydraulic infrastructure. Intensive social mobilization
                         will be piloted in 4-6 polders to establish participatory WMOs that will be responsible for the
                         operation and minor maintenance works of the polders. The establishment of WMOs will follow an
                         eight step process, as identified in the Guidelines for Integrated Planning for Sustainable Water
                         Resources Management, published by BWDB in 2008. Social mobilization is expected to last
                         around two years, during which time the WMOs will be established and trained in participatory
                         planning, as well as in operation and minor maintenance activities. Small works, including minor
                         periodic maintenance and operation of minor hydraulic infrastructure would be undertaken by the
                         WMOs under a memorandum of understanding with BWDB. Should the participatory approach
                         prove to be successful, it would be scaled up under the next phase of investments. It is envisaged
                         that this component, along with the social afforestation (Component A2) and the implementation of
                         the RAP (Component B2) will be implemented through a well-established NGO.

                         Component B2: Implementation of Resettlement Action Plans (US$49 million). Polder scheme
Public Disclosure Copy




                         rehabilitation is a complex project that involves a variety of issues ranging from land acquisition,
                         physical and economic displacement of people and other unanticipated impacts. Generally there are
                         informal settlers on the embankments as they are safe structures. A Social Management and
                         Resettlement Policy Framework (SMRPF) has been prepared and will be disclosed in accordance
                         with Bank guidelines. A draft Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the first package of investment
                         has been prepared and disclosed in the info shop on February 15, 2013. This component will finance
                         the implementation of the RAP and public consultation plans. The component will finance the
                         resettlement and rehabilitation of persons adversely affected by the project. It will also support the
                         development of a system to computerize land acquisition and resettlement data with Global Position
                         System (GPS) reference and independent institute to undertake surveys and verify field data in order
                         to guard against improper targeting of beneficiaries and/or false delivery of benefits in case of SAP/
                         RAP.

                         Component B3. Implementation of Environment Management Plan (US$4 million). An overall
                         environmental assessment of the polder system; a draft Environmental Management Framework
                         (EMF) for the project; and Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) for polders targeted under the first
                         package of investment have already been prepared and disclosed in the infoshop on February 15,
                         2013. This component will finance: (i) the preparation of EIAs for all remaining polders; (ii) the
                         implementation of the Environment Management Plan (EMP) and environmental mitigation and
                         enhancement measures; and (iii) the establishment of an environmental monitoring system in BWDB

                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                         to enable it to track continuous improvement in environmental performance of the polder system.

                         Component C- Construction Supervision, Monitoring & Evaluation of Project Impact, Supervision of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Social and Environment Plans, and Coastal Zone Monitoring (US$32 million)

                         Component C1: Detailed Design and Construction Supervision (US$16 million). This component
                         will cover consulting services for (i) surveys, designs of remaining polders to be included in the
                         project (other than the 5 for which detailed designs have already been completed), and (ii)
                         construction supervision of rehabilitation and improvement of coastal embankments. This will
                         include facilitating consultations with local communities in identifying needs and suitable design of
                         the embankment as well as with other stakeholders such as local government, upazilla and union
                         level governments. The component will finance surveys required prior to construction work.

                         Component C2: Monitoring and Evaluation, Third Party Monitoring of Project implementation, RAP
                         and EMP (US$4 million). This component will cover consulting services for continuously
                         monitoring project activities and providing feedback to the government and the implementing agency
                         on the project’s performance. This includes supervising the implementation of the EMP, SAP and
                         RAP. This will be provided through third party assessment and monitoring of key aspects of project
                         implementation.

                         Component C3: Long Term Monitoring, Research and Analysis of Bangladesh Coastal Zone (US$12
                         million). ($7 million from IDA credit; $5 million Grant from PPCR).

                         The coastal zone is a crucial region for Bangladesh, and it is subject to a multitude of complex
                         natural phenomena that are currently not fully understood. The region is experiencing fast paced
                         changes due to changes in river morphology, fluvial processes, human intervention, and climate
                         change. To tackle this knowledge gap and enhance people’s understanding of this complex
                         environment, the project will support a comprehensive monitoring and morphological assessment of
                         the Bangladesh Delta. A program to extend the current monitoring systems in Coastal Bangladesh is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         also essential to generate data, information, and new knowledge for assessments of effects of
                         multiple drivers on the environment of coastal zone and guide future design, rehabilitation and
                         improvement requirements. The monitoring will cover sediment rates and composition; erosion
                         rates; sea level rise; subsidence rates; tidal dynamics changes; river cross section changes and
                         meander migration; shoreline changes; and any relevant geomorphological attributes.

                         This work will be carried out by key institutions in Bangladesh, such as IWM, CEGIS, Dhaka
                         University, BUET, and BWDB, in cooperation and twining arrangements with international
                         institutions and experts in the topic of estuarine and coastal morphology and geomorphology. This
                         twining arrangement is needed to build in-house capacity and guide local institutions and experts to
                         improve their understanding of the physical processes of such a complex delta system. The project
                         will support the installation and operation of needed equipment and systems on the ground, technical
                         expertise, provision of advanced technology and equipment, high resolution specialized remote
                         sensing images, and the capability to analyze these images. The project will support procurement of
                         goods, services, and incremental operation costs in carrying out this research and analysis, and the
                         development of databases and information systems that will be made available widely both within
                         and outside of Bangladesh.

                         Component D – Project Management, Technical Assistance, Training and Strategic Studies (US$21
                         million).

                                                                      Page 4 of 13
                         This component will support BWDB in implementing the project through the establishment of a fully
                         functioning Project Management Unit (PMU). It will provide resources for needed strategic studies
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (including the continuous updating of the strategic polder assessment as well as all necessary
                         preparatory studies for following phases of the CEIP), institutional capacity building, technical
                         assistance and training.

                         Component E – Contingent Emergency Response Component ($0 million)

                         In case of a major natural disaster, the Government may request the Bank to re-allocate project funds
                         to this component (which presently carries a zero allocation) to support response and reconstruction .
                         This component would allow the Government to request the Bank to cancel project funds from
                         Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) portfolio projects and designate them as IRM funds to be
                         engaged to partially cover emergency response and recovery costs. This component could also be
                         used to channel additional funds should they become available as a result of the emergency.

                         Disbursements under an Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) will be contingent
                         upon the fulfillment of the following conditions: (i) the Government of Bangladesh has determined
                         that an eligible crisis or emergency has occurred and the Bank has agreed and notified the
                         Government; (ii) the Ministry of Finance has prepared and adopted the Contingent Emergency
                         Response (CER) Implementation Plan that is agreed with the Bank; (iii) Bangladesh Water
                         Development Board has prepared, adopted, and disclosed safeguards instruments required as per
                         Bank guidelines for all activities from the CER Implementation Plan for eligible financing under the
                         CERC.
                         Disbursements would be made either against a positive list of critical goods and/or against the
                         procurement of works, and consultant services required to support the immediate response and
                         recovery needs of the GoB. All expenditures under this component, should it be triggered, will be in
                         accordance with BP/OP 8.0 and will be appraised, reviewed and found to be acceptable to the Bank
                         before any disbursement is made.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The study area is the coastal region of Bangladesh. The coastal region borders the Bay of Bengal
                         with 710 km coastal line and has three distinct geographic sections, the Sundarban mangrove forest
                         in the southwest, the very active delta in the central south, and the narrow coastal strip along the
                         Chittagong and Chittagong Hill Tracts area on the east. The coastal region of Bangladesh has 139
                         polders, which were constructed in late sixties to protect the land from saline water intrusion and to
                         increase crop production.

                         Of the 139 polders, 17 polders are proposed to be considered under this project using technical
                         criteria and environmental consideration. The selection of polders has been undertaken in
                         consultation with various level of stakeholders and development partners. The proposed 17 polders
                         belong to 6 coastal districts such as Khulna, Satkhira, Bagerhat, Pirojpur, Barguna and Patukhali.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
                         Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDI)
                         Nadia Sharmin (SASDC)



                                                                      Page 5 of 13
                         Md. Akhtaruzzaman (SASDS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes             An overall environmental assessment of the
                         BP 4.01                                         polder system and Environmental Management
                                                                         Framework (EMF) for the project are already
                                                                         under preparation.
                                                                         A provisional zero amount component
                                                                         (Component E) has been included in the project
                                                                         which will allow for rapid reallocation of loan
                                                                         proceeds during an emergency. The EMF will
                                                                         incorporate the guideline for dealing with
                                                                         emergency operation.
                                                                         The project will conduct polder specific
                                                                         Environmental Impact Assessment and
                                                                         Environmental Management Plan.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes             The coastal zone of Bangladesh falls in ten
                                                                         different bio-ecological zones namely the Ganges
                                                                         flood plain and major rivers, coastal marine
                                                                         water, Meghna flood plaion, Sundarbans,
                                                                         Chakaria Sundarbans, coastal plains, offshore
                                                                         islands and Meghna estauarine flood plain. There
                                                                         may be localized impact on the natural habitats
                                                                         especially on the fish spawning site and protected
                                                                         areas, during the implementation of the civil
                                                                         works. The impact will be determined during the
                                                                         selection process of the polders
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes             Sundarbans the largest Mangrove forest of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         South Asia is in close proximity of the 6 districts
                                                                         of 17 polders. Rehabilitation and reconstruction
                                                                         of polders may have indirect impact on the water
                                                                         flow quantity and pattern within the channels of
                                                                         Sundarbans. The technical studies will consider
                                                                         the flow changes criteria due to the reconstruction
                                                                         and rehabilitation of the polders.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes            Project works will require land acquisition and
                         4.12                                            population displacement for improvement of
                                                                         existing embankments, construction of retired
                                                                         embankments, construction of new water
                                                                         management structures, and construction of bank



                                                                 Page 6 of 13
                                                                                 protection works. BWDB has therefore prepared
                                                                                 the SMRPF for CEIP-I. It includes issues related
                                                                                 to Involuntary Resettlement, Indigenous Peoples
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 and social inclusion as well as gender. Among
                                                                                 other issues, the SMRPF includes (a) a legal
                                                                                 framework outlining the principles and guidelines
                                                                                 which will be used to acquire lands and mitigate
                                                                                 the adverse impacts, including those on
                                                                                 indigenous peoples; (b) facility for screening of
                                                                                 social safeguard issues related to involuntary
                                                                                 resettlement and indigenous peoples; (c)
                                                                                 mitigation principles, guidelines, and a policy
                                                                                 matrix in terms of different impact categories; (d)
                                                                                 a grievance redress procedure for the project
                                                                                 affected persons; (e) stakeholder consultation
                                                                                 framework; and (f) arrangement for monitoring
                                                                                 progress in the implementation of impact
                                                                                 mitigation plans. The SMRPF will provide the
                                                                                 basis to prepare Resettlement Action Plans and
                                                                                 IPPs for annual civil work programs under CEIP-
                                                                                 I.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                            Projects on International            Yes              The project is unlikely to have any adverse
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 impact. During preparation the EA will evaluate
                                                                                 any potential impact due to project activities.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Overall the project bears significant positive environmental aspects. It will increase the resilience
                              of vulnerable committees living in natural disaster prone coastal areas and it will develop the
                              capacity of BWDB in environmental management. The project’s physical intervention is expected
                              to reduce loss of crops and assets by withstanding storm surges, taking into account the impact of
                              climate change, and to decrease salinity intrusion which, in turn, will increase agricultural
                              production in the long run. Component A of the project (about 75% of total funding) will involve
                              embankment upgrading and rehabilitation with extensive earth work. Component B will support
                              the implementation of the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and the establishment of an
                              environmental monitoring system in BWDB to enable it to track improvement in environmental
                              performance of the polder system during implementation and after project completion.
                              Component C2 will support an independent supervision (possibly through third party monitoring)
                              of the EMP implementation.

                              Environmental impacts will be triggered from the following activities: upgrading embankments

                                                                         Page 7 of 13
                           (height increased and base widening), limited realignment, embankment slope and river bank
                           protection work by concrete block and vegetation, disposal of drainage substrate obtained from
                           drainage channels re-excavation and construction/repair and operation of hydraulic structures.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           These activities are expected to affect agricultural land, fish habitat, flora and fauna, physical and
                           cultural structure and livelihood of the people. Considering the sensitivity, extent and duration of
                           the impact, CEIP-I is a Category ‘A’ project according to the Bank’s safeguard classification.
                           Table 1 shows a summary of the environmental impacts obtained from the EIA for the four
                           polders out of the 17 polders that will be targeted under this project.

                           The coastal polders provide social protection to the communities in the region from flooding, tidal
                           inundations and salinity intrusion. The polder embankments also provide emergency shelter to
                           victims of riverbank erosion and flood inundations. As the embankments are safe structures and
                           serve also as roads, the slopes are often used by the poor and landless peoples and sometimes
                           socially influential persons for residential, commercial and community purposes without any
                           functional restrictions. Bank investment for improvement of these polders will involve acquisition
                           of land to accommodate improved design and displacement of people, largely the informal
                           embankment settlers. The World Bank policy on involuntary resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) has
                           therefore been triggered for this project. As none of the residents or likely affected persons within
                           the polders selected by CEIP Phase I is from the tribal communities (indigenous peoples), OP/BP
                           4.10 on Indigenous Peoples has not been triggered for CEIP-I.

                           Adverse social impacts of the polders to be part of the first group (i.e., the rehabilitation of 17
                           polders is expected to take place in four packages) for rehabiliation are related to land acquisition
                           and population displacement due to embankment upgrading and improvement of water control
                           structures. According to the social impact assessment as of February 2013 following the detailed
                           engineering design, a total of 259 ha of land have been proposed for acquisition affecting about
                           1,864 titled households in their land, structure, trees and fish culture areas. In addition, the project
                           is likely to cause the displacement of housing and livelih ood resources affecting 4,339 non-titled
                           households largely on existing embankments and to affect 184 common resource structures within
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the new right of way of the five polders.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             Preliminary analysis of the location and proposed design specification (including assessment of
                           the impacts of climate change) of 17 polders covered in this project shows that most of the polders
                           will not have significant impact on storm surge level and cumulative impact on other polders, as
                           they are located either on the bank of big river and sea or far from the coast on the northern side of
                           the Sundarbans. If realignment is necessary towards Sundarbans, sufficient set back has to be
                           provided to avoid erosion or any adverse impact on on the Sundarbans side. Only a few polders
                           (39/2C, 41/1, 43/2C, 47/2) might face slight impact of increasing storm surge level and cumulative
                           impact on other surrounding polders.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Several alternatives were considered during the design phase of the Project. These included ‘no-
                           project’ alternative and technical alternatives. The present situation of the polder is extremely
                           vulnerable to cyclones, storm surges, wave action, and climate changeeffects, and the polder
                           scheme is not in a state to provide required services particularly protection against tidal
                           inundation, efficient drainage, and minimizing the impact of cyclonic surges. It has been found the
                           project will bring reduction of drainage congestion, reduction of tidal flood/storm surge,

                                                                       Page 8 of 13
                          increasing flood free land type, increasing cropping intensity, increase of cropped area and crop
                          production, increase of fish pond and production and increasing employment opportunity.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Since CEIP-I is a rehabilitation project, no site alternatives were available to be considered.
                          However a comprehensive multi-criteria analysis was carried out to prioritize the polder
                          rehabilitation under CEIP-I. Once the problems being faced by the polder scheme and its
                          inhabitants had been identified, several technical alternatives were considered to address these
                          issues. These alternatives pertained to strengthening the polder embankment, protection of river
                          banks, protection of embankment slope, improving the sluices and their performance, and reducing
                          drainage congestion and water logging.

                           Necessary efforts have been made to minimize environmental and social impacts including land
                           acquisition and disruption of livelihoods. Land acquisition and displacement of people will take
                           places in cases of re-sectioning, retirement and construction of new embankments. The planned
                           key efforts to minimize impacts of the project interventions in the first year contract comprise of
                           the following:
                           •        Closing of open sections of embankments has been designed to use the original alignment
                           with provisions of bank protection.
                           •        Slope protection will be provided for existing sections vulnerable to immediate erosion
                           avoiding retirement and acquisition of additional land.
                           •        Embankment sections through villages, markets and lands of higher elevation have been
                           designed severally to avoid displacement.
                           •        Extensive consultations have been conducted with the affected communities and people
                           living along the embankment alignments to consider their views and incorporate them in the
                           polder design, as far as possible.
                           •        In sections with some constraints of construction of embankment in full section, retaining
                           wall will be constructed to avoid displacement of households and shops.
                           •        The crest level by sections and polders will be decided through technical analysis of
                           recurring events of floods and cyclonic storms.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The project will be implemented by the Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB) under
                           the Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR). The MoWR is the apex body of the government
                           responsible for development and management of the whole water resources of the country.
                           BWDBis the implementing arm of the MoWR in the executions of flood, drainage and irrigation
                           plans and development projects. The National Water Policy (1999), the Coastal Zone Policy
                           (2005), and the National Water Management Plan (2004) are major instruments guiding BWDB in
                           its operation. The MoWR will shoulder the responsibility on behalf of the Government of
                           Bangladesh for overall project management and coordination. For the day to day management of
                           the project, BWDB will rely on a Project Management Unit (PMU) at the headquarter and Field
                           Offices at the local level. The PMU will address the safeguard compliance issues through its
                           Social Environment and Communication Unit (SECU).

                          BWDB has developed an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) for the Project. The
                          EMF provides the guidelines to comply with national legislation and World Bank safeguards
                          policies, and defines all environmental requirements and management plans needed for the
                          reconstruction/rehabilitation of all polders as well as for the afforestation program. In addition,
                          BWDB has also conducted polder specific Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for polder


                                                                     Page 9 of 13
                         numbers 32, 33, 35/1 and 35/3 (polder selected for rehabilitation in the first batch for
                         rehabilitation) and recommended polder specific EMP. An Independent Consultant with
                         international experience reviewed the 4 EIAs. Polder specific consultations with community and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         stakeholders were carried out during the EMF and EIA. The views of the community have already
                         been incorporated in the EMP and project design.

                         Considering the substantial and possibly long term impacts of the project, the PMU will be staffed
                         with a Senior Environment Specialist in the Dhaka office and one or more environment specialists
                         at the field office. At least one environment specialist is expected to be on board by project
                         effectiveness. The contractor will ensure proper environmental management during project
                         implementation, the environment specialist of project supervision consultant will supervise the
                         implementation of EMP during project period. The participatory water management organizations
                         (WMO) will be trained to ensure environmental management during project operation. The SECU
                         Unit of BWDB will oversee the environmental management during project implementation and
                         operation.

                         The Senior Environmental Specialist will oversee the proper implementation of EMP and other
                         environmental management responsibilities. S/he will maintain liaison with WB safeguards team,
                         regulatory agencies, and other stakeholders during the project implementation. S/he has to be on
                         Board as soon the PMU is set up. S/He will be responsible for ensuring the adequacy of
                         environmental component in the Bidding Document (BOQ) and ensure the quality of
                         Environmental Action Plan (EAP) submitted by the contractor. The field level environmental
                         specialist should be on board before commencement of the field work.

                         Civil works under CEIP-I have been packaged into 4 packages; each including works in 4 or 5
                         polders. Social impacts will be identified when specific investments are designed for each
                         package. BWDB has developed a Social Management and Resettlement Policy Framework
                         (SMRPF) for the CEIP-I and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the first package of CEIP-I in
                         compliance with the World Bank policy on Involuntary Resettlements and the national law on land
Public Disclosure Copy




                         acquisition. The SMRPF will guide the preparation of social management plans (SMP) for future
                         investments and the RAP aims to mitigate adverse social impacts of the first package of CEIP-I.
                         The SMRPF includes a resettlement policy framework and a social inclusion/gender framework.
                         Social screening and social impact assessment will be carried out for future investments in line
                         with the SMRPF and SMPs like social action plans and RAPs will be prepared. The PMU will
                         have a Senior Social Specialist at its headquarters and Social Specialists in the field offices to
                         ensure application of the SMRPF for social safeguard compliance of the project interventions. An
                         independent monitor will be recruited to monitor the implementation of the RAPs and the SMRPF.

                         The construction contractors will have dedicated properly qualified and experienced, site-based
                         Environment Supervisors (ESs) at each construction site. The ESs will be responsible to
                         implement various aspects of the EMP particularly the mitigation measures to ensure that the
                         environmental impacts of the construction works remain within acceptable limits. The
                         Construction Supervision Consultants will have dedicated, properly qualified and experienced site-
                         based Environment and Social Monitor (ESM) at each construction site. The ESMs will monitor
                         and supervise implementation of E MP and SMP at the field level.

                         BWDB core unit has posts of 4 Assistant Chief and 2 Deputy Chief to oversee the overall
                         environmental compliance of BWDB implemented projects. Under CEIP-I, the SECU unit will
                         provide training to the BWDB people responsible for monitoring of environmental compliance.

                                                                  Page 10 of 13
                           Thus smooth transition to BWDB will happen to ensure environmental compliance during the
                           O&M after the project completion.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The population in the 6 coastal districts (Bagerhat, Khulna, Satkhira, Barguna, Patuakhali and
                           Pirojpur) in the exposed coast of Bangladesh is the prime beneficiary of the project. At least 8% of
                           this population is compounded within the polder embankments selected for improvement. The
                           local residents including peoples representatives, village leaders, farmers, traders, fishers, boat
                           operators and wage laborers have expressed their interest to the project. The primary stakeholders
                           of the project include the local farmers, business community and the affected persons, women
                           groups, among others. Secondary stakeholders include the community groups, fishermen,
                           boatmen and elected local government representatives. The other stakeholders include the
                           businessmen groups like contractors, sub-contractors and suppliers during the construction period.

                           The local potential affected persons along with local community leaders and other stakeholders
                           were consulted through group meetings and personal contact. During the preparation of the RAP,
                           PAPs and their communities have been informed, closely consulted, and encouraged to participate
                           in the meeting. The opinion of the different levels stakeholders regarding the project was sought
                           and considered in preparation of RAP and EMP. A total of 19 formal stakeholders meetings were
                           held with different communities along the right of way of which 3 meetings in polder 32, 5
                           meetings in polder 33, 4 meetings in polder 35/1, and 3 meetings in polder 35/3. Different types of
                           stakeholders i.e. concerned UP Chairman/member, Teacher, Imam, Local Community Leader,
                           Political Leader, farmer, shop keepers and other affected people attended the sessions. One
                           national level workshop was held on February 28, 2013 on 4 EIAs, EMP, EMF, SMRPF and RAP.

                           Consultation with the stakeholders will be continued during implementation of the project. During
                           the implementation phase, the Polder Committees and Water Management Organizations (WMOs)
                           will be sought to provide cooperation from various stakeholders in the decision-making and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation of RAPs and EMPs. Through public consultations, the PAPs will be informed that
                           they have a right to grievance redress from the BWDB. The areas for participation of the primary
                           stakeholders include: (i) identify alternatives to avoid or minimize resettlement; (ii) assist in
                           inventory and assessment of losses; (iii) assist developing alternative options for relocation and
                           income restoration; (iv) provide inputs for entitlement provisions; and (v) identify likely conflict
                           areas with resettlers.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        14-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     15-Feb-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        05-Apr-2013
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bangladesh                                                         18-Feb-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        10-Feb-2013


                                                                     Page 11 of 13
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Feb-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bangladesh                                                       18-Feb-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?




                                                                    Page 12 of 13
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Maria Sarraf
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Zia Al Jalaly (RSA)                          Date: 15-Apr-2013
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst (SM)               Date: 15-Apr-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 13 of 13
