                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA3874
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Apr-2013, 16-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Russian Federation                 Project ID:    P126283
                            Project Name:      SOCIAL INCLUSION THROUGH SPORTS (P126283)
                            Task Team          Sarah G. Michael
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          22-Apr-2013                        Estimated   13-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSSO                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Other social development (50%), Other human development (20%), Participation
                                              and civic engagement (20%), Other urban development (10 %)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     150.00           Total Bank Financing:                    70.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     80.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                        70.00
                              Total                                                                                       150.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to enhance social inclusion for selected disadvantaged groups
                           in pilot municipalities, through increased access to, and use of, sports and recreation activities and
                           services.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                        Page 1 of 7
                         The proposed project will have three components:

                         Component One: Promoting Social Integration of Disadvantaged Groups through Sport ($22.9
Public Disclosure Copy




                         million). This component is aimed at strengthening the linkage between social inclusion and sports.
                         It draws on lessons from both national and international good practice to develop a methodology and
                         strengthen human capacities to deliver sports and physical culture programming designed to promote
                         social integration for disadvantaged groups. A competitive financing scheme for supporting
                         innovative social inclusion through sports activities implemented by local civil society organizations
                         and volunteer groups is also envisioned. The component will also include communications activities
                         to reach out to disadvantaged people as well as to promote wider awareness of social inclusion in
                         society at large. No civil works are anticipated to be financed under this component. The component
                         comprises the following four subcomponents.

                         Subcomponent 1a) Applied Analysis and Learning of Best Practices for Social Inclusion through
                         Sports. This subcomponent will focus on analysis and embedding in project activities best practice
                         from work nationally and internationally under the aegis of social inclusion through sports.

                         Subcomponent 1b) Building Human Capacity to Work with Disadvantaged Groups. The objective of
                         this sub-component is to enhance the skills and quality of human resources for social inclusion
                         through sports in the target municipalities as a means of improving the relevance and effectiveness of
                         the services they provide to vulnerable groups.

                         Subcomponent 1c) Sports and Social Integration activities for Disadvantaged Groups. This
                         subcomponent will support the implementation of social inclusion through sports activities for
                         project beneficiary groups. It will include sports and physical training activities as well as
                         leadership, confidence-building and other personal development activities, counseling, healthy
                         lifestyles promotion, peer mentoring, other social and economic learning opportunities, and other
                         social and cultural activities and events.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 1d) Public Awareness of Social Exclusion. Social exclusion of vulnerable groups is
                         often high in Russia and considerable prejudice and social stigma still exists, including around
                         people’s participation in sports, social and other community events. This sub-component will
                         promote the development of public information campaigns aimed at promoting the social inclusion
                         of vulnerable groups in sports and overall community life.

                         Component Two: Development of Accessible Sports Infrastructure ($120.85 million). This
                         component will support the development of accessible sports infrastructure as a means of improving
                         the access of vulnerable groups to social inclusion opportunities. An estimated total of up to six new
                         accessible sports centers will be constructed. The specific infrastructure to be supported by the
                         project will be depend on local needs, population size, potential to reach vulnerable groups, as well
                         as on the affordability and financial sustainability of long-term operation and maintenance of the
                         facilities.

                         Component Three: Project Management ($6.25 million). In compliance with the RF Government
                         Resolution No. 43 of 28 January 2005, a Project Implementation Unit has been recruited by the
                         MinSports to carry out the day-to-day management of the project, including procurement, financial
                         management, monitoring and evaluation, project communications and reporting functions. This
                         component will finance (a) operational costs of the project (including PIU staff salaries, office


                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         consumables, utilities, in-country travel, office and vehicle maintenance, implementation of the
                         project communications strategy etc.); (b) annual audits; and (c) monitoring and evaluation surveys
                         and studies. The project intends to recruit a specialist firm for M&E to undertake intensive M&E
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (including regular beneficiary assessment, tracer studies, opinion surveys, etc.) to maximize the
                         learning impact of this pilot project.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in six municipalities: Bryansk (Bryansk region); Krasnoyarsk
                         (Krasnoyarsk region); Electrostal (Moscow region); Novosibirsk (Novosibirsk region); Tomsk
                         (Tomsk region); Izhevsk (the Republic of Udmurtia). All project interventions will take place in
                         urban landscape. There will be no impact on natural habitats.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexei Slenzak (ECSEN)
                         Sophia V. Georgieva (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              The Project anticipates construction of six new
                          BP 4.01                                            sport facilities. The potential environmental and
                                                                             social impacts of these activities will be mitigated
                                                                             by good construction practices followed by
                                                                             contractors at the construction sites. A social
                                                                             assessment was conducted and will guide
                                                                             stakeholder consultation and dialogue on Project
                                                                             construction. An Environmental Management
                                                                             Framework (EMF) was prepared and will be used
                                                                             for screening and management of environmental
                                                                             impacts. Environmental Assessment (OVOS) will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             be undertaken during preparation of the design
                                                                             for each site/facility. Based on the results of this
                                                                             assessment, site-specific EMPs will be developed
                                                                             for each project site. EMPs will outline site-
                                                                             specific mitigation activities, institutional
                                                                             responsibilities and timelines for their
                                                                             implementation, and a monitoring plan. Separate
                                                                             consultations will be organized to discuss every
                                                                             site-specific EMP.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                          BP 4.11




                                                                     Page 3 of 7
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes                This policy was triggered as a precaution. All
                            4.12                                                 project activities will be implemented on public
                                                                                 land (municipal or federal). Project activities
                                                                                 which require private land acquisition will not be
                                                                                 eligible for financing. Minsports conducted initial
                                                                                 pre-screening of project sites to check for
                                                                                 squatters/informal use of land, and has
                                                                                 communicated World Bank safeguard
                                                                                 requirements to regional and municipal
                                                                                 authorities. While no informal land use is
                                                                                 expected, a Resettlement Policy Framework was
                                                                                 prepared during project preparation should any be
                                                                                 found, and will be added as an Annex to the
                                                                                 Project Operational Manual.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The Project is not expected to pose any significant adverse environmental concerns. It foresees
                              the construction of six new sport centers. All project activities will take place in urban landscapes
                              and their potential adverse environmental impacts will be minor and site-specific. Effects on the
                              environment resulting from construction activities may include dust, noise, and other construction-
                              related local and temporary nuisances such as temporary increases in heavy vehicle traffic. To
                              mitigate such adverse environmental impacts, contractors will be required to follow
                              environmentally sound construction practices and include environmental safety requirements into
                              the technical specifications and contracts for civil works. Compliance with such instructions will
                              be monitored during implementation. Another group of "indirect" and longer term negative
                              impacts may be associated with increased pressure on the environment due to increase of
                              attendance of the area and municipal traffic.

                              Mitigation measures may include the design, construction and/or upgrading of relevant municipal
                              infrastructure (access roads and parking lots, waste collection bins, etc.) and recommendations for
                              municipal authorities to minimize negative impacts. To guide the risk mitigation measures for
                              different sites, an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was prepared as part of Project
                              preparation. This EMF defines all environmental requirements and procedures, suggests
                              appropriate arrangements for the evaluation of environmental impacts, and recommends
                              appropriate remediation and mitigation measures to be followed by contractors working on each of


                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                           the project sites when implementing interventions under the Project.

                           No land acquisition or resettlement is expected under the project. Given the scale of construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                           activity, a Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared to provide guidance on the process of
                           consultations with affected communities, the establishment of grievance and redress mechanisms,
                           and the process of preparing RAPs, should any impact on formal or informal assets arise during
                           implementation.

                           At the time of Appraisal no physical cultural resources were found on the sites selected for
                           construction (i.e. none registered in the Russian Federation Cultural Heritage Register) as
                           determined by the Social Assessment through interviews with municipal authorities.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             No major potential indirect and/or long term impacts are foreseen.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The RF Ministry of Sports, which oversees all federal sports institutions, is the project
                           counterpart and will be responsible for Project implementation and coordinating efforts of the
                           municipalities and other stakeholders involved. The Ministry does not currently have in-house
                           capacity for environmental and social safeguard issues and has developed the EMF and RPF, as
                           well as the Social Assessment, using external environmental and social expertise. The
                           implementation of the project will be undertaken by Foundation for Investment Projects of St.
                           Petersburg (FISP), which has experience in implementation of Bank-financed projects. FISP has
                           an experienced environmental specialist to ensure effective screening and preparation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           environmental and social management plans as required and regular supervision of safeguard
                           issues.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The approved versions of the RPF and EMF were displayed online in the six participating
                           municipalities prior to appraisal with a corresponding announcement in local newspapers. Public
                           consultations on the RPF and EMF were completed by the MinSports prior to disclosure.
                           Notification of consultation(s) was done in each municipality, and detailed lists of participants and
                           proceedings were then published on municipal and MinSports websites. The main stakeholders
                           included in consultations included the representatives of the three key target beneficiary groups (i.
                           e. people with disabilities of all categories; young people aged 15-29 years with incomes below
                           subsistence level and; at-risk children and adolescents aged 6-15 years), municipal and oblast sport
                           authorities, departments of social protection, youth policy, drug control, education, sport and
                           recreation centers, and civil society and private sectors representatives interested by the project.
                           These framework documents in Russian language were shared with local residents, local
                           municipal authorities and other relevant stakeholders (e.g. local sports authorities, construction
                           authorities) for their comments/feedback before appraisal. Site specific consultation on EMPs/
                           RAPs for identified sub projects will be organized during social assessment if design
                           documentation, including environmental assessment (EA/OVOS) is prepared. In case EA/OVOS
                           is not ready by the time of social assessment consultations, separate consultations will be


                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                           organized. EA/OVOS in Russian language will be available for comments prior to consultations.
                           All documentation on public consultations (e.g. announcements, invitations, list of participants,
                           minutes/summaries and comments received) will be attached to EA/EMP/EMF for Infoshop
Public Disclosure Copy




                           disclosure.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       21-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    05-Nov-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Russian Federation                                                13-Mar-2012
                           Comments: EMF disclosed at national level on 03/13/2012; separate regional level disclosures in
                                         six project regions also took place between March and April 2012
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       06-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    05-Nov-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Russian Federation                                                13-Mar-2012
                           Comments: RPF disclosed at national level on 03/13/2012; separate regional level disclosures in
                                         six project regions also took place between March and April 2012
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?

                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Sarah G. Michael
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                            Date: 16-Jul-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Elisabeth Huybens (SM)                         Date: 16-Jul-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
