                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA1211
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Aug-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Bolivia                                 Project ID:                       P127743
                              Project Name:                   Rural Alliances Project II (P127743)
                              Task Team Leader:               David Tuchschneider
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 27-Aug-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:             23-Oct-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  LCSAR                                   Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%), Agricultural extension and research (20%), Agro-industry,
                                                              marketing, and tra de (10%)
                              Theme:                          Rural markets (50%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural policies and institutions (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                           0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                50.00
                                   Municipalities of Borrowing Country                                                                                          3.00
                                   Local Farmer Organizations                                                                                                   7.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                      60.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? Yes

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The project development objective is to improve market access for small rural producers in selected areas of the country. To achieve this, the
                              Project will support the creation and maintenance of productive alliances between rural small-producer organizations (SPOs) and effective value-
Public Disclosure Copy




                              adding buyers (intermediaries, wholesalers, transformers). Furthermore, it will empower rural producers through the strengthening of self-
                              managed grass-roots organizations; increase their access to productive assets, technology and financial services in order to improve production;
                              enhance environmental sustainability of production practices; and promote more effective, responsive and accountable service provision at the
                              local level. The proposed Project is a follow on operation to the successful PAR I, which tested the model for improving market access.

                              3. Project Description

                              Component 1: Institutional Support.
                              This component will finance technical assistance and training to provide the institutional and organizational support needed for the creation and
                              consolidation of productive alliances at the local level. The component will give a particular focus to the development of the institutional capacity of
                              small producer organizations to negotiate and manage new marketing arrangements with the private sector. The component's main results will be
                              the formation or consolidation of rural productive alliances and the preparation of viable alliance plans. To achieve these aims, the component will
                              (a) support the implementation of a project communications campaign; (b) build capacities of small producers and their organizations to negotiate
                              and manage Alliances and to improve their production processes; (c) support the process of call for proposals, the preparation of pre-feasibility
                              and feasibility studies and their evaluation and approval; and (d) assist with the organizational arrangements for the formalization of the alliances.
                              The component has the following sub-components: (a) Communication and dissemination; (b) Institutional capacity support; (c) Capacity building
                              for service providers and local governments; and (d) Appraisal of Alliances.

                              Component 2: Implementation of Rural Alliances.
                              The aim of this component is to provide support for the implementation of the alliances prepared under Component 1.The component's main
                              results will be: (a) achievement of objectives agreed by producers and buyers in their alliance plan; (b) introduction of technological innovations
                              and improved environmental management in the production process of SPO members; (c) access to follow-up credit from formal financial
                              institutions; and (d) implementation of complementary public infrastructure. To achieve these outputs, the project will co-finance three types of
                              alliances:
                              a)          for newly participating SPOs in agricultural alliances (including non-wood forest products), Producer Organization Subprojects including
                              the provision of goods, small works and technical assistance services up to the storage phase. This type of alliance may include complementary
                              public works under Municipal Subprojects; b) for newly participating SPOs in non-agricultural alliances, provision of targeted technical assistance
                              services; and c) for previously financed SPOs, provision of targeted technical assistance services, including support for developing investment
                              proposals and presenting them for funding to formal financial institutions. The component has the following sub-components: (a) Producer
                              organization subprojects, (b) Municipal subprojects, and (c) Support to alliance implementation.

                              Component 3: Project Management.
                              The component will support the operation of a Project coordination team in EMPODERAR’s central office and five dedicated Regional Operating
                                                                                                                                                                 Page 1 of 5
                         Units (UORs) in order to achieve efficient, effective and transparent Project implementation, ensure quality in the identification, preparation and
                         implementation of alliances, maintain a solid monitoring and evaluation system and implement a public information system. The component will
                         also finance studies related to both improvements and adjustments in Project implementation and to policy and regulatory issues. The component
                         will finance goods, consulting and non-consulting services and operating costs for project administration, M&E, communications campaigns,
                         studies, fiduciary and safeguards administration, transparency and accountability. The component has the following sub-components: (a)
                         Implementation management, (b) Public information system, and (c) Studies.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project will take place in five distinct zones across the country, each managed by a Regional Operating Unit (UOR): (i) the La Paz-Beni area
                         ("Norte"), comprising temperate and sub-tropical valleys and lowland municipalities in the departments of La Paz and Beni; (ii) the "Valles" area in
                         the valley region of the department of Cochabamba; (iii) the "Tropico" area in Santa Cruz and Beni, composed of tropical municipalities in said
                         departments; (iv) the "Chaco" area, including municipalities in Santa Cruz, Chuquisaca and Tarija; and (v) the "Tarija" valley area comprising the
                         southern valley of said Department. These areas have been selected using indicators which identify poor municipalities (Vulnerability Index, VAM
                         2, 3and 4), and growth potential. The list excludes the county's poorest and richest municipalities (VAN 5 and 1 respectively). A definitive list of
                         eligible municipalities will be discussed at appraisal and confirmed at negotiations.

                         The Departments include a variety of ecological regions spanning from high-altitude valleys to tropical humid forests. PAR I has already operated
                         in all these ecological zones, yet the proposed Project area encompasses new municipalities. The Borrower is finalizing a partial EA that
                         complements and updates the earlier assessments of environmental characteristics and problems relevant to the Project by each ecological
                         region, including projected concerns of climate vulnerability.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSSO)
                         Tuuli Johanna Bernardini (LCSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             Yes             No large-scale impacts are expected given the limited, community-based nature of
                                                                                         Project activities. Most alliances will be dedicated to agricultural products and
                                                                                         limited to primary production. On average, producer subprojects that form alliances
                                                                                         will include 25-40 smallholder production units and one line of production, for
                                                                                         example organic quinoa, coffee, different fruits, honey, pork, poultry or handcrafts.
                                                                                         A number of associated small municipal public works will also be financed,
                                                                                         including road rehabilitation and improvement, and water and irrigation. A partial
                                                                                         EA was conducted by the Borrower and the respective report disclosed adequately
                                                                                         within the country and by the Bank in the InfoShop. The EA report includes a
                                                                                         revised and improved Environmental Management Plan (EMP) at the Project level
                                                                                         that will be applied to the subprojects as instructed in the Environmental
                                                                                         Management Manual. The latter will be included as an annex to the Operational
                                                                                         Manual.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                     Yes             The EMP includes a comprehensive exclusion list to be applied at the early stage
                                                                                         of subproject evaluation in order to prevent any negative impacts on natural
                                                                                         habitats. The EA report provides maps of all the national and municipal protected
                                                                                         areas within the Project's administrative boundaries. It further provides maps of all
                                                                                         implied RAMSAR as well as Important Bird Areas (IBAs). No activities will be
                                                                                         eligible within the core zones of these areas, but specific activities such as
                                                                                         beekeeping can be financed within their buffer zones, provided pertinent
                                                                                         authorizations have been obtained and the activities are compatible with the area's
                                                                                         Management Plan.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                              Yes             The EMP contemplates deforestation risks of humid or dry forests related with
                                                                                         expansion of croplands or pastures that might be induced by some of the
                                                                                         beneficiary rural alliances or other Project effects. On the other hand, rural
                                                                                         alliances focused on eco-tourism and gathering of non-timber forest products could
                                                                                         effectively promote natural habitat conservation by rural producers.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                         Yes             As in PAR I, pest management is expected to be one of the main challenges of
                                                                                         environmental management of PAR II and the EA includes an integrated pest
                                                                                         management plan. An important experience of and lessons learned on promotion
                                                                                         of IPM were gained through PAR I. To promote continuity for strengthening
                                                                                         environmentally sound IPM, EMPODERAR has produced high-quality training and
                                                                                         dissemination materials, and is committed to providing continuing training on the
                                                                                         subject. It is expected, based on the experience on PAR I, that an important
                                                                                         proportion of Alliances will promote organic agriculture.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11          Yes             Some rural alliances involving tourism could benefit from, and perhaps help protect
                                                                                         or restore important archaeological, historical, or other cultural property.
                                                                                         Conversely, poorly-managed tourism could damage fragile sites or objects of
                                                                                         cultural interest. Civil works such as roads and irrigation canals could possibly
                                                                                         uncover significant cultural property. Management plans in individual subprojects
                                                                                         will be developed to manage specific issues if identified. The EA includes related
                                                                                         operational guidance to secure appropriate precautionary activities and
                                                                                         coordination with the competent national authority. Operational instructions are
                                                                                         included also for potential chance finds.

                                                                                                                                                                   Page 2 of 5
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                    Yes              Given that the overwhelming majority of Project beneficiaries (64% of the targeted
                                                                                                 population) identifies itself as indigenous, the Project as a whole is considered an
                                                                                                 Indigenous Peoples Project as per OP/BP 4.10. Specific measures for
                                                                                                 encouraging alliances with minority groups in the lowlands will be enacted. Project
                                                                                                 documents and the Operational Manual will include key procedures and activities
                                                                                                 to ensure culturally adequate implementation, including the realization of regular
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 consultations at the local, regional and national levels.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              Yes              This safeguard is triggered to ensure proper care is taken, , to avoid involuntary
                                                                                                 resettlement in the municipal investments sub-component. As some subprojects
                                                                                                 may require land acquisition for alliance purposes, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                 Framework is being finalized before Appraisal. No civil works will be identified
                                                                                                 before appraisal.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        No               This safeguard is not triggered as the Project will not finance large dams that
                                                                                                 would demand the triggering. The Project may, however, financing for dams that
                                                                                                 are less than 8 meters in height and for which generic safety measures designed
                                                                                                 by qualified engineers will be included in the Operational Manual. Subprojects that
                                                                                                 rely on the performance of an existing dam or a dam under construction will be
                                                                                                 deemed ineligible.
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP        No               The activities under the Project do not involve international waterways.
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60            No               No project activities are contemplated in disputed areas.


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any potential l arge scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                   No large-scale, significant or irreversible negative impacts are expected from Project activities given that they are limited in scope and
                                 community-based by nature. Same applies to minor associated municipal works such as road or bridge improvement and water provision or
                                 irrigation systems that can be financed on demand basis.

                                 This view is backed by the main results of an Independent Environmental Assessment that the Bank financed to review environmental
                                 management of PAR I in order to draw lessons and recommendations for PAR II. The executive summary of the case study concludes that: “…
                                 the project is not generating significant negative effects on people's health and/or natural resources. Possible environmental impacts of
                                 supported alliances are limited in terms of territorial extent and severity, basically due to the type and scale of production systems involved.
                                 Subprojects with potential serious negative impacts have been effectively excluded from the operation during the screening proposals at the
                                 beginning of the evaluation process. Therefore, the review results in a satisfactory level of compliance with all active safeguards and with the
                                 domestic legal framework.? Rather, the proposed Project is expected to have positive socio-environmental impacts as it promotes
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 environmentally friendly productive activities such as organic farming and IPM. Further, the Project will facilitate related capacity building, and
                                 environmental concerns are integrated along the subproject cycle, including an improved environmental monitoring system.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                   Not relevant due to the small scale and geographic distribution of the Project activities; at this stage the actual Project activities or their
                                 location have not been identified. The partial EA applies a framework approach to socio-environmental management.
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                  Not relevant due to the small scale and geographic distribution of the Project activities. Further, the Project is a repeater based on a
                                 successful predecessor.
                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                                  and implement the measures described.
                                   During the last year of PAR I implementation, the Borrower started to review the functionality and effectiveness of the applied environmental
                                 management instruments. Various workshops and meetings were organized under the leadership of EMPODERAR's national office for this
                                 purpose, calling together the environmental specialists based on the regional operating units (UORs) and consultants that have provided
                                 technical assistance and aided in the supervision of activities carried out by beneficiary producer groups. Further, the Bank hired an
                                 Independent Environmental Assessment (IEA) for PAR I in order to audit implementation of the Bank's safeguards and the Project
                                 environmental management instruments.

                                 All the named activities have resulted in overall acceptable conclusions on the Project's environmental performance as stated above.
                                 Nevertheless, a number of opportunities for improvement were also identified in order to enhance effectiveness and efficiency of the
                                 environmental subproject cycle, including specific instruments, design and implementation of mitigation measures, environmental monitoring
                                 and continued technical support to the beneficiaries. Consequently, the environmental specialists at the UORs have been given greater
                                 responsibility over the environmental quality of the full alliance portfolio within each region. Many tasks that used to belong to consultants who
                                 were hired to support producer groups to prepare their environmental assessments and management instruments will be assigned to the
                                 regional environmental specialist(s), including continued technical support and environmental monitoring. There will be more and enhanced
                                 capacity building on environmental aspects addressed to all involved stakeholder groups, especially on Integrated Pest Management.

                                 The Borrower has obtained an environmental license from the national environmental authority as required by national legislation. It has also
                                 finalized and published the EA to assess potential environmental impacts of the Project related with expected/eligible Project activities and the
                                 revised geographic and eco-regional Project coverage. Consequently, the Project-level EMP now reflects lessons learned and improvements
                                 recommended by the above described IEA. For example, the EA includes standard technical descriptions of certain key mitigation measures

                                                                                                                                                                              Page 3 of 5
                           such as septic tanks and biodigestors. Further standardization and streamlining of well-performing mitigation measures will be continued by and
                           beyond the PAR II effectiveness.

                           The municipal investment subcomponent will be implemented by the national Productive and Social Investment Fund (Fondo de Inversión
                           Productiva y Social, FPS), and a separate environmental management framework has been prepared for the municipal investments and is
                           included in the Project-level EMP. The FPS has a small environmental unit in its National Office and has recently hired a number of regionally
                           based environmental supervisors. EMPODERAR will coordinate environmental management efforts with these professionals.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           About 64% of the target population self identifies as belonging to an indigenous group. This proportion is smaller than in PAR I, where 70% of
                           the population identified itself as such. PAR-EMPODERAR has shown great capacity to work with indigenous producers and their organization,
                           as shown by the fact that indigenous producers constitute 90% of the actual direct beneficiaries. The proportion of indigenous people in the
                           target population, the levels of participation achieved so far in PAR I and the implemented mechanisms for consultation at local, regional and
                           national levels allows for the designation of the whole Project as an Indigenous Peoples Project.

                           About 32% of direct beneficiary households in PAR I are headed by women. Additional measures to increase women's participation that will be
                           applied in the Project include: specific activities in the communications campaign targeted at women (language specific andsite specific);
                           additional technical assistance, including separate workshops, to help women's groups apply and compete for funding; and an emphasis on
                           training women in Producer Organizations. Project personnel will also receive further training in gender specific issues.

                           As part of Project preparation, the Borrower conducted a comprehensive Social Assessment (SA) which included extensive stakeholder
                           consultations in all seven new areas covered by PAR II: “Nor and Sud Cinti? (Chuquisaca), “Nor and Sud Yungas? (La Paz), “Nor and sud
                           Chichas? (Potosí), “Valles centrales? (Tarija), “Valles meso térmicos? (Santa Cruz), “Pampas? (Beni) and “Norte amazónico? (Pando). The
                           workshops were held between March 16 and March 23, 2012 in the municipalities of Camargo (Chuquisaca), Chulumani (La Paz), Tupiza
                           (Potosí), Tarija (Tarija), Mairana (Santa Cruz), Trinidad (Beni) and Cobija (Pando), involving a total of 457 participants (potential beneficiaries,
                           local authorities, farmers’ representatives, campesino and indigenous organizations, and NGOs). In addition, a consultation of 169 beneficiaries
                           of PAR I was conducted in the municipalities of Yacuiba (Chaco de Tarija), Camiri (Chaco, Santa Cruz), Buena Vista (Santa Cruz) and San
                           Javier (Santa Cruz). This process aimed at identifying the social benefits and risks of the current operation and gathering lessons learned to be
                           applied in PAR II.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders in regard to this project are mostly indigenous rural inhabitants, in particular small farmers who are associated or
                           become organized as a result of Project opportunities. Most of the farmers are Aymara or Quechua, though use of indigenous languages varies
                           and most people are bilingual. In the lowland municipalities of La Paz, Beni, Santa Cruz and Tarija there are small indigenous groups practicing
                           varied combinations of slash and burn agriculture and traditional forest use, though timber exploitation is growing. Most of the indigenous and
                           campesino groups are well organized at several levels (local, regional, national) and some of their organizations have important roles in
                           government. Other stakeholders are buyers entering into alliances and municipal authorities, when they participate through public
                           infrastructure provision. Secondary stakeholders are goods and service providers who are recruited either by EMPODERAR or Producer
                           Organizations, and who will receive training to facilitate handling of Project rules and relations with beneficiaries. Leaders of higher level
                           indigenous and campesino organizations play an important role in providing oversight, but have occasionally attempted to control the flow of
                           funds to grassroots organizations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Public consultations on environmental and social aspects of the Project were held through 12 workshops carried out during the second half of
                           March, 2012 in the municipalities that will be covered by the Project. Workshops were held both with actual PAR I beneficiaries and potential
                           PAR II beneficiaries, as well as with other stakeholders (mostly local authorities). The EA includes a comprehensive annex that describes these
                           consultations and lists the participants, and full documentation is available in the Project's website. The EA report, the SA, and the
                           Resettlement Framework have been disclosed by the Borrower at the PAR website and by the Bank at InfoShop. Furthermore, the documents
                           are available at the national and regional PAR-EMPODERAR offices.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                               31-Jul-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                           02-Aug-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                            10-Aug-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                               31-Jul-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                           31-Jul-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                            10-Aug-2012
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                               31-Jul-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                           31-Jul-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                            10-Aug-2012
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                            Yes


                                                                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 5
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    31-Jul-2012
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                02-Aug-2012
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 10-Aug-2012
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                              If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                              If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are                   Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                              Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                              Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                              If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by           Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the             Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                              Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for              Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language             Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for          Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard           Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                     David Tuchschneider
                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                       Name Renato Nardello (SM)                                                        Date: 10-Aug-2012




                                                                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 5
