                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/28/2013                                    Report No.: AC6852
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Afghanistan                          Project ID: P120397
Project Name: Afghanistan Agricultural Inputs Project (AAIP)
Task Team Leader: Johannes Georges Pius Jansen
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 7, 2013         Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2013
Managing Unit: SASDA                          Lending Instrument:
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (40%);Crops (25%);Central government
administration (25%);Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (10%)
Theme: Nutrition and food security (35%);Export development and competitiveness
(28%);Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (25%);Infrastructure services
for private sector development (10%);e-Services (2%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                        0.00
         Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                         74.73
                                                                       74.73
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]       No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is strengthened institutional capacity for safety and
reliability of agricultural inputs and sustainable production of certified wheat seed.

3. Project Description
The project design structure consists of four (4) components:
 Component A: Improved Seed Production and Certification. This component aims to
strengthen a sustainable, commercially viable, and technically efficient seed production
and certification system. The project will focus on strengthening seed production and
distribution for wheat – the country's main staple crop – while supporting other food
crops including vegetables and grain legum where appropriate. The project will cover the
entire seed chain beginning with research in variety selection to generate breeder seed,
production of foundation and registered seeds from breeder seed, and multiplication of
registered seed into certified seed. In addition, the project will encourage compliance
with the seed industry regulatory framework comprising the national seed policy, the
seed law, and accompanying seed rules and regulations. Component A is organized into 3
sub-components - Varietal Selection and Production of Breeder Seed, Production of
Foundation and Registered Seed, and Coordination of Seed Sector.

 Component B: Plant Quarantine Networks and Quality Control for Agro-chemicals.
This component aims to build and strengthen institutional capacity and physical
infrastructure required for quality control of agrochemicals and plant quarantine. Project
activities will focus on preventing marketing of banned, hazardous, sub-standard, and
unreliable pesticides and fertilizers, as well as preventing introduction and spread of
quarantine pest into the Country. This would be achieved through facilitating
enforcement of the recently finalized Pesticides and Plant Quarantine Acts and
Regulations. The goal is to comply with international standards for quality control of
agrochemicals and plant quarantine practices. Component B is organized into 2 sub-
components - Quality Control for Agrochemicals and Plant Quarantine Networks.

 Component C: Input Delivery Systems. This component will begin with the
implementation of two comprehensive in-depth surveys to collect data that will be
analyzed to develop a plan of action for investment activities in inputs delivery systems.
The first survey involves a detailed account of farm level production (input-output)
activities for wheat and other major crops. The second survey will focus on input
distribution networks/chains for major agricultural inputs. By mid-term review (MTR) of
the project, data from these surveys would have been analyzed to develop a feasible plan
of action for investment in input delivery systems.

 Component D: Project Implementation and Management. The project will be
implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL). The
following main technical Directorates from the MAIL side and other major actors are/will
be involved in respectively the preparation and implementation of the project: (i) for
Component A (Improved Seed Production and Certification): Agricultural Research
Institute of Afghanistan (ARIA), Improved Seeds Enterprise (ISE), National Seed Board
(NSB), Afghanistan National Seed Organization (ANSOR), International Centre for
Improvement of Maize and Wheat (CIMMYT); (ii) for Component B (Plant Quarantine
Networks and Quality Control for Agro-chemicals): Plant Protection and Quarantine
Directorate (PPQD) and Food Quality Control and Agricultural Inputs Directorate
(FQCAID); (iii) for Component C (Improve and Expand Input Delivery Systems):
FQCAID; and (iv) for Component D: (Project Management, Coordination, Monitoring &
Evaluation): Technical Deputy Minister's Office under which the Project Management
Unit (PMU) will resort. Moreover, the project will establish links with the Extension
Directorate and the Private Sector Directorate.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project sites will partially overlap with those of the NHLP, OFWMP and IRDP.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Asta Olesen (SASDS)
   Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDI)
  Mr Abdul Mohammad Durani (SASDS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

  Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
  The judicious and safe use of fertilizers and other agrochemicals (pesticides, fungicides,
herbicides etc) is a requirement to improve the generally low levels of agricultural
productivity in Afghanistan, increase farmers' incomes and improve food security in the
country. However, both fertilizers and other agrochemicals nearly entirely imported and
often of unreliable quality. Afghanistan currently lacks the legal and regulatory
frameworks, as well as the infrastructure to exercise and enforce quality control for
fertilizers and other agro-chemicals. Farmers' access to inputs is often insufficient and
knowledge regarding their safe transport, storage, use and disposal remains weak. In
addition, agricultural inputs delivery networks remain underdeveloped, weakly regulated,
and often are of a rather monopolistic nature. Together these factors may lead to adverse
human health effects during crop production and consumption, contamination of the
environmental resources (soils, water, air) and negative economic impact.

 An ESMF and a Pest Management Plan (PMP) have been developed to effectively
address the above environmental and social concerns and opportunities resulting from the
use of fertilizers and other agrochemicals. The project itself is not promoting the use of
fertilizers and other agrochemicals - rather it aims at strengthening the legal and
institutional framework needed for safety and reliability of fertilizers and other
agrochemicals. Therefore, the social and environmental impacts of the project are
expected to be positive. Against this background and in addition to an Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF), a detailed Pest Management Plan (PMP has
also been developed. The ESMF sets out specific mitigation and enhancement measures
to address the social and environmental aspects of project interventions, including
safeguards screening guidelines for sub-projects. Each subproject will undergo a review
process to screen for sensitive environmental/social issues. Sub-projects with attributes
registered on the 'negative list' will be ineligible for support. The PMP addresses the
project's concerns relative to the risks associated with the use of agrochemicals in
Afghanistan to deal with the control of pests and diseases. The PPMP is compliant with
the World Bank Safeguard Policies on Pest Management (OP 4.09 and BP4.01 Annex C)
and consistent with the priorities for agricultural investments and policies under the
National Agricultural Development Framework (NADF), implemented by the Ministry of
Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock in collaboration with the Development Partners.

 To adequately address the key safeguard issues, the following safeguards activities and
measures are proposed: (i) implementation of the PMP; (ii) enhancing the skills and
abilities of farmers, through training in appropriate technologies, including Integrated
Pest Management (IPM) approaches in collaboration with other projects; (iii) providing
guidelines for establishment of a Grievance Redress Mechanism in the project as well as
guidelines for public consultations; (iv) development of a Pesticide Poisoning Training
Manual; and (v) development of a set of Occupational Health and Safety Guidelines.

 No land acquisition will be funded or take place under this project, and only existing
government land will be used for seeds multiplication and upgrading of physical
infrastructure on ARIA and ISE farms. Before any project-funded physical work can start
on any government land, documentation is required that the land is free of squatters,
conflicting claims and other encumbrances.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

  The project envisages a significant amount of physical works – including construction
of new buildings and the rehabilitation of existing ones. Since this includes a number of
laboratories, liquid waste resulting from the laboratory operations may contain chemical
substances which can contaminate water quality. The ESMF comprises screening list to
be used to identify such cases.

 Insofar as the project engages with farmers for training and capacity building purposes,
the PMP discusses the IPM approach where the pesticide should be the last resort and
priority would be given to natural and agriculture pest control methods. Both the ESMF
and the PMP have best practice guidelines for the proper identification, storage and
application of pesticides if they are to be used by farmers.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts:
 To achieve the project's development objective (strengthened institutional capacity for
safety and reliability of agricultural inputs and sustainable production of certified wheat
seed), there are no alternatives available to the activities described in the project
document . Both the ESMF and the PMP include procedures and screening lists to help
avoid or minimize adverse impacts that may result from civil works undertaken by the
project

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

  The project management unit (PMU) in the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and
Irrigation (MAIL) has already been created and partially staffed during the preparation
phase of the project. Currently the PMU is comprised of a team of key national subject
matter specialists (including a safeguards officer) necessary for the preparation phase and
assisted by a small number of international experts. For the implementation phase of the
project the PIU will employ social and environmental staff (national as well as
international) at the headquarter level to monitor and assist in the implementation of the
provisions of the ESMF and the PMP. Related training and capacity building is an
essential element of the project design.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

 Agricultural inputs stakeholders identified during preparation of ESMF and PMP
include the following:
 1.     Male and female farmers with and without land (including hired labor)
 2.     Farmers' organizations and cooperatives
 3.     Input retailers, wholesalers and importers
 4.     NGOs
 5.     Private sector incl. ANSOR and private seed enterprises (PSEs)
 6.     Donors involved in agricultural input supply
 7.     Relevant directorates/departments of MAIL, DAILs, DOWAs, NEPA
 8.     Border Control Posts
 9.     CDC members (male and female)
 10. Kabul University (in particular Agriculture Faculty and Medical Faculty),
agriculture colleges

 Stakeholder consultations were conducted during the development phase of both the
PMP and the ESMF. The minutes of these consultations are available in working
document in MAIL, including lists of participants.
 In all subprojects which require consultations with relevant stakeholders, consultations
will be conducted to elicit the views of both the male and the female population.

 The ESMF and the PMP have been disclosed in Afghanistan in Dari and Pashto in
relevant places and in the MAIL website, and in English at the World Bank InfoShop.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  09/09/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              09/10/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               12/25/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  09/09/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              09/10/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               12/25/2012
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        Yes
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                      Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                     Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or    Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name               Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Johannes Georges Pius Jansen   12/20/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli           12/20/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr Abdul Mohammad Durani          12/20/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Sanjay Srivastava               12/20/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                    Mr Simeon Kacou Ehui
  Comments: ISDS is forwarded for your clearence
