                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA2905
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Benin                             Project ID:    P122950
                            Project Name:      Benin Cities Support Program (P122950)
                            Task Team          Kwabena Amankwah-Ayeh
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          20-Apr-2013                       Estimated   21-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTU2                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (31%), Sanitation (31%), Sub-
                                              national government administration (16%), Solid waste manageme nt (15%),
                                              Other social services (7%)
                            Theme(s):         Urban services and housing for the poor (50%), Municipal governance and
                                              institution building (24%), Decentralization (13%), Particip ation and civic
                                              engagement (13%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      60.00           Total Bank Financing:                 60.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                          0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               60.00
                              Total                                                                                     60.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project's development objective is to increase access to urban services and improve urban
                           management in selected cities of Benin.

                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         3. Project Description
                         This project aims at supporting GoB in (i) strengthening the capacities of Benin’s municipalities in
                         managing and implementing urban services; (ii) rehabilitating and expanding infrastructure services
Public Disclosure Copy




                         delivery assets to support the reduction of their deficit in Benin’s urban centers; and (iii)
                         strengthening and further enhancing the intergovernmental fiscal framework.

                         The proposed project comprises three components as follows:

                         Component A: Service Delivery Improvement through infrastructure rehabilitation, maintenance and
                         expansion (IDA US$49 million equivalent). This component will support the improvement of
                         infrastructure service delivery through rehabilitation and expansion of urban community
                         infrastructure in 10 urban municipalities of Benin to improve their effectiveness as economic growth
                         poles. Demand driven sub-projects financed under the project would be taken from the existing and
                         updated Commune Development Plans of the 10 participating urban Municipalities. These sub-
                         projects may include, among others, improving urban drainage systems, paving and tarring some
                         strategic urban roads, water supply, sanitation facilities, Solid Waste Management, covered markets,
                         lorry/articulated vehicle/car parks, safe toilets (for primary and secondary schools, and health
                         centers), rehabilitation of some cultural assets and others. The project seeks to link municipal
                         investments supported by the project to existing capacity of the municipalities. The activities to be
                         funded are aligned with the Commune Development Plans of the 10 participating local governments
                         thus building on existing planning capacity, integrating Bank financing in a development framework
                         elaborated by the client, and thus responding to the needs of local communities. The processes
                         followed in creating the community development plans involve annual financial and technical audits
                         of municipalities that is directly run through strong community involvement and engagement
                         processes enabling the actual needs of localities to be fully accounted for in these plans. Municipal
                         wide workshops of findings of the audits and submissions by various community development
                         associations are a limelight of the plans development process during which period the Mayors and
                         key Municipal Administration officials avail themselves for community scrutiny. These processes
Public Disclosure Copy




                         were strongly supported by PGUD-II that helped to create 14 such community associations (comite
                         de developpment du quartier--CDQs) in beneficiary municipalities of that project.

                         Up until the mid-term review of the project scheduled for about end-October 2016, investments
                         under Component A will be carried out by a competitively selected implementing entity/agency that
                         has a proven track record in delegated contract management in the implementation of the Bank’s
                         Urban Projects. This is due to the large size of the investment projects to be funded, as opposed to
                         the PSDCC which is largely funding small-scale investments. In addition, the investments to be
                         funded may have significant safeguards issues related to environmental protection and compensation
                         for land acquisition and involuntary resettlement. At mid-term review, the Government and Bank
                         will examine the progress in capacity building of the 10 urban municipalities on procurement,
                         financial management, and safeguards. On the basis of each municipality’s performance against a set
                         of agreed objective criteria relating to procurement, financial management, and safeguards, a
                         decision will be made for each municipality as to whether it is capable of executing the investments
                         in the second half of the project. An implementing agency/entity will continue to carry out the
                         project in those municipalities that are not assessed to have sufficient capacity.

                         Component B: Municipal Management and Deepening Decentralization (IDA US$ 5 million
                         equivalent): This component seeks to improve urban governance and municipal management at the
                         municipal/city level while supporting central Government’s efforts at decentralization through


                                                                     Page 2 of 8
                         building capacity for monitoring and evaluating the formula-based intergovernmental fiscal transfer
                         system operational at the central government level. In order to support strengthening of critical
                         aspects of municipal and urban management (in particular, Financial Management, Procurement,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Safe guards, Community Participation, Municipal Engineering and Urban Planning), the project will
                         support training and capacity building of municipalities. In line with the policy of the Ministry of
                         Decentralization regulating the capacity building of communes, training services provision shall be
                         competitively recruited to provide on-the-job guidance, training and capacity building through the
                         Centre de Formation pour l’Administration Locale (CeFAL). The training and capacity building will
                         aim to support the cities in meeting performance criteria to be able to manage investments under
                         component A. The project plans to provide consultant services for the upfront training and
                         management enhancement support for the Municipalities and central Government departments
                         implicated in the project (in procurement, project management, financial management, social and
                         environmental safeguards design and implementation, monitoring and evaluation and disaster
                         management, and others), to enable GoB to better implement the project. This will be done towards
                         deepening already existing local processes, scaling them up and supporting the municipalities to
                         enhance their work in undertaking proper physical and financial audits to better inform their
                         development planning for services delivery.

                         The project proposed to fund studies, training and support to enhancing fiscal collection at municipal
                         level to strengthen the fiscal base of municipalities. Upon demand, the project would also provide
                         technical support in various aspects of proper municipal management to the participating
                         municipalities. Finally, the project would support capacity building and technical assistance to the
                         Permanent Secretariat of the CONAFIL to strengthen its ability to fulfill its core monitoring and
                         evaluation functions for the resources transferred through FADeC. Support of CONAFIL would be
                         aimed at help it implement the recommendations of its recent institutional audit, and would be
                         coordinated with the support already provided under PSDCC and by other development partners in
                         order to avoid overlap.
                         These activities tie into the demand for transparency by central Government of all Municipalities in
                         their management of resources and systems as well as support social accountability of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         municipalities through proper participation of communities in their development processes. It would
                         also make further direct demand on municipal managers to change their behaviors and incorporate
                         communities in decisions that affect their lives in the development processes.

                         Component C: Institutional Strengthening, Capacity Building, Monitoring & Evaluation and Project
                         Management (IDA US$6 million equivalent). This component proposes to support activities aimed at
                         strengthening: (i) the entities involved in the implementation of the project (Municipalities, TS,
                         MEHU, MEF, MDGLAAT, MDAEP) to better support and monitor municipal development; and (ii)
                         support to project management, monitoring and evaluation of project results, and targeted training for
                         the Municipality officials and central Government staff working on Intergovernmental Fiscal
                         Transfer System (IFTS), Technical Secretariat and project implementing entity (IE) staff. Project
                         would incorporate specialized training for central government officials to better structure the
                         mechanisms for accounting, transfer and auditing as well as support municipal staff to seek better
                         and effective solutions for operation and maintenance of infrastructure at the municipal level which
                         has been a challenge faced by most municipalities in Benin and elsewhere. The project will partner
                         more closely with World Bank Institute (WBI) to bring core urban management training
                         opportunities to participating municipalities and central government line ministries to better enhance
                         the institutional capacity building efforts, and to develop social accountability measures to improve
                         transparency and accountability measures related to the project. Annual workshops/seminars will be
                         held during which time open discussions on how specific thematic area issues have been handled at

                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                         various levels by each municipality would be shared and discussed. This will create a platform and
                         an opportunity for the participating municipalities, line ministries, community organizations,
                         representatives of communities, academia and the press to share in possible sustainable locally-tested
Public Disclosure Copy




                         solutions around themes that are close to achieving infrastructure services provision for the people of
                         Benin. A Communications Officer will be appointed to work within the TS to ensure systematic
                         dissemination of information on the project and policy changes that are sought, just as was
                         successfully experimented and concretized in the implementation of PGUD-II.

                         Specifically, the proposed operation would finance investments to improve the service delivery and
                         technical assistance for capacity enhancement. GoB has reviewed, revised and adapted the PGUD-II
                         ESMF and RPF, made some improvement on those documents and delivered them to the Bank for
                         review and clearance. These documents were cleared and disclosed in Cotonou and Washington DC
                         on April 19, 2013. In deepening its understanding of Bank procedures, Government has also
                         contracted studies to produce environmental impact assessments (EIAs) and resettlement action plans
                         (RAPs) for some already agreed works in some of the beneficiary municipal centers to be supported
                         by the project. Similarly, contracts have been issued following Bank procurement procedures for
                         technical studies on most urban infrastructure systems (roads, drainage systems) as well as
                         municipal economic assets (markets, lorry parks) and social infrastructure (schools and clinics) to be
                         constructed under the project.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project locations are 10 selected urban municipalities of Cotonou, Abomey, Parakou, Porto
                         Novo, Abomey Calavi, Lokossa, Kandi, Come, Boichon, and Seme Podji.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
                         Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)
                         Africa Eshogba Olojoba (MNSEN)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               The proposed project is classified as
                          BP 4.01                                             environmental Category B because no activity
                                                                              funded under the project is expected to have a
                                                                              significant negative environmental or social
                                                                              impact. The proposed project triggers the OP 4.01
                                                                              on environmental assessment. Activities under
                                                                              the proposed project are not expected to generate
                                                                              any adverse environmental or social effects, as a
                                                                              large part of the project is geared towards
                                                                              sustainable improvement and development of
                                                                              urban infrastructures. Since the location, extent
                                                                              and magnitude of the investments are not known
                                                                              at this stage of project preparation, the
                                                                              appropriate instruments to prepare before the
                                                                              appraisal is an Environmental and Social
                                                                              Management Framework (ESMF). The existing
                                                                              ESMF of PGUD-2 was revised, updated and


                                                                      Page 4 of 8
                                                                               adapted for this project and disclosed in Cotonou
                                                                               and Washington DC on April 19, 2013, with the
                                                                               understanding that EIAs, EMPs, RAPS or ARAPs
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               will be prepared per the guidance in the
                                                                               environmental and social screening checklist
                                                                               contained in the ESMF. The ESMF has been
                                                                               disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes               Some cultural assets including, but not limited
                            BP 4.11                                            to, royal palaces, old colonial buildings and
                                                                               adjoining gardens, may be rehabilitated using
                                                                               funds from the proposed operation. The ESMF
                                                                               and the RPF have made specific arrangements for
                                                                               the rehabilitation processes and how EIAs and
                                                                               RAPs would be carried out and special
                                                                               precautions would be exercised to ensure
                                                                               availability and usage of these facilities during
                                                                               the rehabilitations to be carried out.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes               Interventions on the proposed project might lead
                            4.12                                               to land take, restriction of access to assets or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               sources of livelihood. For due diligence, since the
                                                                               location, extent and magnitude of the investments
                                                                               are not fully known at this stage of project
                                                                               preparation, a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                               (RPF) has been prepared and disclosed in-country
                                                                               and at the infoshop. The RPF of the PGUD-2 has
                                                                               been revised, updated and adapted and disclosed
                                                                               on April 19, 2013 to be used for this project.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                             The project is classified as Environmental Category B as the potential environmental and social
                           impacts are not likely to be significant, and most of the project activities are intended to mitigate
                           the negative environmental impacts and health hazards resulting from the current flooding
Public Disclosure Copy




                           situation. In light of the scope of works, such as rehabilitating drains and channels and
                           construction of municipal solid waste collection points, the impacts are likely to be small-scale and
                           site-specific and thus easily manageable. The two safeguards instruments: an Environmental and
                           Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared
                           by GoB and disclosed in Cotonou and Washington DC on April 19, 2013, shall be used to guide
                           all EIAs and RAPs preparation before the commencement of civil works.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             No potential and/or long term adverse environmental and social impacts are anticipated due to
                           project investments.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Not relevant.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The Government team and the implementing agencies of PGUD-2 showed much experience in
                           the Bank’s environmental and social safeguards compliance, including implementing a highly
                           satisfactory Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) that involved payment of compensation and
                           provision of a range of amenities and services, and community development activities. The current
                           project will benefit from the capacity built during implementation of PGUD-2 as many of the
                           actors in that project are still in Government employ and involved in the preparation and
                           implementation of the current project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Key stakeholders especially people who may be directly affected by the implementation of this
                           operation, majority of whom happen to be citizens of Municipalities that are beneficiaries of this
                           proposed operation, have been consulted through community meetings and discussions of
                           safeguards policies. Emphasis was placed on the ESMF and the RPF documents with full
                           disclosure of what would be done in the RAP as well as the EIAs as and when they are triggered to
                           be prepared in course of the project implementation. This culminated in a national workshop on
                           this project attended by representatives of communities, civil society organizations, CBOs, central
                           and, municipal government officials, the press, academia and the private sector organizations and
                           employers. The ESMF and the RPF have been disclosed in Cotonou and Washington DC on April
                           19, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          18-Apr-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       19-Apr-2013
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors



                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Benin                                                            19-Apr-2013
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Apr-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Benin                                                            19-Apr-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies




                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Kwabena Amankwah-Ayeh
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 05-May-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Alexander E. Bakalian (SM)                     Date: 06-May-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
