                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET


                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA3818
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed:
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Tunisia                            Project ID:    P132381
                            Project Name:     TN-Competitiveness and Export Dev. (P132381)
                            Task Team         Djibrilla Adamou Issa
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         13-May-2013                        Estimated   19-Sep-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    MNSF1                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Central government administration (30%), General industry and trade sector
                                              (30%), Other domestic and international trade (20%), Othe r industry (15%),
                                              SME Finance (5%)
                            Theme(s):         Export development and competitiveness (40%), Trade facilitation and market
                                              access (30%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (20%), Other
                                              Private Sector Development (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      74.60           Total Bank Financing:                51.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                        0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                3.60
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                  51.00
                              LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                                    20.00
                              Total                                                                                  74.60
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                                                      Page 1 of 10
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project components -

                         The proposed project would consists of 3 components:

                         Component 1: Support to improve the business climate and the diffusion of innovation for trade
                         competitiveness (US$ 9 million)

                         Sub-Component 1.1: Support the restructuring and modernization of customs (US$4.5m)

                         Upgrading the Customs Information (SINDA). The project will finance (i) consultant services to
                         assess the system and compare it to international best practices; (ii) equipment and software; (iii) and
                         technical assistance and trainings to customs to update the system.

                         Introduction of a comprehensive computerized risk management system. The proposed project will
                         finance: (i) technical assistance and consultancy services to improve the performance of the current
                         selectivity module through dynamic scoring and the use of appropriate dashboards and its
                         synchronization with the SINDA; (ii) technical assistance and consultancy services by hiring experts
                         to help develop interactive analysis of risk factors; (iii) experts services to incorporate external
                         (domestic and international) data and intelligence into the customs risk management systems to
                         promote an integrated risk management model for all international transactions; (iv) consultancy and
                         expert to regularly benchmark Tunisian risk management function against other comparable foreign
                         models and make required upgrades; (v) procurement of equipment and software for the
                         implementation of the risk management function; and (iv) TA and training to develop a risk
                         management and change management program for all units involved in implementing the selectivity
                         and in selectivity management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Development of the authorized economic operator (AEO) approach. The proposed project will
                         support the following activities: (i) finance experts and consultancy services to develop methods for
                         auditing enterprises to qualify them for AEO status; (ii) finance the corresponding training for
                         customs officials responsible for monitoring such enterprises; (iii) finance experts and consultants to
                         prepare a computerized approval mechanism and guideline; and (iv) finance the preparation of tools
                         and instruments for Tunisia to expand the AEO approach, in accordance with international standards,
                         to enhance the security of the supply and logistics chain.

                         Support for the improvement of procedures manuals and guidelines. The project will (i) finance
                         technical assistance for conducting an inventory of all procedures; (ii) consultancy for carrying out a
                         critical analysis of processes and a subsequent streamlining; and (iii) experts to prepare and publish a
                         manual of procedures, users’ guide and downloadable forms and documents on the Customs website.

                         Operationalization of Logistic Zones procedures and computerization. The Ministry of Transport in
                         Tunisia is now developing Logistical Zones. Logistics zones are defined under the Custom’s Code as
                         areas under Customs control. From a Customs perspective legislation now needs to be introduced to
                         incorporate the existence of these logistical zones, and expertise to control operators inside the zone
                         needs to be developed. The project will support customs with (i) technical assistance for the
                         preparation of regulations and standardized operating procedures and the publication of procedures
                         and reporting guides; (ii) a special computerized control system encompassing the handling,

                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         movement, and trading of goods within the area and in transit to and from the zone; and (iii)
                         equipment for a perimeter control and tracking system.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Development of Mutual Recognition Agreement (MRA) with other countries. This would imply that
                         Tunisian exports do not have to face conformity control when exported to a partner (to the
                         agreement) country. This project will finance: (i) background analysis on key trading partner
                         countries for which the signature of such MRA would boost Tunisian exports, (ii) training for staff
                         negotiating such agreements.

                         Sub-Component 1.2: Improvement in internal logistics (US$2.0million)

                         The objective of this sub-component is to help the Government improve trade logistics to lower the
                         cost of exports for Tunisian enterprises. The project will finance the following activities:

                         Help the Ministry of Transport better define the need for improvements in the port of Radès. Because
                         Radès is Tunisia’s main port of entry/exit, it will be given special priority with a view to achieving a
                         critical mass and economies of scale. The project will (i) first finance a detailed study comparing the
                         port with the main competitors in order to identify critical bottlenecks, and will (ii) then support the
                         implementation of measures designed to reduce the overall stay of goods in the port. The delivery of
                         this support should make it possible to shorten the average wait-time of containers from an average
                         of 6 days today to 3 days.

                         Support the Ministry Transport in the implementation of its Logistics Zones development strategy.
                         The objective of this sub-component is to facilitate the implementation of logistics zones in order to
                         provide areas for logistics operations. The project would specifically finance technical assistance for
                         (i) helping to prioritize and optimize the establishment of logistics zones in Tunisia; (ii) preparing a
                         regulatory framework to encourage domestic and foreign private logistics companies to invest in and
                         do business in Tunisia; (iii) developing Ministry of Transport capacities based on a priority list of
                         experts prepared by the Ministry of Transport; (iv) providing support for the establishment of an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         institutional framework, including a coordination unit to coordinate the development of logistics
                         zones and monitor their performance.

                         Management and tracking of containers. The average wait time of container in the Rades Port is now
                         6 days on average. While customs clearance time has been reduced over the years, the main
                         difficulties reside now in the time it takes the port of Rades public operator (Société Tunisienne
                         d’Acconnage et de Manutention STAM) to track containers, and/or produce them, when necessary,
                         to Customs. Another well-known factor for delay is the time taken to remove goods from the port
                         after their release by Customs. STAM is putting in place a global management system for
                         movements within the port, which includes Radio-frequency Identification (RFID) technology,
                         container location and tracking, and rationalizing movements of goods according to different
                         requests. The system would also help in identifying overtime containers . The project would support
                         the development of the interface between the STAM system and SINDA, thus eliminating manual
                         inputs and cross-checks. It would contribute significantly to reducing administrative delays in the
                         clearance and release of goods.

                         Developing efficient logistics operators. The objective of this sub-component is to facilitate the
                         emergence of modern operators in the identified value chains. The project will provide: (i) technical
                         assistance for the creation of a certification of logistics expert, through the training of trainers and
                         awareness; and (ii) the training and effective certification of experts in the logistic chains.

                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                         Component 1.3: Support innovation and its dissemination (US$2.5 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Innovation is an important component that can help Tunisian industries climb the value chain and
                         penetrate new foreign markets. Moreover, innovation in certain industries such as information and
                         communication technologies (ICTs) will make it possible not only to help industries adopt new
                         technologies but also enable Tunisia to further develop ICTs as exportable services, based on its
                         competitive advantage. Innovation in and of itself cannot be effective without an ecosystem of
                         resources, infrastructures, services, and a business climate that facilitates market access.

                         The project will finance the following activities:

                         Creation of an appropriate framework and a partnership for the dissemination of innovation: The
                         project will finance the following activities aimed at supporting active business/university/research
                         center partnership initiatives for the development of innovation to produce new tradable goods and
                         services on the international market, including in particular: (i) technical assistance for technology
                         transfer offices; and (ii) support to the Gazala Technopole (technical assistance, capacity building,
                         software, databases, information and data dissemination system).

                         Support for INNORPI (The National Standardization and Industrial Property Institute). In particular,
                         the project will finance the following activities:

                         (i) Expert services and training for the creation of an INNORPI central trade register for property
                         right and the dissemination of information to facilitate their access by companies;
                         (ii) Strengthening of INNORPI capacities and competencies in respect of the quality and assessment
                         of export compliance by providing technical assistance to INNORPI to align it with international
                         standards to ensure that its certifications are recognized regionally and internationally;
                         (iii) Support for the establishment of a system for the traceability, certification, and accreditation of
                         goods and services destined for export (such as agro-industrial products, construction materials and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         electromagnetic compatibility, medical clinics, etc.). More specifically, the project would finance for
                         each sector an analysis of the needs for traceability, certification and accreditation by sector/product/
                         service; the preparation of traceability/certification manuals (Hallal, EPC Global, etc.); and the
                         dissemination of theses manuals.

                         Component 2. Provision of financial and nonfinancial services to export enterprises (US
                         $37.5million)

                         Component 2.1. Export Finance Guarantee (Dhamen Finance) (US$10million)

                         One of the main obstacles to the development of Tunisian exports – particularly to new markets – is
                         access to financing. EDP II established a guarantee fund (Dhamen Finance, managed by
                         COTUNACE [Tunisian Foreign Trade Insurance Company] for shipment loans to promote the
                         development of exports. Since its creation, Dhamen finance has guaranteed 784 export financing
                         operations for 234 export enterprises. The total amount of loans guaranteed to date is TND 83.8
                         million, while the figure for exports is TND 215.7 million.

                         The guarantee mechanism will be revised to respond to the new challenges and objectives identified
                         and supported by the Project, and resources will be allocated to the fund to increase its size.



                                                                       Page 4 of 10
                         Activities under this sub-component will include:

                         Capital increase. Dhamen capital will be increased by US$8million with funds coming from the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         proceeds of the loan . This would allow raising the guarantee ceiling from TND 750,000 for goods
                         and TND 200,000 for services to TND 1 million (goods and services) per operation;

                         Technical assistance to simplify the guarantee mechanism and procedures. At present, guaranteeing a
                         full cycle (ex and post-export) involves 2 different agencies and 2 different contracts: Dhamen
                         Finance for pre-financing and COTUNACE for buyer’s risk coverage. The idea would be to have
                         banks deal with a single entity (COTUNACE) and a single contract. This work, which will require a
                         legal analysis and will be supported by the project.

                         Technical assistance to improve the governance and risk monitoring approach. The project will
                         finance TA to review the governance of the fund in order to incorporate a risk monitoring/assessment
                         and management system. This will require revising the procedures manual prior to effectiveness;
                         (single contract forms; procedures manual).

                         Create a Foreign Establishment Guarantee product [Garanties des Investissements à l'Étranger
                         FGIE]. The objective of this activity is to help finance companies to open representation offices in
                         their destination market in order to actively expand their client’s base and therefore internationalize
                         more. The proceeds of the loan would specifically finance for COTUNACE: (i) the development of a
                         specific operational manual for this new guarantee product component and an implementation
                         roadmap; (iii) the capital required for this new tool as part of the guarantee fund; and (iii) the basic
                         operating costs and marketing campaigns.

                         Setting up of regional representatives and market the Dhamen finance in the regions. A pilot
                         experiment is proposed, consisting of establishing one Dhamen representative in each of two
                         underserved regions (Bizerte and Gabes) to identify SMEs with export potential, to offer them export
                         finance guarantee services and ensure that the operations are properly carried out. The project will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         help prepare the business plan and its implementation.

                         Staffing, operating costs. The loan proceeds would specifically finance the staffing (2 experts and 1
                         assistant), basic operating costs and marketing campaigns of experts assigned to Dhamen finance.

                         Component 2.2. Export Development Innovation Fund (Fonds d’Innovation et de Développement
                         des Exportations FIDEX) (US$23.5million)

                         The project will provide nonfinancial services, in the form of partial subsidies (matching grant, to
                         enterprises/groups/associations involved in the industries/sectors identified and supported by the
                         project. It would specifically provide non-reimbursable co-financing of 50 percent for individual
                         firms and percent for professional associations, on a demand-driven basis, with the remaining 50
                         percent mobilized from participating private sector firms and professional organizations.

                         The component includes: (i) capital increase (US$20 million); and (ii) support to CEPEX in
                         managing the fund, with acquisition of equipment and technical support in the preparation of export
                         plans, training for the staff in charge of implementing the scheme, and monitoring and evaluation by
                         following the group of enterprises throughout the project implementation period (US$1million); and
                         (iii) a built in monitoring and evaluation system by assessing the performance of a focus group at the
                         outset, at midterm and the end of the project (US$0.5million).

                                                                      Page 5 of 10
                         The fund will finance on a cost sharing basis up to 50 percent of the cost associated to the following
                         services for enterprises and associations respectively:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Support to enterprises producing organic and/or traditional products (appellation d’origine contrôlée,
                         Hallal, etc.), particularly for obtaining certification and for the development and implementation of
                         business and export marketing plans;

                         Support to enterprises seeking special accreditation for exports of goods and services (e.g. ICTs,
                         university education/training, high-value-added tourism such as cultural and medical tourism, bed
                         and breakfasts, etc.);

                         Support to enterprises that have projects to open subsidiaries/agency in foreign markets (Maghreb,
                         Middle East, Sub-Saharan Africa, etc.): the fund will help enterprises develop strategies for
                         establishing branches/subsidiaries abroad in high-priority or promising markets;

                         Support for enterprises exporting innovative goods and services, support for young entrepreneurs
                         (start-ups, etc.) including coverage of some of the costs related to the development and marketing of
                         new goods and services. In cooperation with chambers of commerce and private sector associations
                         (TACT [Tunisian Association for Communication and Technology], UTICA [Tunisian Union of
                         Industry, Trade and Handicrafts], etc.), CEPEX will organize annual business plan competitions to
                         identify and support new enterprises or entrepreneurs proposing projects with strong innovative
                         potential and able to respond to the new requirements of the regional or international market;

                         Support to enterprises operating in regions other than Tunis. The project will finance (i) an annual
                         competition among projects originating from other regions of Tunisia to identify those that are most
                         promising; and (ii) will then provide technical assistance to enable them to develop and tap into the
                         domestic market and then the export market;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Support to enterprises for the hiring and capacity building of workers (particularly new graduates to
                         be recruited) to involve them in the export process and increase their;

                         Support to logistical operators to promote the development of partnerships between Tunisian and
                         foreign operators (BtoB meetings, training on the requirements for doing business in the logistics
                         zones being created by the Ministry of Transport); training for domestic transports companies and
                         consultants (transport rules and standards, so as to better manage administrative requirements,
                         available IT systems and productivity building software – TMS [transportation management system],
                         WMS [warehouse management system], barcodes, etc.).

                         Component 2.3. Strengthening of the Export Promotion Center (CEPEX) as a sustainable export
                         development services provider (US$4million)

                         The results of a recent study show that the effectiveness and impact of CEPEX are hindered by the
                         fact that: (i) many processes are carried out manually, (ii) some services could undoubtedly be better
                         handled by professional associations and private sector than by CEPEX itself and are in fact are not
                         cost effective for the institution and its limited public resources; (iii) most of its activity is still
                         essentially focused on industry and not enough on services; and (iv) the market studies and
                         publications are not yet sufficiently developed. In this latter area, CEPEXoffers several services that
                         are often viewed as simplistic and not always responsive to private sector needs. Aware of some of

                                                                      Page 6 of 10
                         these limitations, CEPEX is currently engaged in a gradual process of improving certain of these
                         processes and information systems.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Also, CEPEX underwent a peer review assessment by the International Trade Center. The study
                         benchmarks CEPEX to other peer institutions in the world and come up with action plan for reforms.
                         Area of reforms include (i) a revision of its governance structure to bring in more private sector and
                         private associations; (ii) a change in business model from a solely government funded entity to a
                         service provider based on private sector needs and able to market some of its services to enterprises.

                         The subcomponent is aimed at helping the authorities (i) improve current CEPEX functions; and (ii)
                         reform CEPEX to become a sustainable export development agency.

                         The project will finance the following activities for CEPEX:

                         An institutional audit to update the two studies mentioned above, to come up with action plan and
                         facilitate Public Private Dialog (PPD) to agree on the way forward. The action plan will define
                         CEPEX priorities; propose reforms (governance and operations) to have it become an institution that
                         is more focused on its customer base. It will also help CEPEX define a list of essential business
                         services that it should provide directly and those that should be outsourced (based on the current best
                         practices model, e.g. ProChile, MATRADE, etc.). Most importantly, the project will provide and TA
                         to organize PPD to discuss and validate the action plan by the Government in collaboration with the
                         private sector.

                         Implementation of the action plan. The project will then provide technical assistance, institutional
                         support, and equipment for t he implementation of the strategy and the action plan. To ensure the
                         long-term viability of CEPEX, assistance to the project will be phased out and gradually be replaced
                         by the funds that CEPEX is expected to generate by providing services to private enterprise sand the
                         contributions/membership fees from private enterprises.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Technical assistance to improve current CEPEX functions, particularly in the field of market studies.
                         This will be done by (i) performing an analysis that would map specific private sector needs and
                         serve as a roadmap for the type of information to be generated by CEPEX; (ii) support CEPEX to
                         subscribe to international databases in these fields and digitizing the existing essential documentation
                         available with CEPEX; (iii) developing an appropriate IT system, including the possibility of online
                         registration to enable users to access data as well as the possibility of on-site consultation.

                         Component 3: Support to the ministries of trade and investment for project coordination and
                         management (US$4.37million)

                         This component will finance activities designed to strengthen the capacity of the Project
                         Coordination and Management Unit (PCMU), as well as the implementing agencies. The project will
                         finance the following activities: (i) training in procurement and financial management for staff of the
                         PCMU and the key implementing agencies, as required by the Bank procedures; (ii) consultancy
                         services (a financial management consultant, an accountant, and an expert to assist the coordinator
                         with implementation of the project), to enable the PCMU to successfully perform tasks such as the
                         coordination of implementing agencies and the monitoring of project performance indicators, the
                         provision of information and reports to the project Steering Committee and the World Bank; (iii)
                         financing of steering committee meetings; and (iv) IT hardware and office equipment for the project
                         coordination unit.

                                                                      Page 7 of 10
                         It will also support the Government, particularly the ministries of trade and industry, for the
                         implementation of export development studies and strategies, including in particular: (i) procurement
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of equipment to connect the DQPC (Directorate of Quality and Consumer Protection) to Tunisie
                         Trade Net (TTN); (ii) expert services for the DGCE (Directorate General of Foreign Trade) for the
                         drafting of texts governing e-trade in Tunisia; (iii) technical assistance to the DGCE for an
                         assessment to update its database of trade facilitation legislations and the preparation of a trade
                         procedures manual and guide.

                         Project Financing

                         Financing Instrument. The lending instrument is a Specific Investment Loan (SIL). An SIL is
                         proposed as it is a flexible instrument that can finance the diverse activities which are needed to
                         support the private sector, such as technical assistance, equipment, and provision of financial and
                         non-financial services enterprises.

                         Project cost and financing. An International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) SIL
                         of US$ 51 million is proposed. The Government’s and beneficiaries’ contribution is US$2.5million
                         and US$22 million respectively.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Nationwide

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (MNSSD)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                          4.12
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                          Projects on International           No
                          Waterways OP/BP 7.50



                                                                      Page 8 of 10
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:

                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.

                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                                                                                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                                                                                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                                                                                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]

                                                                                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Djibrilla Adamou Issa
                            Approved By



                                                                      Page 9 of 10
                         Regional Safeguards Name:                          Date:
                         Advisor:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Simon C. Bell (SM)       Date: 20-May-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            Page 10 of 10
