                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC2937

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Belize                           Project ID:      P127338
                            Project Name:       Climate Resillient Infrastructure (P127338)
                            Task Team           Yoonhee Kim
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           27-Jan-2014                      Estimated        20-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      LCSDU                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Flood protection (30%), Urban Transport (30%), Central government
                                                administration (20%), Irrigation and drainage (20%)
                            Theme(s):           Climate change (50%), Natural disaster management (25%), Land
                                                administration and management (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     15.00                      Total Bank Financing:         15.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:                  0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         15.00
                              Total                                                                         15.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objectives of the proposed Climate Resilient Infrastructure Project (CRIP) are to
                           improve the resilience of critical infrastructure to natural hazards and understood impacts of climate
                           variability and to strengthen the capacity of the national and local government in managing climate
                           resilience.
                           C. Project Description
                         The Climate Resilient Infrastructure Project (CRIP) would support the GoB in strengthening the
                         resilience of critical infrastructure to natural hazards and the anticipated impacts of climate
                         variability through targeted retrofitting, rehabilitation and reconstruction activities. The investments
Public Disclosure Copy




                         financed by the CRIP would be informed by an extensive project identification and prioritization
                         process enabled through provisions provided by a Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and
                         Recovery (GFDRR) and European Union (EU) Africa, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) grant in the
                         amount of US$750,000. The primary output of the GFDRR/EU-ACP grant would be a
                         comprehensive cross-sectoral climate resilience investment plan, which is currently being developed
                         jointly with the GoB, and is expected be adopted as the GoB’s mid-term investment strategy.
                         Activities included in the national climate resilience investment plan would be identified and
                         prioritized using a multi-criteria evaluation (MCE) methodology. The MCE will be based on a
                         combination of physical, social, economic, and environmental criteria, which will be defined and
                         confirmed by key national stakeholders.

                         In order to establish the institutional priorities and appropriately define the weight of each criterion
                         included in the MCE methodology the following activities would be conducted under the GFDRR/
                         EU-ACP grant: 1) the establishment of a hazard and disaster baseline, 2) the conduction of a series of
                         participatory workshops to reach consensus on MCE criteria, 3) the analysis of socio-economic
                         vulnerability, and 4) an integrated (qualitative and quantitative) locational-based vulnerability
                         assessment of critical infrastructure.

                         The secondary output of the GFDRR/EU-ACP grant would be a country specific hazard and disaster
                         risk analysis framework and an inter-institutional capacity-building strategy for improved disaster/
                         climate risk identification and assessment. The referenced framework and capacity building strategy
                         would identify activities that could be financed under the CRIP. These would likely include technical
                         assistance activities such as land-use and physical planning, improved performance of infrastructure
                         maintenance, institutional strengthening, capacity-building, awareness raising and knowledge-
                         building around geospatial data management, climate/disaster risk analysis. The combination of these
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities would establish the institutional capacity and analytical foundation required for the GoB to
                         create an information platform and integrate risk analysis into the decision making process as well as
                         facilitate the mainstreaming of disaster risk management across sectors.

                         It is anticipated that the investment portfolio identified under the GFDRR/EU-ACP grant will exceed
                         the CRIP financing envelop. The CRIP would, therefore, seek to finance the most critical
                         investments within the agreed Project envelop. Specific investment programs for the CRIP will be
                         selected based upon a set of criteria which will be developed further, taking into account the
                         requirement of safeguards policies and economic and financial analysis. As noted above, the
                         investments that would be financed under the proposed CRIP would only cover critical infrastructure
                         needs and would therefore not be sufficient to build climate resilience across all sectors of public
                         infrastructure. However, the CRIP would provide a strong institutional foundation to strengthen
                         climate resilience across sectors in the long-term.

                         In parallel, the GoB would seek partnerships with other donor partners and funding sources –
                         particularly international climate funds, to support any financing short falls within their national
                         climate resilience investment plan. Currently, the GoB is in preliminary discussions with the Climate
                         Investment Funds (CIF), which has agreed, in principle, to endorse the cross-sectoral national climate
                         investment plan currently under preparation. This will significantly increase the likelihood of
                         leveraging additional resources from the CIF as well as other climate funds.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project location and salient physical characteristics will be identified during the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation. As mentioned before, under the GFDRR/EU-ACP supported investment
                         identification process, characteristics and components of infrastructure such as primary and
                         secondary road networks, drainage systems, as well as critical public buildings, and critical
                         infrastructure in the water sector and in the drainage system will be assessed in terms of the extent
                         they are exposed to natural disasters and climate variability. Out of the identified investment
                         programs, the Project will select sub-projects of investment based upon a set of criteria e.g. the
                         urgency, socio-economic impact, environmental and social benefits, etc. Given that specific sites are
                         not identified as yet, an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) will be prepared, reviewed,
                         and disclosed prior to project appraisal. In addition, social assessment will be carried out to identify
                         and address the needs of the beneficiaries and stakeholders in the unlikely event of adverse impacts
                         experienced as a result of the physical investments proposed and implemented under the CRIP.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         While the implementation arrangement is to be further discussed and agreed with the GoB, the Belize
                         Social Investment Fund (SIF) is considered as the implementation entity. The BSIF is currently
                         implementing Belize Municipal Development Project (15 US$ million, Category B). The BSIF’s
                         capacity to implement environmental management practices in road works and small infrastructure
                         projects is judged to be satisfactory based on the most recent site visits conducted in December 2012.
                         The project engineers and contractors working on the Belize Municipal Development Project have
                         followed acceptable environmental management practices with regard to construction waste disposal,
                         occupational health and safety, appropriate consultation with cultural institutes regarding sites of
                         potential historical importance, and flood prevention measures. Similarly, the BSIF has acquired
                         some initial experience in implementing the involuntary resettlement policy through a current Bank
                         operation they are currently managing. The Social Investment Fund has two engineers on staff who
                         have proved capable to screen sub-projects for environmental impact, and adopt appropriate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mitigation measures. For example, the project engineers worked with the Corozal House of Culture
                         to protect two old (small) watchtowers that were identified on the periphery of a secondary road
                         rehabilitation sub-project. They have been assigned national heritage status, appropriate measures
                         were taken during construction to protect the watchtowers, and plaques and protective fencing will
                         be placed around the site after construction is complete. The majority of environmental impacts for
                         the MDP's small civil rehabilitation and upgrade works related to construction waste, prevention of
                         runoff, and safety measures. The project engineers have proved diligent in addressing these minor
                         impacts. They have been requested to provide more timely written feedback in the form of regular
                         progress reports.Nevertheless, the BSIF is still relatively unfamiliar with Bank Operational Policies
                         with regards to safeguards. It is therefore suggested that close monitoring be provided by the Bank
                         safeguard specialists, and that BSIF staff attend upcoming training on Bank safeguards to be held in
                         Honduras in summer 2013. For the proposed project, two separate PIU staff will be recruited to
                         manage all the related safeguards policies. Given that some sub-project sites will be located in the
                         vicinity of natural habitats, the inclusion of an environmental specialist with some knowledge of
                         biodiversity protection would be useful.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Noreen Beg (LCSEN)
                         Kimberly Vilar (LCSSO)
                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          Potential adverse environmental impacts on
                           BP 4.01                                     human populations or environmentally
                                                                       important areas are site-specific, and are related
                                                                       to small-scale retrofitting and rehabilitation
                                                                       works which are expected to be mainly
                                                                       localized, temporary and readily manageable.
                                                                       Since the exact location and/or nature of
                                                                       potential small investments to be financed under
                                                                       this project have not yet been determined, an
                                                                       Environmental Management Framework will be
                                                                       prepared to conform to Bank safeguard policies.
                                                                       This will provide the framework within which
                                                                       EMPs will eventually be developed. EMP(s)
                                                                       will be prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal
                                                                       for any project activities fully identified by the
                                                                       appraisal date.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes          OP 4.04 - Natural Habitats will be triggered.
                                                                       The EMF will screen sub-projects to ensure that
                                                                       no significant degradation or conversion of
                                                                       natural habitat will occur. In cases where sub-
                                                                       projects are located in the vicinity of natural
                                                                       habitats ( without imposing significant
                                                                       degradation or conversion) appropriate
                                                                       mitigation measures will be adopted, and will be
                                                                       described in the EMF and subsequent EAs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       This project will help protect degraded critical
                                                                       ecosystems, which are important to preserve
                                                                       local biodiversity and the quality of water
                                                                       resources. The EMF will explicitly forbid any
                                                                       project activities in areas supporting critical
                                                                       natural habitats or inducing significant
                                                                       conversion or degradation of critical natural
                                                                       habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36             No           Based on site visits to seven potential sub-
                                                                       projects, and discussions held during the April
                                                                       2-5 preparation mission, it is clear that there are
                                                                       no sub-projects that would have an impact on
                                                                       the health and quality of forests, would affect
                                                                       the rights and welfare of people living in forests,
                                                                       or would bring about changes in the
                                                                       management, protection, or utilization of natural
                                                                       forests or plantations. There is therefore no need
                                                                       to trigger OP 4.36.
                                                                   The EMF will explicitly forbid any project
                                                                 activities that would lead to the destruction,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 degradation or conversion of forests and key
                                                                 forest ecosystems.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD   During the project implementation, the team
                                                                 will assess if any of the sub-projects finances
                                                                 retrofitting or rehabilitating the existing
                                                                 buildings (for termites) or drainage (road
                                                                 insecticide) which could require a pest
                                                                 management plan.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The project is not expected to have negative
                         BP 4.11                                 impacts on cultural property, including movable
                                                                 or immovable objects, sites, structures, groups
                                                                 of structures or natural features or landscapes
                                                                 with archaeological, paleontological, historical,
                                                                 architectural, religious, aesthetic or other
                                                                 cultural significance. However, “chance
                                                                 findings? during implementation of activities
                                                                 could be possible. During implementation,
                                                                 possibility that the Project in the context of
                                                                 potential sub-project affect known
                                                                 archaeological sites or chance finds will be
                                                                 assessed. In the event that such sub-projects are
                                                                 contemplated, project implementation will
                                                                 include an archaeological survey of all
                                                                 potentially affected area by qualified
                                                                 archaeologists and the local authorities
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 responsible for the protection of Belize's
                                                                 cultural heritage will be consulted. . Chance
                                                                 finds procedures will be incorporated into EMPs
                                                                 and construction contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   Site visits and discussions during the April
                                                                 preparation mission clarified that no sub-
                                                                 projects will take place in areas of heavy
                                                                 indigenous population. However, one of the
                                                                 potential sub-projects, the Ten Cent ( Mount
                                                                 Pleasant ) Creek located on the outskirts of
                                                                 Belmopan, is located in an urban district with an
                                                                 80% Mayan population, which is integrated into
                                                                 the workforce of Belmopan. It is unclear to
                                                                 determine at this stage if this presence of this
                                                                 population in an urban area would trigger OP
                                                                 4.10.
                                                                 There will be a screening for the presence of IPs
                                                                 and if IPs fulfilling the four requirements of the
                                                                 policy are present, an IPP will be prepared.
                                                                The stand-alone social assessment will include
                                                                an analysis to determine the relative
                                                                vulnerability of IPs to disaster and climate risks
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                in Belize.
                                                                The EMF will not include this social analysis on
                                                                relative vulnerability of IPs. It will be
                                                                undertaken as part of the stand-alone social
                                                                assessment.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   The project is not expected to have major
                         4.12                                   impacts on private land or livelihoods,
                                                                especially given its focus on rehabilitation of
                                                                existing infrastructure. However, it is possible
                                                                that works such as river defense, drainage
                                                                improvements, the rehabilitation and
                                                                replacement of critical bridges and road
                                                                improvements, could possibly elicit some minor
                                                                impacts covered by this policy. For that reason,
                                                                an involuntary resettlement framework will be
                                                                prepared as a precautionary measure. If cases
                                                                arise during implementation, an (most likely,
                                                                abbreviated) involuntary resettlement plan(s)
                                                                would be prepared during implementation.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        TBD   During the implementation, the project team
                                                                will assess if any of the flood mitigation
                                                                components would involve a retention structure
                                                                that would trigger this policy.
                         Projects on International        Yes   There is a possibility of affecting international
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   waterways. Benque Viejo del Carmen and
                                                                Belmopan are located along the international
                                                                waterway, which originates in Guatemala (the
                                                                Mopan River) and flows downstream into
                                                                Belize (where the Mopan flows into the Belize
                                                                River). The Belize River in turn discharges into
                                                                the Caribbean Sea. The proposed project could
                                                                include the sub-projects of drainage or flood
                                                                mitigation works near Benque Viejo del Carmen
                                                                and Belmopan areas. Similar to Municipal
                                                                Development Project, these potential
                                                                investments, if any, are not expected to have
                                                                any adverse effects on the water quantity or
                                                                quality of any of these waterways or on any of
                                                                the riparian. This policy will be triggered as a
                                                                precaution.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP Yes   While project activities will not be undertaken
                         7.60                                   in disputed areas, this policy has been triggered
                                                                in earlier Bank financed projects in Belize in the
                                                                                                                                 context of Belize and Guatemala having a
                                                                                                                                 longstanding territorial dispute and having
                                                                                                                                 recently (12/2008) signed a Special Agreement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 to submit, after ratification via referenda, to the
                                                                                                                                 International Court of Justice regarding this
                                                                                                                                 dispute. This policy will be triggered as a
                                                                                                                                 precaution.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Aug-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Not Applicable
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Yoonhee Kim

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Anna Wellenstein (SM)                                                                                                Date: 09-Apr-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
