                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA780
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Apr-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Indonesia                                Project ID:                       P125405
                              Project Name:                   National Community Empowerment Program In Urban Areas For 2012-2014 (P125405)
                              Task Team Leader:               George Soraya
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 01-Mar-2012                                    Estimated Board Date:             02-Aug-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  EASIS                                    Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (26%), Other social services (26%), Sanitation (25%), Sub-national
                                                              government administratio n (14%), Public administration- Other social services (9%)
                              Theme:                          Participation and civic engagement (39%), Other urban development (38%), Other social development (11%),
                                                              Municipal governance and in stitution building (9%), Other social protection and risk management (3%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                         Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                   218.50
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                      266.00
                                   Indonesia - Program for Community Empowerment                                                                               23.50
                                   Total                                                                                                                      508.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? Yes

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The project development objective is to help ensure the urban poor in participating kelurahan benefit from improved local governance and living
                              conditions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              To achieve this objective, the project will: (a) strengthen and institutionalize elected representative organizations held accountable to communities,
                              (b) provide grants to communities directly and transparently to finance an open menu of activities aimed at poverty alleviation, (c) enhance the
                              capacity of central and local governments to partner with community organizations in public service provision and (d) increase awareness of
                              disaster risk mitigation and mainstream measures of resilience.

                              3. Project Description

                              The overall project is expected to benefit about 6,400 kelurahan (urban wards) nationwide through the provision of: (a) tertiary infrastructure (such
                              as roads, drainage, housing rehabilitation, water supply and sanitation), (b) social programs, and (c) economic support activities to benefit the poor
                              - all based on priorities expressed by the participating communities.

                              The project consists of the same components as PNPM-Urban III, although the design of the individual components has been adjusted to reflect
                              lessons learned and recent evaluation findings. This section presents a summary of each component (The amount in brackets show IBRD and
                              USAID contribution for each component).

                              Component 1: Capacity Building for Communities and Local Governments ($105 + $4 million). This component consists of the provision of
                              technical advisory services to carry out community development and local government capacity building activities, including:
                              a.        facilitating the preparation of a community development plan (CDP) for each project kelurahan, using a transparent and participatory
                              process,
                              b.        organizing and assisting community groups (Kelompok Swadaya Masyarakat or KSM) who would submit proposals to the Board of
                              Community Trustees (Badan Keswadayaan Masyarakat or BKM) to utilize project resources and implement programs identified in the CDP,
                              c.        assisting BKMs with the establishment of community associations (BKM Forums),
                              d.        training of RLF units staff to support well-performing revolving loan funds (RLFs), under the “expanding or closing RLFs” strategy, and
                              e.        assisting local governments to build capacity for working with BKMs and BKM Forums, and preparing plans for implementation of
                              Regional Poverty Alleviation Strategy programs.

                              Component 2: Kelurahan Grants ($100 + $17 million). This component will provide grants to participating kelurahan to co-finance investments in
                              activities identified in CDPs, which consist of:
                              a. Block Grants, consisting of: (i) specific high-priority infrastructure investments, based on competitive proposals from community groups
                              consistent with the priorities in the CDP, (ii) additional capital infusion to revolving loan funds (RLFs) to increase access to investible funds for the
                              poor; and (iii) social programs to benefit the poorest and most vulnerable groups or individuals.
                              b. Specialized programs, including (i) piloting interventions for women’s groups to enhance participation; and (ii) a spatial development program

                                                                                                                                                                            Page 1 of 5
                         targeting the poorest . These pilot programs will be undertaken in collaboration with local governments that commit themselves to planning
                         investments with community groups, and to co-finance these from their own budgetary resources.

                         Component 3: Implementation Support and Technical Assistance ($61 + $4 million). This component will finance implementation support and
                         technical assistance to: (a) strengthen the capacity of staff of the Project Management Unit (PMU), Province-level government agencies,
                         Participating Kecamatans, Participating Kotas, Participating Kabupatens and Participating Kelurahan in project implementation and monitoring,
                         including through the National Management Consultants (NMC), Oversight Consultants (OC), City Coordinators, and Facilitators; and (b) carry out
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and support monitoring and evaluation. In addition, the component would continue to support monitoring and evaluation activities to ensure timely
                         progress reports and annual evaluation reports for feedback to strengthen program implementation; activities could also support capacity building
                         on M&E for the national government.

                         Component 4: Contingency for Disaster Response ($0). This component will finance the provision of preparedness and rapid response to disaster,
                         emergency and/or catastrophic events, as needed, at the Kelurahan level through Sub-projects and/or using the Project implementation
                         arrangements. Due to the high risk of catastrophic natural disaster events in Indonesia, a provisional zero dollar component is included in the
                         project to allow for rapid reallocation of loan funds in the event of a natural disaster. Such a contingency was first included in PNPM-Urban III, in
                         response to a request by GOI to use the PNPM platform as a central part of the government’s post-disaster recovery strategy.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The project will be implemented in 6,400 kelurahans in 149 urban local governments in 20 provinces (out of 33 provinces in the country), which
                         have been covered by Urban Poverty Projects (UPPs, then become the PNPM as a national program) and ongoing PNPM-Urban series. Provinces
                         that are not covered by the project are those located in West Java, DKI Jakarta, West Kalimantan, and Sumatera-except Nanggroe Aceh
                         Darussalam. The Islamic Development Bank (IDB) will finance PNPM-Urban in the remaining 13 out of 33 provinces in the country. USAID will
                         provide a grant to help finance program in Aceh. The project will be implemented in urban areas (small, medium and large urban areas) including
                         existing dense developed areas and urbanizing peri-urban areas. As has been experienced in UPPs and ongoing PNPM-Urban series, these
                         urban areas comprise of mixed population with various social, economic and cultural characteristics. The project may cover kelurahans that are
                         prone to natural disasters. To date, there has been no report on the involvement or impacts on Indigenous Peoples in the UPPs and ongoing
                         PNPM-Urban series. Preliminary screening in reference to the IP Study (2010) prepared by the Bank showed that 11 villages in 8 provinces
                         outside Java (Aceh, NTT, Kalimantan Selatan, Kalimantan Timur, Sulawesi Tengah, Sulawesi Selatan, Gorontalo and Irian Jaya Barat) covered
                         under the project may have IPs communities which may or may not involve or be impacted by the project. Since the study was prepared using
                         various understanding on IPs characteristics and old information from various sources including from government agencies, the presence of IPs
                         communities as defined under the OP 4.10 in the kelurahans in these 8 provinces will have to be verified and reconfirmed during the project
                         implementation.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Indira Dharmapatni (EASIS)
                         Virza S. Sasmitawidjaja (EASIS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             Yes             The proposed project is an urban CDD program and similar to UPPs and PNPM
                                                                                         Urban series, the nature of the investments (mostly tertiary level infrastructure
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                         such as local road/bridge construction and/or repairs, footpaths, tertiary drainage,
                                                                                         community water supply, and sanitation/public toilets) are not likely to have any
                                                                                         large scale, significant or irreversible impacts. Potential impacts are likely to be
                                                                                         site specific, not significant and can be managed by good engineering design and
                                                                                         construction practices. Observations in some projects under previous iterations of
                                                                                         UPPs and ongoing PNPM-Urban series suggest that environment related-issues
                                                                                         include among others, ineffective water flows in the drainage channels, improper
                                                                                         management of domestic waste water from public bathing and toilets, and
                                                                                         ensuring that water quality of the shallow wells meets the standards.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                     No              The proposed subprojects will not cause conversion or degradation of critical or
                                                                                         other natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                              No              None of the project components will pass through any environmentally sensitive
                                                                                         forests or national parks.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                         No              The project will not involve any activities related to pest management
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11          Yes             In UPPs series and PNPM-Urban projects, there is no sub-project involving or
                                                                                         impacting Physical Cultural Resources (PCR), i.e. sites with archeological,
                                                                                         paleontological, historical, religious or of unique natural value as defined under the
                                                                                         policy. The project would support the management and/or conservation of cultural
                                                                                         heritage under the neighborhood level program, based on the CDPs, CSPs and
                                                                                         sub-project proposals, as proposed and agreed by community groups and local
                                                                                         governments. The types, location and management or conservation measures for
                                                                                         cultural heritage will be known during project implementation, i.e. during the
                                                                                         preparation of CDPs, CSPs and sub-project proposals. The project is therefore
                                                                                         triggers OP/BP 4.11 on PCR.




                                                                                                                                                                   Page 2 of 5
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                   Yes               Although there is no report on the involvement or impacts on the IVPs communities
                                                                                                 in UPPs series and ongoing PNPM-urban series, initial screening made in
                                                                                                 reference to the IP Study (2010) reveals that IP communities are in existence in 11
                                                                                                 villages in 8 provinces outside Java (provinces of Aceh, NTT, Kalimantan Selatan,
                                                                                                 Kalimantan Timur, Sulawesi Tengah, Sulawesi Selatan, Gorontalo, and Irian Jaya
                                                                                                 Barat). Verification and confirmation on the presence of the IPs communities as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 defined in OP 4.10 will be made during the project implementation, i.e. during the
                                                                                                 preparation of CDPs, CSPs and sub-project proposals. The subproject type,
                                                                                                 location, and intensity of impacts will be only known at the project implementation.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             Yes               The project will continue to finance small scale sub-projects and therefore no
                                                                                                 significant amount of land is foreseen for community investments. Similar to the
                                                                                                 previous UPP series and ongoing PNPM-urban series, it is expected that most of
                                                                                                 the beneficiaries would voluntarily contribute their land for these purposes. The
                                                                                                 sites and sizes of land that are needed for subprojects will not be known until the
                                                                                                 CDPs, detailed CSPs and sub-project proposals are prepared. The proposed
                                                                                                 project anticipates that under the neighborhood level program, however, as it
                                                                                                 involves co-planning and co-financing by the local government and community
                                                                                                 groups, there might be land acquisition or involuntary resettlement.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                       No
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP       No
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60           No


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                   Experiences from the UPP series and ongoing PNPM-Urban series confirm that activities financed by the Kelurahan block grants (including
                                 the proposed specialized program targeting the poorest) are mostly small-scale tertiary community infrastructure subprojects financed under
                                 Component 2 (Kelurahan Block Grants), such as tertiary roads, minor road/bridge repairs, footpaths, tertiary drainage, community water supply,
                                 and sanitation/public toilet, community social/economic facilities, all with limited service area within kelurahan. The project will likely have similar
                                 characteristics of environmental impacts and land needed for sub-projects with those of in UPPs and ongoing PNPM-Urban series. These types
                                 of sub-projects are not likely to have any large scale, significant or irreversible environmental impacts. Potential impacts are likely to be site
                                 specific, not significant and can be managed by good engineering design and construction practices. For instance, water flows in the drainage
                                 in some of the visited kelurahans could have been better if it is designed with a semi-circular bottom and put waste collection control boxes to
                                 ease the removal of debris or garbage. Observations in some projects under previous UPPs and ongoing PNPM-urban series suggest that
                                 environmental related-issues mainly occur due to inadequate guidance, monitoring and supervision by the facilitators and OCs (Oversight
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Consultants) during the planning and implementation stages. The proper mitigation and prevention methods proposed are proper training (on
                                 specific technical environmental impact mitigation measures) and monitoring of the supervising field engineers, especially on site selection for
                                 water and sanitation projects, use of tested water quality from wells, and maintenance of the facilities. As has been the practice of the ongoing
                                 PNPM-urban series, the project will adopt the updated Environmental Guidelines, Operation Manual and Technical Guidelines of the ongoing
                                 PNPM-Urban III. In addition, the “Good and Bad Infrastructure Picture Book” and Best Practices documented by the ongoing PNPM-urban
                                 series will be continuously used by the OCs and the facilitators, as well as BKMs to avoid/minimize and address environmental and social
                                 impacts of subprojects. The project environmental assessment remains category B.

                                 As the project will continue to finance small scale infrastructure sub-projects, therefore no significant amount of land is foreseen for community
                                 investments. Although vary in size, experiences from the UPPs and PNPM-urban series revealed that area of land needed for each subproject
                                 (including those under the pilot neighborhood development) is generally very small. Field observation suggested that for a public toilet for
                                 instance, the average land size is 30 m2. For road or drainage channel improvement, usually land is needed for expanding and/or widening the
                                 existing alignment. Similar to the UPP series and ongoing PNPM-Urban series, most of land needed by subprojects will be voluntary
                                 contribution from the beneficiaries. Decision for land contribution was made based on active participatory consultation among the members of
                                 the community groups during the preparation of the subproject proposals. This practice will continue in the project. Furthermore, documentation
                                 of the consultation process and supporting information will be included in the subproject proposals. OCs and facilitators will ensure that
                                 voluntary land donation is decided through consultation with the land donator and beneficiaries without any pressures and well documented.

                                 As the specialized program targeting the poorest is a collaborative initiative between the community group and local government (as well as
                                 other interested parties such as private sector) in particular poorest area of the kelurahans, some investments may involve land acquisition or
                                 involuntary resettlement. The location and intensity of involuntary resettlement, if any, will only be known during project implementation, i.e.,
                                 preparation of CDPs, CSPs and sub-project proposals. Furthermore, under this pilot program, the project would support the management or
                                 conservation of cultural heritage that are proposed jointly by the community group and the local government. Similar to involuntary resettlement,
                                 the types, location and management or conservation measures of cultural heritage will only be known during project implementation. The
                                 project will adopt the updated Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework, the Operation Manual and the Technical Guidelines of the
                                 ongoing PNPM-urban series as guidance to implement voluntary land donation and involuntary resettlement (if any).

                                 In all UPPs and ongoing PNPM-Urban projects, as of to date there is no report on the involvement or impacts on IP communities. The proposed
                                 PNPM Urban will cover all kelurahans (urban wards)/villages of the UPP series and ongoing PNPM-Urban projects across the country. Initial
                                 screening in reference to the IPs Study (2010) prepared by the Bank showed that the project anticipates that 11 villages located outside Java in
                                 8 provinces that are included in the project would have IPs communities. However, verification and confirmation of the presence of IPs
                                 communities in these villages as defined in the OP 4.10 are needed and can only be identified during project implementation. If any, as is the
                                 case for identification for potential environmental impacts and land needs, the extent to which IPs communities would be part of the
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 3 of 5
                           beneficiaries or, may or may not be impacted by the subprojects will only be known during project implementation. The project will adopt the
                           updated IPs Framework, Operation Manual and Technical Guidelines of the ongoing PNPM-Urban series.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                             In the long term, the project is expected to improve environmental living conditions of the beneficiaries and kelurahan. Improved
                           environmental-related basic services and access of their neighborhoods’ connectivity to other areas provided by the project will improve their
                           health quality while at the same time, reduce their expenditures to get basic services, and provide better access to social and economic
                           facilities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                            N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                             The Borrower, particularly the Executing Agency (Ministry of Public Works) has more than 10 years of experiences in managing environmental
                           and social safeguards under the UPPs and ongoing PNPM-Urban series. It has adequate capacity to implement the environmental guidelines,
                           land acquisition and resettlement frameworks as well as IPs framework and the Operation Manual and Technical Guidelines. The project will
                           adopt the updated the Environmental Guidelines, Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Frameworks as well as IPs Framework, and the
                           updated Operation Manual and Technical Guidelines of the ongoing PNPM-Urban series. Implementation of these instruments at the
                           community level is reflected during the preparation of the CDPs, CSPs and preparation of subproject proposals. The roles of OCs and
                           facilitators to supervise the communities in preparing these three planning documents are critical to ensure that safeguards are mainstreamed
                           and implemented consistently. Capacity of the OCs and facilitators as well as BKMs in implementing safeguards requirements have been and
                           will be continued during project implementation.

                           The Borrower's project will use the same institutional arrangements, including organizational structure and instruments for implementation,
                           which have been in place with relatively good performance since the implementation of the ongoing PNPM-Urban series to implement the
                           project, particularly for safeguards aspect. The Borrower has continuously improved the institutional arrangements and capacity to respond to
                           the recent development and needs. The National Consultant Team (NMC) which is currently assisting the PMU of the Executing Agency will
                           maintain the experts, consultants and facilitators who have sufficient experiences in environmental management, and in addressing social
                           issues including land acquisition and gender, and, in handling IPs. As of to date, there is no pending issues on the environmental management
                           and social safeguards handling in the UPP series and ongoing PNPM-Urban series. However, project documentation on environmental
                           management and voluntary land donation will have to be continuously improved.

                           The project will update and adopt the Environmental Guidelines, Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework and Indigenous Peoples
                           Planning Framework (IPPF) as well as the project manual and technical guidelines that have been adopted by the PNPM-urban series. The
                           Environmental Guidelines will be updated to ensure that management or conservation of cultural heritage will be properly addressed so that
                           potential negative impacts can be avoided, minimized and mitigated. The IPs framework will be updated to commensurate with the OP (become
                           IPPF) 4.10 and in reference to an Initial Social Assessment prepared based on lessons learned from other projects, as available. Accordingly,
                           the project manual and technical guidelines of PNPM-Urban series, which implement the safeguards frameworks, will be updated as necessary
                           to accommodate the need for management and conservation of cultural heritage and lessons learned from the ongoing PNPM-Urban series
                           (and other projects for IPs, as available), and to improve the quality of project implementation. The safeguards frameworks and project manual
                           as well as technical guidelines have been used for PNPM-Urban series regardless of financing sources (especially for Component 2), and this
Public Disclosure Copy




                           will continue in the proposed project.

                           The project will continue strengthening the capacity of project management staff, consultants and facilitators in environmental and social
                           safeguards through regular training. Web-based reporting will be continuously improved.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                             The main key stakeholders are the community members of the group who are beneficiaries of the project. Participatory consultation are taking
                           place in the formation of the community board of trustees (BKMs), community groups (KSMs), preparation of the subproject proposals and
                           implementation of subprojects. The role of the facilitators and volunteers is important in this consultation process. Environmental screening and
                           mitigation measures are identified and agreed among the beneficiaries during the preparation of the subproject proposals. Similarly, the need
                           and mechanisms for obtaining land are identified and agreed among the beneficiaries through participatory consultations during the preparation
                           of subproject proposals. Further screening, verification and confirmation of the presence and involvement as well as impacts of subprojects on
                           IPs communities as defined by OP 4.10 will be carried out during the preparation of the CDPs, CSPs and subproject proposals. Documentation
                           on the environmental and social screening and mitigation measures are included in the subproject proposals, and will have to be reviewed by
                           the BKMs and facilitators.

                           The Environmental Guidelines, Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework as well as the IPPF and the project operation manual/technical
                           guidelines are uploaded in the project website www.p2kp.org. The updated versions will be also uploaded in the same website. The project
                           operation manual and technical guidelines are distributed to all project management staff, consultants, facilitators, and the BKMs.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                          Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                             09-Feb-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                         10-Feb-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                          23-Feb-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors


                                                                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 5
                             Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                          Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                             09-Feb-2012
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                         10-Feb-2012
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                          23-Feb-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                          Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                             09-Feb-2012
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                         10-Feb-2012
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                          23-Feb-2012
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?              Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                              Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on        Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                              If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by    Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the      Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    George Soraya
                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Franz R. Drees-Gross (SM)                                             Date: 21-Apr-2012




                                                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 5
