                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA870
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jul-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Ethiopia                                Project ID:                      P128891
                              Project Name:                  Ethiopia Promoting Basic Services Program Phase III Project (P128891)
                              Task Team Leader:              Robert S. Chase
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 09-Jul-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:            27-Sep-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 AFTSE                                   Lending Instrument:              Sector Investment and Maintenance Loan
                              Sector:                        Primary education (53%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (21%), Health (15%), General water,
                                                             sanitation and flood p rotection sector (6%), General transportation sector (5%)
                              Theme:                         Other social protection and risk management (30%), Decentralization (20%), Public expenditure, financial
                                                             management and procurement (20%), Participation and civic engagement (20%), Rural services and infrastructure
                                                             (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                  Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                  Borrower                                                                                                               1702.00
                                  African Development Bank                                                                                                175.00
                                  UK British Department for International Development (DFID)                                                              520.00
                                  EC European Commission                                                                                                   70.00
                                  IDA reallocated as a credit                                                                                             600.00
                                  Financing Gap                                                                                                           438.00
                                  Total                                                                                                                  3067.00
                              Environmental Category:        C - Not Required
                              Is this a Repeater project? No
Public Disclosure Copy




                              2. Project Objectives

                              PBS 3 will contribute to the higher-level objective of expanding access and improving the quality of basic services by funding block grants that
                              ensure adequate staffing and operations, and by strengthening the capacity, transparency, accountability and financial management of local
                              governments. The program defines basic services as education, health, agriculture, water supply and sanitation and rural roads.

                              3. Project Description

                              The Program Development Objective (PDO) of PBS III is to contribute to the higher-level objective of expanding access and improving the quality
                              of basic services funded through block grants by continuing to strengthen the capacity, transparency, accountability and financial management of
                              local governments. PBS II was built around a set of principles or shared commitments by Government and development partners, adherence to
                              which was regularly “tested? through the PBS Reviews, particularly the bi-annual Joint Review and Implementation Support (JRIS) Mission. The
                              tests/shared commitments embodied in the principles of Sustainability (including additionality), Accountability (including fairness), Fiduciary
                              standards, and Effectiveness, which will form the basis of discussions for PBS III.

                              PBS III is proposed to have the following program structure:

                              Sub-Program A -- Basic Services Block Grants
                              Sub-Program B – Strengthening Local Accountability and Transparency Systems
                               Component B1 – Citizen’s Engagement
                              Component B2 – Local Public Financial Management and Procurement
                               Component B3 – Managing for Results
                               Component B4 – Results Enhancement Fund

                              Sub-Program A - Basic Services Block Grants - finance recurrent (salaries, operation and maintenance) expenditures in the five basic service
                              sectors (education, health, agriculture, water and sanitation, and rural roads) at local levels. The Basic Service Block Grants are based on Core
                              PBS Principles that reflect joint understandings of how to reach the shared development objectives of improved decentralized basic service
                              delivery. To track progress towards common objectives and agreements, the program is based on a set of interrelated “Core PBS Principles? that
                              guide program implementation. These core principles derive from Government commitments reflected in its Constitution, its current Growth and
                              Transformation Plan (GTP), as well as sectoral and multi-sectoral plans.
                              Semi-annual Joint Review and Implementation Support (JRIS) missions (See Annex 3 on Implementation Arrangements and Annex 4 on
                              Implementation Support) allow for the Government, including MOFED, sectoral ministries, and regional authorities, and Development Partners to
                                                                                                                                                                       Page 1 of 4
                         review performance according to these principles. Disbursement for the Basic Service Block Grants depends on overall performance according to
                         these principles.
                         Sub-Program B – Strengthening Local Accountability and Transparency Systems - As a complement to the Basic Service Block Grants Sub-
                         program and in support of the overall PBS objectives, Sub-program B: Strengthening Local Accountability and Transparency Systems seeks to
                         maintain and strengthen these systems with a strategic focus on the woreda-level as the front-line of administration with responsibility for PBS
                         objectives. The Sub-program includes four interrelated components: (B1) Citizen’s Engagement, (B2) Local Public Financial Management, (B3)
                         Managing for Results, and (B4) a Results Innovation Fund.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component B1 - Citizen’s Engagement - As recognized in the Program Development Objective and Core PBS Principles, transparency and
                         accountability are essential to promoting improved local service delivery. In Phases 1 and 2, the PBS program supported opportunities for citizens
                         to get information about local budgets and local service delivery objectives, as well as to provide feedback to those responsible for service delivery.
                         For PBS Phase 3, the Government and PBS Development Partners seek to expand, deepen and link these on-going efforts to promote citizen’s
                         engagement. It will also seek to institutionalize them, so that efforts for citizen’s engagement can be sustained outside of the PBS program. The
                         Citizen’s Engagement Component (B1) links three thematically related work programs to strengthen the system and capacity for services to be
                         delivered to local users in an increasingly transparent, responsive and accountable manner.

                         Component B2 - Local Public Financial Management and Procurement - The PBS Program relies on a robust, decentralized Public Financial
                         Management system that allows public resources to flow reliably from the federal treasury, through regional and zonal administrations, to woreda-
                         level and front-line basic service providers that generate results. While Ethiopia’s PFM system is strong, given the scope, complexity and diversity
                         of the decentralized economic governance system in the country, there are regions and aspects of its operation that need to be strengthened.
                         Given the focus of the PBS operation on local level administration, woreda-level PFM system strengthening is of highest priority.

                         The Government, with Development Partners’ support, is developing a comprehensive governance, public sector capacity and Public Financial
                         Management action plan to ensure that the overall Ethiopian system to generate results, retain quality staff and maintain accountability is
                         improved. The PBS Local PFM Component B2 will be embedded within that comprehensive reform strategy.

                         Component B3 - Managing for Results - Reliable, timely and available data and results analysis are jointly essential for meeting PBS Program
                         objectives. Together they allow mutual monitoring of progress towards GTP and PBS goals and analysis of why progress is particularly strong in
                         some regions or sectors and could be improved in others. Accordingly, PBS Sub-program B on decentralized system strengthening includes the
                         Managing for Results (M4R) Component. The overall aim of the M4R Component is to enhance the effectiveness of the PBS 3-project by ensuring
                         that data, systems, and analytic capacity are strengthened to deliver results throughout the project implementation period. It will (a) monitor PBS
                         program results, (b) strengthen the multi-sectoral, decentralized system for credible, timely and available data, and (c) undertake targeted surveys
                         and studies that fill crucial gaps in the Government’s and DP’s understanding of how PBS results can be sustainably achieved.

                         Component B4 - Results Enhancement Fund - Inspired by the P4R instrument, the Results Enhancement Fund will identify a limited number of
                         Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLI) consisting of a combination of outcome and process indicators. When, through an independent, objective
                         verification protocol, it is determined that one of these results has been met, the amount of resources linked to that DLI will be disbursed, either to
                         the federal or regional block grants. The DLIs will be designed to provide incentives to administrative units responsible for achieving the stated
                         result or innovation.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         PBS III will be implemented throughout the country by local government authorities in collaboration with respective sector specialists operating at
                         the local and regional levels. The Block Grants sub-program, which provides recurrent expenditures to sub-national governments for basic
                         services, supports resources needed to deliver decentralized basic service results, allowing increased basic service-delivery staffing and recurrent
                         costs that complement the results of other sector-specific investment lending. The capacity enhancing sub-program works to ensure that
                         Ethiopia’s decentralized economic governance system remains robust across jurisdictions and maintains progress on crucial accountability
                         improvements. The physical setting is not relevant for safeguard analysis as both sub-programs do not involve any capital investment or civil
                         works.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Tamene Tiruneh (AFTSE)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              No               Safeguard Policy for Environment Assessment is not triggered in the context of
                                                                                           support through PBS III which involves only recurrent cost for local basic services
                                                                                           and strengthening Local Accountability and Transparency Systems. The project is
                                                                                           not undertaking any works that would have environmental and social impacts.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      No               PBS III will not support any sub-project that involves the significant conversion or
                                                                                           degradation of critical natural habitats. Therefore, the Safeguard Policy for Natural
                                                                                           Habitats is not triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                               No               PBS III will not support any sub-project that involves the significant conversion or
                                                                                           degradation of natural forests or related natural habitats. Therefore, the Safeguard
                                                                                           Policy for Forests is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                          No               This project is not supporting any activities which trigger this policy.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11           No               This project does not affect Physical Cultural Resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                    No               This policy is not triggered in the project. PBS III provides resources only to cover
                                                                                           recurrent cost for local basic services and strengthening Local Accountability and
                                                                                           Transparency Systems.



                                                                                                                                                                      Page 2 of 4
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              No               This project does not involve land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement or
                                                                                                 restrictions of access to resources or livelihoods.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        No               This policy is not triggered because Dams will not be financed under PBS III which
                                                                                                 involves only recurrent costs at local level for basic services.
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP        No               N/A
                               7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60            No               This project is not being implemented in any disputed areas.


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any potential l arge scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  A.       Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                                 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant
                                 and/or irreversible impacts:

                                 The principal safeguards issues and impacts were associated with the Local Investment Grant which involved the construction and/or
                                 rehabilitation of small-scale investments in the education, health, agricultural extension, water supply and sanitation, and rural roads sectors
                                 under the previous two phases of PBS. In PBS III, the Block Grants sub-program provides recurrent expenditures to sub-national governments
                                 for basic services allowing increased basic service-delivery staffing and recurrent costs that complement the results of other sector-specific
                                 investment lending, and the capacity enhancing sub-program works to ensure that Ethiopia’s decentralized economic governance system
                                 remains robust across jurisdictions and maintains progress on crucial accountability improvements. Both sub-programs do not involve any
                                 capital investment or civil works. Therefore, any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are not expected from the
                                 implementation of the project
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                  Under PBS III, the Block Grant sub-program provides recurrent expenditures to sub-national governments for the five basic service sectors,
                                 and the capacity enhancing sub-program is to strengthen Local Accountability and Transparency Systems. Both sub-programs do not involve
                                 any capital investment or civil works. Therefore, any potential indirect and/or long-term impacts are not expected due to project activities.
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                  No alternative, other than “No project?, exists for Sub-Program A- Basic Services Block Grants, which will cover salaries, operations and
                                 maintenance in the five sectors – health, education, agriculture, water supply and sanitation, and rural roads at local level.
                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                                  and implement the measures described.
                                   Most of the regions have established a Land and Environment Protection Office at woreda (district) level. Though the capacity of these offices
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 is limited, it provides an opportunity to mainstream environmental and social issues into development planning and implementation at local
                                 levels. PBS III has to build on the experiences gained through the Local Investment Grant (LIG) component of the previous phases to
                                 encourage best practices in environmental and social management in the design and implementation of projects.


                                 The PBS Environmental and Social Sustainability Study, which was conducted in early 2011 and covered 20 sample LIG woredas in five
                                 regions, has revealed that most of the LIG woredas visited use an abridged version of the ESMF screening form to screen projects, and there
                                 are indications that the culture of vetting a given project for its environmental and social sustainability is taking root, albeit slowly and at varying
                                 pace. The implementing agency, Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (MOFED), will develop an Action Plan to implement some of
                                 the recommendations of the Study.

                                 Based on the experiences gained through the implementation of LIG safeguard instruments and the findings and recommendations of the PBS
                                 Environmental and Social Sustainability Study, PBS III may explore providing capacity building support to local governments in environmental
                                 and social assessment which in turn may contribute to the sustainability of the whole program. However, the PBS III will not be financing LIG or
                                 any works or activities with potential negative environmental and social impacts.
                               5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                                  on potentially affected people.
                                  Under PBS III, for Subprogram A, Basic Services Block Grant, as Project financing is limited to recurrent expenditures for basic services and
                                 does not include financing for capital investment or civil works, World Bank safeguard policies are not triggered. Although there could be
                                 concurrent Government financing for capital development in the basic services sectors that will enhance the development outcomes of Sub-
                                 Program A, this is not necessary to achieve the objectives of PBS III and therefore is not associated with the project. . Also for Sub-Program
                                 B, which is to strengthen Local Accountability and Transparency Systems, the World Bank safeguard policies are not triggered. However,
                                 during the previous PBS phases, local government officials and beneficiary communities have provided invaluable insights to the development
                                 of the ESMF as a tool to ensure the environmental and social sustainability of the LIG sub-projects. As the PBS III will not be financing LIG or
                                 any works or activities which trigger the World Bank safeguard policies, disclosure on safeguard policies is not applicable.

                               B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                               If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                               disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                               If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                                                                                                                                                                              Page 3 of 4
                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Robert S. Chase
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                        Date: 12-Jul-2012
                            Sector Manager:                      Name John Van Dyck (SM)                                                  Date: 05-Jul-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 4
