                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA3832
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kazakhstan                        Project ID:    P127966
                            Project Name:      Kazakhstan - Youth Corps program (P127966)
                            Task Team          Keiko Inoue
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          16-Jul-2013                       Estimated   31-Oct-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSH2                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Adult literacy/non-formal education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          21.76              Total Bank Financing: 0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                              Financing Gap:        0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   0.00
                              Trust Funds                                                                               21.76
                              Total                                                                                     21.76
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective is to promote young people’s community engagement
                           and life skills through community-based service learning programs, especially for vulnerable youth.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project will be implemented over approximately four years with a proposed closing date of
                           February 28, 2018. On behalf of the Government of Kazakhstan, the CYA under the MOES will be

                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         the implementing agency for the project. A Project Management Unit (PMU) will be established
                         within the CYA and be responsible for the overall project coordination and oversight. The CYA will
                         be staffed with experienced personnel to mitigate the risks of insufficient capacity. CYA/PMU will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         need to: (i) maintain an updated Project Operations Manual (POM), (ii) carry out fiduciary
                         responsibilities including financial management/reporting and procurement, (iii) provide technical
                         supervision and oversight to the Coordinating Agency, and (iv) ensure coordination and
                         communication with other ministries and agencies. The CYA will manage a Designated Account and
                         process all payments under the project.

                         Day-to-day project implementation for Component 1 will be the responsibility of the Coordinating
                         Agency, which will be competitively selected and work under the supervision and monitoring of the
                         CYA/PMU.

                         The project activities will be structured around three components: (i) Subgrants for Community-
                         Based Service Learning and Life Skills Development, (ii) Institutional Development for Youth
                         Policy Implementation, and (iii) Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation.

                         Component 1: Subgrants for Community-Based Service Learning and Life Skills Development
                         (Estimated total costs including contingencies: US$ 20.0 million)

                         Component 1 will incorporate the five elements (community engagement, initiative, support system,
                         safe place, and recognition for positive behavior) and implementation will follow the protocol and
                         monitoring framework outlined in the Project Operations Manual (POM). A Coordinating Agency
                         will be responsible for overseeing the daily administration of Component 1 activities, which are
                         organized along four sub-components: (i) Sub-grants for Community-Based Service Learning, (ii)
                         Life Skills Development, (iii) Outreach to Vulnerable Youth, and (iv) Coordination, Communication,
                         and Accountability.

                         Sub-component 1.1 – Community-Based Service Learning (estimated US$ 15.0 million). This sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component will finance sub-grants to two sets of potential recipients: (i) host organizations and (ii)
                         groups of young people. Following a community-driven development (CDD) model, organizations
                         and young people will be selected on a competitive basis based on proposals submitted in response to
                         calls for proposals by the Coordinating Agency. Calls for proposals will take place on a quarterly
                         basis, with the aim of having the first round launched in the Spring of 2014. Two proposal templates
                         will be developed: one for the host organizations and another for the youth participants.

                         An impact evaluation, to be designed and implemented by the World Bank, will be conducted to
                         evaluate the effectiveness of the Host Organizations or Youth Initiative Approach. In addition to the
                         two treatment groups discussed above, there will be a control group to provide the counter-factual.
                         Research shows that flexibility, youth input, and organization autonomy in the design of service
                         learning programs are important. Yet this attribute also makes systemic evaluations of community-
                         based service learning programs difficult. Additionally, the dynamic nature of the project design,
                         with real time feedback gathered, is likely to result in periodic project design modifications. The
                         impact evaluation will be designed with this constraint in mind.

                         Sub-component 1.2 - Life Skills Development (estimated cost US$ 3.5 million). Life skills
                         development will be provided to all participants in the community-based service learning program,
                         whether they participate through the Host Organizations or Youth Initiative Approach. The World
                         Bank’s 2007 World Development Report on Development and the Next Generation notes that there

                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         is strong evidence that bundled youth programs are more effective and in this case, the community-
                         based service learning activities are complemented by life skills development opportunities.
                         Although the Coordinating Agency will facilitate the life skills activities, the actual delivery of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         training programs is likely to be subcontracted.

                         The life skills development program will be implemented in two phases for each participant. First,
                         before engaging in the community-based service learning program, each participant must complete a
                         two-week life skills development program, focusing on skills such as community engagement,
                         communication, collaboration, identifying and avoiding risky behaviors, and healthy gender
                         relations. Second, during the community-based service learning program, the Coordinating Agency
                         will facilitate monthly mentoring sessions with each participant that focus on: (i) individualized
                         mentoring on professional and personal goals and (ii) linking young people with public services that
                         are available in their communities/areas, including local employment and health centers. These
                         monthly meetings will also provide opportunities to collect data on youth beneficiaries and allow the
                         project to monitor the propose use of funds.

                         For those youth participating in the Youth Initiative Approach only, each group will also receive
                         entrepreneurial training to ensure that they have the basic skills to manage finances, supervise
                         implementation, and monitor their proposed programs. Entrepreneurial training will include the
                         development of entrepreneurial mindsets and basic capabilities (positive perception of
                         entrepreneurship as a career option; opportunity recognition; risk assessment; basic financial literacy;
                         marketing; and business management skills).

                         Sub-component 1.3 – Outreach to Vulnerable Youth (estimated cost US$ 0.5 million). Sub-
                         components 1.1 and 1.2, at least initially, will be offered with national coverage without targeting.
                         This will ensure that the project is demand-driven and help the GoK identify where uptake is
                         naturally strongest for community-based service learning programs. This is important for building
                         momentum for a project that is based on an approach that is untested in Kazakhstan. Despite the
                         possibility that this approach will only capture the “easy to reach? youth, as noted above, a strong
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Information and Communication Campaign framework should enable the project to recruit even
                         among those who are ordinarily excluded from government services. Also, the weighted selection
                         criteria for the host organizations and youth applications will ensure that incentives are aligned to
                         encourage vulnerable youth to participate. Sub-component 1.3 will pilot approaches to engage
                         vulnerable young people and encourage their participation in the community-based service learning
                         and life skills development programs. Once the vulnerable youth have been identified and they have
                         received support with the proposal process, they will be integrated into the program under Sub-
                         components 1.1 and 1.2.

                         For this project, a vulnerable youth is defined as someone who is (i) neither in education,
                         employment, or training (NEET) or (ii) working in poverty. Kazakhstan’s geographic size also lends
                         itself to the possibility that sub-populations of young people remain “hard to reach? and therefore
                         vulnerable. Two filters are applied to identify the regions with: (i) the highest share of vulnerable
                         young people and (ii) the highest nominal stock of vulnerable young people. According to this
                         criterion, four regions – Pavlodar, Karagandy, Mangystau and Aktobe – have the highest share of
                         vulnerable young people. The nominal stock of vulnerable youth is highest in South Kazakhstan and
                         Almaty regions. Among the NEET and working poor, two groups of youth stand out as requiring
                         additional support: women and youth with disabilities.

                         Sub-component 1.3 – Outreach to Vulnerable Youth (estimated cost US$ 0.5 million). Sub-

                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                         components 1.1 and 1.2, at least initially, will be offered with national coverage without targeting.
                         This will ensure that the project is demand-driven and help the GoK identify where uptake is
                         naturally strongest for community-based service learning programs. This is important for building
Public Disclosure Copy




                         momentum for a project that is based on an approach that is untested in Kazakhstan. Despite the
                         possibility that this approach will only capture the “easy to reach? youth, as noted above, a strong
                         Information and Communication Campaign framework should enable the project to recruit even
                         among those who are ordinarily excluded from government services. Also, the weighted selection
                         criteria for the host organizations and youth applications will ensure that incentives are aligned to
                         encourage vulnerable youth to participate.

                         Sub-component 1.3 will pilot approaches to engage vulnerable young people and encourage their
                         participation in the community-based service learning and life skills development programs. Once
                         the vulnerable youth have been identified and they have received support with the proposal process,
                         they will be integrated into the program under Sub-components 1.1 and 1.2.

                         Sub-component 1.4 - Coordination, Communication, and Accountability (estimated cost US$ 1
                         million). This Sub-component includes the activities that the Coordinating Agency will carry out. In
                         particular, the Coordinating Agency will be responsible for developing two important frameworks
                         before launching the first call for proposals: (i) Information and Communication Campaign and (ii)
                         Feedback and Resolution Mechanism.

                         The Information and Communication Campaign (ICC) will detail public awareness-building
                         activities to be carried out before, during, and after the project. The ICC will be designed and
                         implemented with substantive inputs and participation by young people, and build awareness on:
                         core project principles; beneficiary characteristics; proposed benefits at the individual, collective, and
                         community levels; implementation mechanism including timing; roles and responsibilities of
                         different stakeholders; and transparency and accountability measures. Concrete examples of the ICC
                         include ensuring that sufficient outreach is conducted in order to encourage participation by
                         vulnerable young people, as well as informing the public about the selection criteria for participants
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to ensure transparency and fairness. The ICC will also provide information to communities about
                         young people’s engagements in service learning activities and the life skills they are gaining.

                         The Feedback and Resolution Mechanism (FRM) will serve as a critical monitoring tool for the
                         project. The FRM will also be developed and implemented with substantive inputs and participation
                         by young people, especially the determination of data collection modality. The FRM will make use
                         of available Information and Communication Technology (ICT) infrastructure that is already used by
                         young people. An effective and properly implemented FRM will ensure that project funds are being
                         used as planned, that project interventions are reaching the intended beneficiaries, and that the
                         quality of inputs are good. The objective of the FRM is to obtain real time feedback from various
                         stakeholders, especially youth, so that the project interventions can be modified regularly, as well as
                         to minimize governance and accountability issues. The FRM will also need to detail a process for
                         resolving any problems once they emerge. The Coordinating Agency is expected to apply good
                         practices from global cases to implement and continue to improve the FRM.

                         In summary, Component 1 will finance (i) service fees to a Coordinating Agency for the day-to-day
                         management of Component 1 activities, including the provision of necessary information and reports
                         to the CYA, (ii) sub-grants to host organizations and youth participations, (iii) provision of stipends,
                         as well as life skills development and entrepreneurial training to youth participants, (iv) pilot
                         programs to improve outreach to vulnerable youth by promoting the program and supporting their

                                                                       Page 4 of 7
                         application process, and (v) the development and implementation of ICC and FRM, as well as
                         creating a sense of community among the host organizations and youth participants. A separate
                         Bank-executed trust fund, with its own funding source, will be set up to finance the design and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation of the impact evaluation.
                         Component 2: Technical Assistance
                         (Estimated total costs including contingencies: US$1.763 million)

                         Component 2: Institutional Development for Youth Policy Implementation
                         (Estimated total costs including contingencies: US$0.763 million)

                         Sub-component 2.1 - Development of Institutional Framework for Youth Policy Implementation,
                         Coordination, and Evaluation (estimated cost US$ .463 million). The CYA under the MOES will be
                         the implementing agency for the project. As noted above, the CYA developed the Law on State
                         Youth Policy and technical assistance will be provided to support its implementation and monitoring
                         and evaluation, including young people’s feedback on the youth programming offered under the
                         policy. The technical assistance provided through this Sub-component will include: (i) input for the
                         draft law on volunteering, (ii) capacity building for regional staff on implementation and monitoring
                         of youth-focused volunteering programs, (iii) capacity building for the use of quantitative and
                         qualitative data to produce reports on youth development, and (iv) capacity building for the
                         application of findings from data analysis to monitor and improve youth development programs at
                         the national and regional levels.

                         Subcomponent 2.2 – Curriculum Development and Outreach to Senior Secondary Students
                         (estimated cost US$ .3 million). The sub-component will finance the provision of technical
                         assistance for curriculum development that targets senior secondary students and focuses on raising
                         their awareness of community-based volunteering and service learning. This activity will be linked
                         with Component 1, so that senior secondary students who are nearing graduation are aware of the
                         community-based service learning and skills development programs and encouraged to apply.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation
                         (Estimated total costs including contingencies: US$1 million)

                         A small Project Management Unit (PMU) will be financed within the CYA to manage the fiduciary
                         aspects of the project, supervise the Coordinating Agency, and ensure adequate project monitoring.
                         The PMU will consist of the following staff: (i) Project Coordinator, (ii) Financial Management
                         Specialist, (iii) part-time Procurement Specialist, and (iv) Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist. In
                         addition, a technical specialist may also be hired. It is critical that this PMU is physically located
                         within the MOES, in close proximity to the CYA.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The activities to be financed by the project are not likely to have adverse social impacts. The
                         financing of sub-grants to host organizations and groups of young people considered under
                         Component 1: Community-Based Service Learning and Life Skills Development do not include
                         construction of infrastructure or other activities that would require land acquisition that could
                         generate adverse impacts. The project does not trigger environmental safeguards as it will only
                         finance sub-grants, stipends, and technical assistance, thus the project will be assigned an
                         Environmental Screening Category of “C?.



                                                                       Page 5 of 7
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Arcadii Capcelea (ECSEN)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/      No
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:

                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.

                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                           B. Disclosure Requirements

                                                                       Page 6 of 7
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                                                                                             Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Keiko Inoue
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Alberto Rodriguez (SM)                      Date: 08-Jul-2013




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
