                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                           ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                   Report No.: ISDSA5702

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Sep-2013
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Sep-2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:         Kenya                            Project ID:    P146161
                                                     Parent         P111545
                                                     Project ID:
   Project Name:    Additional Financing for Cash Transfers for Orphans and Vulnerable Children
                    (P146161)
   Parent Project   Kenya Cash Transfer for Orphans and Vulnerable Children (P111545)
   Name:
   Task Team       Cornelia M. Tesliuc
   Leader:
   Estimated       01-Oct-2013                       Estimated   31-Oct-2013
   Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
   Managing Unit: AFTSE                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                     Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Other social services (100%)
   Theme(s):         Social safety nets (100%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:          66.40             Total Bank Financing: 10.00
   Financing Gap:                0.00
     Financing Source                                                                    Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                           10.00
     UK British Department for International Development
                                                                                            56.40
     (DFID)
     Total                                                                                  66.40
   Environmental C - Not Required
   Category:




                                           Page 1 of 6
 Is this a          No
 Repeater
 project?

 2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   To increase social safety net access for extremely poor OVC households and to build the capacity
   of the government to more effectively deliver the National Safety Net Program.
 3. Project Description
The additional financing will support the two components of the original project. However,
following the modification to the PDO, the description of Component One will be revised to reflect
this modification. Component One will thus aim to contribute to building the capacity of the
government to deliver the National Safety Net Program by (i) strengthening program systems to
ensure good governance; (ii) harmonizing cash transfer programs to improve sector coherence; and
(iii) capacity building for expanding cash transfer programs to promote more comprehensive and
equitable coverage. Component Two will remain unchanged. The activities to be supported through
the two components are described below:

Component One: Policy Development and Institutional Strengthening (US$ 10 million equivalent
from IDA and US$ 5.2 million equivalent through DFID co-financing).
The component aims to contribute to building the capacity of the government to deliver the National
Safety Net Program by (i) strengthening program systems to ensure good governance; (ii)
harmonizing cash transfer programs to improve sector coherence; and (iii) capacity building for
expanding cash transfer programs to promote more comprehensive and equitable coverage. These
three areas of support reflect the key results of the National Safety Net Program and the World Bank
support to it through the Program for Results (PforR), including the recommendations of the
assessments that were carried-out by the World Bank to inform the design of this program. To build
capacity in these three areas, this component will support the provision of technical assistance to the
government to further development and strengthen core program systems, such as targeting,
enrolment, payments and complaint and grievance handling among others.

Component Two: Program Implementation in Selected Sub-counties (US$ 51.2 equivalent through
DFID co-financing). The activities to be financed through this component remain unchanged from
the original project, as this consists of financing regular cash transfers to poor and vulnerable
households caring for OVCs that are enrolled into the program. These households are selected in
accordance with the Program’s Operational Manuel. Once enrolled into the Program, each household
receives a monthly payment in cash, which is delivered every two months either through the Postal
Corporation of Kenya (PCK) or Equity Bank. The monthly transfer is currently Ksh 2,000, although
this will be reviewed on an annual basis, and adjusted if needed.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project aims to be nationwide in coverage. The CT-OVC Program selects geographic areas to
support based on a ranking of locations that is informed by poverty and vulnerability criteria.


                                              Page 2 of 6
   5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
  Nyambura Githagui (AFTCS)

   6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
   Environmental Assessment OP/       No
   BP 4.01
   Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

   Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

   Pest Management OP 4.09            No

   Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
   BP 4.11
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      Yes              As described in the previous section, the
                                                      Environmental and Social Systems Assessment
                                                      (ESSA) that was carried out by the World Bank
                                                      as part of the preparation of the PforR operation
                                                      found that some marginalized groups may not be
                                                      captured in these programs but that this is not due
                                                      to deliberate effort to exclude them by program
                                                      staff but as a result of the limited coverage of the
                                                      program as compared with the level of need. In in
                                                      view of the findings of the ESSA, there is a need
                                                      for the CT-OVC program to pay keen attention to
                                                      Minorities, Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups.
                                                      As a result, while the original OVC project did
                                                      not trigger OP 4.10, this safeguard policy has
                                                      been triggered for the additional financing.
   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
   4.12
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
     Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
      Previous project was Environmental Category C. Additional financing will not result in a change
     of this category.



                                              Page 3 of 6
  The Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) that was carried out by the World
  Bank as part of the preparation of the PforR operation, together with a number of independent
  assessments, found that the CT-OVC Program tends to be well targeted to those households that
  are eligible for support. However, concerns have been raised that targeted programs may exclude
  some vulnerable and marginalized groups. The ESSA found that some marginalized groups may
  not be captured in these programs but that this is not due to deliberate effort to exclude them by
  program staff but as a result of the limited coverage of the program as compared with the level of
  need. In in view of the findings of the ESSA, there is a need for the CT-OVC program to pay keen
  attention to Minorities, Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups. As a result, while the original OVC
  project did not trigger OP 4.10, this safeguard policy has been triggered for the additional
  financing. A Vulnerable and Marginalized Group Framework has thus been prepared by the
  Borrower in accordance with the requirements of OP4.10. The framework sets out the institutional
  arrangements (including capacity building where necessary) for addressing any grievances and
  monitoring and reporting. It has been disclosed in the Borrower’s website and in the Banks Info
  Shop following cleared by the Bank.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
    N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
    N/A. No alternatives were considered.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
    The Operations Manual for the CT-OVC Program has been updated in response to the findings of
  the ESSA. The targeting process has been strengthened to better ensure that all eligible households
  – regardless of their place of residence, language or ethnicity – are considered for inclusion in the
  program and that the most deserving are then enrolled. The complaint and grievance mechanisms
  have similarly been reformed to improve their usability by poor and vulnerable households and
  follow-up by program staff. Additionally, a section has been added to the Operations Manual that
  provides guidance to front-line staff on how to reach minority, vulnerable and marginalized
  groups. A functional review will identify the capacity gaps in terms of staff and operational
  systems that will need to be strengthened and the project will finance those. These issues will be
  tracked through the regular monitoring of the program and by the World Bank through the regular
  implementation support missions.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    Consultations were held with minority, vulnerable and marginalized groups during the
  preparation of the ESSA and the feedback from these consultations are reflected in the ESSA
  report. Given the findings of the ESSA, and the triggering of OP4.10, a Vulnerable
  andMarginalized Group Framework has been prepared. Consultations with the key stakeholders
  were held within the framework of existing program and also with communities in possible areas
  of operation with care not to raise expectations in the communities until specific program locations
  are known. There are however no adverse impacts anticipated from any of the OVC program
  activities.
B. Disclosure Requirements
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework


                                             Page 4 of 6
     Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Sep-2013
     Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Sep-2013
   "In country" Disclosure
     Kenya                                                            11-Sep-2013
     Comments:
   If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
   respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
   Audit/or EMP.
   If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
   OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
    Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
    Indigenous Peoples?
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Sector Manager review the plan?
    If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
    Development Unit or Sector Manager?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:       Cornelia M. Tesliuc
   Approved By


                                               Page 5 of 6
Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 15-Sep-2013
Advisor:
Sector Manager:     Name: Stefano Paternostro (SM)      Date: 16-Sep-2013




                                     Page 6 of 6
