                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA762
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Jul-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Pakistan                                  Project ID:                       P112901
                              Project Name:                   PK: Punjab Cities Governance Improvement (P112901)
                              Task Team Leader:               Raja Rehan Arshad
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 27-Jun-2012                                     Estimated Board Date:             30-Aug-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  SASDU                                     Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Sub-national government administration (70%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (30%)
                              Theme:                          Municipal governance and institution building (40%), Decentralization (15%), Municipal finance (15%), Public
                                                              expenditure, financial management and procurement (15%), Other public sector governance (15%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                          Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                             5.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                 150.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                       155.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The project development objective is to support the Punjab large cities in strengthening systems for improved planning, resource management,
                              and accountability.

                              3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Component 1: Performance Grants (US$ 140 million)
                              This component will provide an annual grant to the project cities, based on satisfactory performance in selected governance areas. Disbursements
                              under Component 1 will be made against a set of Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEPs) that reflect non-salary O&M expenditures of existing
                              urban assets and services, such as roads and water supply service in the city. The amount of the performance grant is determined on a PFC
                              formula basis, at an increasing scale of distribution across four years.

                              EEPs would finance two departments/entities for each city included in the project: the Works and Services Department of CDGs and WASAs.
                              Using the 2010-2011 government budget number, the EEPs identified under the project account for about 7.8% of total expenditure of five cities
                              and their service entities (including expenditure of CDGs, DAs, and WASAs), 10.8% of total current expenditure , and 34.8% of total current
                              expenditure related with urban related functions . The EEPs are under the city current budget—they are: (1) power/energy needed for machinery,
                              operations for asset maintenance and service delivery (56% of the EEP expenditures) and (2) repair and maintenance of machinery, equipment,
                              roads, buildings, and water supply/drainage (44% of the EEP expenditures). The Bank’s guidelines on financial management and procurement will
                              be applicable to the EEP and the framework for addressing social and environmental safeguards will be applicable to all activities included in the
                              EEP.

                              The disbursement decision will be based on achievement of pre-specified results, referred to as disbursement linked indicators (DLIs). The
                              achievement of the seven DLIs (Table 2, below) will be individually assessed for each city every year by independent assessment teams. The DLIs
                              have been identified with the Government over the course of preparation to reflect specific areas of improvement. The Government is in full
                              agreement on all DLIs currently proposed. The achievement of all DLIs applicable for the year would be required to ensure disbursement.

                              First-year DLIs were met by Project Appraisal; disbursement for the first year is made on project effectiveness. For following years, a city needs to
                              meet all the DLIs for that particular year in order for disbursement against the next year to be triggered. The funds for the cities which are not
                              qualified for disbursement during the year will be rolled over to the next year for same cities. If cities are not qualified for disbursement for two
                              consecutive years, the funds for those cities will be shared by other participating cities that meet the DLIs. If the DLIs are met for a particular city at
                              a year, the city is also required to spend more than or equal to what it received in the previous year for the EEPs in order for the full disbursement
                              for the following year. If the DLIs are met but the city spends less than what it received, then only the amount which is equal to what they have
                              spent on EEPs for that year will be disbursed toward the following year, while the remaining amount will be rolled over to the following year. In that
                              case, the city needs to meet all the DLISs and spend at least the disbursed amount and the remaining balance from previous year’s disbursement
                              in order for full disbursement for the year after. If the city does not meet the spending requirement for two consecutive years, the difference
                              between project funds going to the city and actual spending on EEPs will be shared by other participating cities.

                              Component 1 focuses on two areas of urban governance and is aligned with the seven DLIs. The first sub-component addresses transparency and

                                                                                                                                                                             Page 1 of 4
                         voice in the preparation, monitoring and evaluation of plans and programs in urban areas and the second sub-component addresses resource
                         planning and management, seeking to improve decision making, consolidate fragmented revenue sources and strengthen resource mobilization.

                         Sub-component 1.1: Transparency and voice (DLIs 1-3). Three improvements are supported: (i) institutional alignment in spatial planning. The
                         project supports the introduction of an integrated spatial planning process that will use a common urban b oundary definition, and in which all city
                         level institutions participate. In any given urban area there are CDG and other city level service entities, such as WASA and DA. Each of these
                         entities has a different planning remit, and their plans do not cover the same spatial distribution. The resulting lack of coordination hampers the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         efficient use of development funding; (ii) public disclosure of information. The project supports improvements in the collection (and up-dating) of
                         data, preparation of periodic reports and disclosure of information to citizens; and (iii) citizen feedback. The project also supports the development
                         of a grievance redressal mechanism for citizens, and a citizen scorecard.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Resource planning and management (DLIs 4 -7): Four improvements are supported: (i) capital improvement and asset
                         maintenance. Cities will prepare three-year rolling DAMP; (ii) arrangements for producing annual consolidated financial statements of CDGs and
                         efficient implementation of procurement procedures. Cities will develop SOPs focusing on streamlining of the procurement rules with other
                         directives; and implementation of procurement rules including but not limited to procurement planning, equal opportunity, transparency and
                         efficiency; (iii) intergovernmental finance. Currently there are multiple funding windows, some supporting CDGs and others service entities (e.g.
                         WASA). Government of Punjab will consolidate these transfers into one window, and provide the funds to the CDG, which will then further allocate
                         the funds. This consolidation will allow improved planning and control of resources for city level development expenditures; and (iv) strengthening
                         own source revenue. Cities will increase revenues through improvements in the property tax regime.

                         Component 2: Project Implementation and Capacity Building (US$ 10 million)

                         This component supports a program technical cell (PTC) under provincial Planning and Development Department’s Urban Unit and City Program
                         Units (CPUs) in the five cities. The project will provide financing through a Designated Account to be held with the Urban Unit for (i) towards office
                         and administrative expenses (goods equipment and operating costs) for the Urban Unit and the five CPUs; and (ii) capacity building activities for
                         entire urban areas in the Province. Funds will disburse against presentation of financial management reports.

                         The Urban Unit is tasked with (i) project management and administration; (ii) project financial management (iii) project reporting; and (iv)
                         monitoring and evaluation;

                         The Urban Unit will also manage the capacity building activities sponsored under the project, including. (i) formulation of TOR/ RFP; (ii) assist in
                         short-listing consultants and manage the selection process; (iii) ensuring quality assurance on the delivery of the capacity building; and (ii)
                         facilitating knowledge sharing between the five project cities. The capacity building will focus on: (i) city-wide urban planning; (ii) resource planning:
                         (ii) urban immovable property tax (UIPT); (iv) procurement; (v) management of environmental and social impacts; (vi) citizen participation and use
                         of social accountability approaches and tools; and (vii) preparation of service delivery investment pipeline for third stage of GoPunjab urban
                         strategy.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The proposed project is geographically spread over the five large cities of Punjab and includes the cities of Lahore, Faisalabad, Multan,
                         Gujranwala and Rawalpindi. These cities account for almost one-half of the urban population living in the Punjab province. Population pressure on
                         these cities together with industrial activities have led to rise in environmental pollution levels particularly air and water quality. Indiscriminate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         pumping of groundwater has also led to groundwater mining at least in Lahore and Rawalpindi. Solid waste management and sewage disposal are
                         also grey areas and need systematic handling to build the image as environmentally responsible cities in the province.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Raja Rehan Arshad (GFDRR)
                         Shahnaz Arshad (SASDU)
                         Ming Zhang (SASDU)
                         Sanjay Srivastava (SARDE)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?        Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes               The component 1 on Performance Grants to the five participating cities is to be
                                                                                            used for strengthening systems and providing funds for the improved operation
                                                                                            and maintenance (O&M) of existing urban assets and services, such as roads and
                                                                                            water supply service. Since none of the scheme envisaged to be financed under
                                                                                            PCGIP is likely to be large scale, unprecedented and/or irreversible impacts are
                                                                                            unlikely, the PCGIP has been classified as Category B, in accordance with OP
                                                                                            4.01. The project has prepared an ESMF in compliance with OP 4.01.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      No
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                               No
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                          No
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11           No
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                    No
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              No
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        No
                         Projects on International Waterways OP/BP        No
                         7.50

                                                                                                                                                                       Page 2 of 4
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any potential l arge scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  The component 1 (described above) on Performance Grants to the five participating cities is to be used for strengthening systems and
                                 providing funds for the improved operation and maintenance (O&M) of existing urban assets and services, such as roads and water supply
                                 service. Other eligible expenditures include: (1) power/energy needed for machinery, operations for asset maintenance and service delivery;
                                 and, (2) repair and maintenance of machinery, equipment, roads, buildings, and water supply. No new schemes investments to be funded
                                 under this component. .

                                 Recognizing the fact that the project will finance only O&M activities of existing urban assets and services, which have low to moderate, short
                                 duration and reversible environmental impacts, the environmental and social impacts are expected to be marginal. The O&M activities are not
                                 anticipated to require land or relocation of structures. Therefore OP 4.12 is not triggered. To deal with the environmental impacts and unlikely
                                 situations where unexpected social safeguard impacts materialize, the borrower has considered the project as an opportunity to introduce
                                 reforms for the integration of environmental management aspects in the cities’ urban planning and development process. The project has
                                 therefore prepared an environmental and social management framework (ESMF) with an aim to guide the five cities on the internalization of
                                 environmental and social considerations at large in the cities’ planning and development process.

                                 Urban air quality, solid waste management, sewage disposal and water quality, - indicators related with urban development, remain major
                                 environmental issues needed to be tackled in a more systematic way than the current practices. Except in Multan, where there exists one
                                 sanitary landfill site, which caters for around 30 percent of the solid waste generated there – in all other cities solid waste management remains
                                 a major issue. Similarly, PM10 and PM2.5 levels, indicators reflecting the state of air quality, in these five cities are also well above the WHO
                                 thresholds. In terms of sewage disposal, except Faisalabad with treatment facility to cater about 20 percent of the sewage generated in the city,
                                 no other city has got treatment facilities installed and receiving water bodies, like the river Ravi in case of Lahore, have turned into sort of a
                                 drain than a river.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                  Due to the nature of the proposed project interventions with focus only on O&M activities of existing urban assets in water supply and roads,
                                 no long term direct or indirect impacts are envisaged.
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                   The proposed project activities are for O&M of the service delivery assets, and the only other option is no project’ option, which could have
                                 even more significant adverse environmental impacts like affecting human health seriously. In the analytical work carriedout earlier in Pakistan,
                                 it is concluded that both ambient air quality and indoor air pollution, together with inadequate water and sanitation facilities are the major
                                 contributors in the cost of environment degradation, which amounts to 6 percent of country’s GDP. Further, inadequate water and sanitation
                                 facilities are major reason for the morbidity and mortality in the children under the age of 5. No project is therefore not an option from
                                 environment perspective.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                                  and implement the measures described.
                                   The borrower has prepared an ESMF, which guides the CGs in the preparation of environmental assessments, identification of potential
                                 environmental impacts and to implement the corresponding mitigation measures. The document also suggests the institutional arrangements
                                 for the implementation of ESMF. The overall responsibility for the monitoring of ESMF implementation will remain with the Urban Unit, which is
                                 an extended technical arm of the Government of Punjab to provide technical back-stopping to the cities in the province. UU has got number of
                                 qualified technical specialists including on environment, which will provide support to project implementation unit at UU for compliance
                                 monitoring. Under the arrangements, a dedicated Safeguards Coordinator will be appointed in the Urban Unit, who will be responsible for
                                 overall implementation of the ESMF, and will coordinate with the implementing agencies at the CDGs and monitor their activities during the
                                 implementation phase. The Safeguard Coordinator will also ensure that the cities are properly capacity built to be able to perform the activities
                                 as per the requirements of the ESMF by designing training programs and generating discussions on various forums. The Safeguard
                                 Coordinator will also be responsible for arranging an independent assessment, a third party validation of ESMF implementation, which will be
                                 carried out on an annual basis. At the CDGs, each large city will also have a dedicated Safeguards Specialist, who will ensure effective
                                 implementation of the ESMF within the respective city. S/he will prepare the scheme-specific ESMPs, carryout monitoring to ensure effective
                                 implementation of the mitigation measures proposed by the ESMPs, and produce regular reports, which will document the process and
                                 outcome of the entire ESMF implementation during the reporting period.
                               5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                                  on potentially affected people.
                                   The CGs, its various special agencies like WASAs, DAs, other government departments like the Punjab Environment department, Urban and
                                 Public Health Department, activist groups in water and sanitation and solid waste management in the cities, civil society organizations, select
                                 group of project beneficiaries, communities benefiting from the project are some of the stakeholders, which are proposed to be consulted during
                                 the preparation of environmental assessments as proposed in the ESMF.

                               B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                               Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                                 Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              03-Jul-2012
                                 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          06-Jul-2012
                                 Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           10-Jul-2012

                                                                                                                                                                        Page 3 of 4
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                              Directors
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?               Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?               Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language       Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for    Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?               Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard     Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same         Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Raja Rehan Arshad
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                                             Date: 10-Jul-2012
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Ming Zhang (SM)                                                      Date: 10-Jul-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                                Page 4 of 4
