                                                                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                              CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSC234
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Apr-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                         Guinea                                    Project ID:                         P128309
                              Project Name:                    Second Emergency Agricultural Productivity Support Project (P128309)
                              Task Team Leader:                Jane C. Hopkins
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 30-Apr-2012                                      Estimated Board Date:               22-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                   AFTAR                                     Lending Instrument:                 Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                          Irrigation and drainage (40%), Crops (35%), Agricultural extension and research (25%)
                              Theme:                           Global food crisis response (100%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                             Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                          0.00
                                   Global Food Crisis Response Program                                                                                             20.00
                                   Special Financing                                                                                                                 0.00
                                   Financing Gap                                                                                                                     0.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                           20.00
                              Environmental Category:          B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The development objective of grant is to improve the productivity and value-added of targeted commodities. The commodities targeted are rice,
                              maize, and cassava and traditional poultry. They were chosen based on the following factors: (i) importance in the diet of the Guinean population,
                              (ii) widely cultivated by smallholders, and (iii) an important source of income for women (traditional poultry).
Public Disclosure Copy




                              C. Project Description

                              Activities under the proposed project will be organized around the following three components: (i) Rehabilitation and improved management of
                              irrigation infrastructure in selected rice producing areas: (ii) Access to improved inputs and post-harvest equipment;and (iii) Capacity Building,
                              Project Coordination and M&E.

                              Component 1: Rehabilitation and improved management of irrigation and drainage infrastructure in selected rice producing areas (USD 7.8
                              million). This component aims at increasing the productivity of irrigated rice production systems in targeted areas through the rehabilitation of
                              infrastructure and improved management. Specific objectives include: (i) improved water control through the restoration of degraded works and
                              equipment that will allow abandoned or low yielding perimeters to be used productively; (ii) restructuring water management and maintenance
                              systems by strengthening the technical capacity of irrigation management organizations; and (iii) improved storage and marketing capacity through
                              the rehabilitation and construction of storage facilities and threshing platforms, and strengthening the management capacity of the producer
                              groups.

                              In particular, the component will finance: (i) the rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure totaling 3,620 hectares, (ii) the rehabilitation
                              and construction of post-harvest infrastructure (storage and drying/threshing facilities), and (iii) organizational support and capacity building for
                              water management and maintenance of the rehabilitated infrastructure (perimeters, storage facilities, etc.) so as to ensure sustainability.

                              Organizational and capacity building activities supported by the component include: (i) the formation and technical training of the producer groups
                              and water user associations in charge of the water management and maintenance of irrigation and drainage infrastructure; (ii) the establishment of
                              an annual system of maintenance of the rehabilitated facilities including the programming and implementation of maintenance programs; (iii)
                              estimation of hydraulic fees and establishment of an efficient system for the management of recovered funds to be exclusively devoted to
                              maintenance; and (iv) organization and training committees in charge of the management of the storage facilities.

                              The irrigation infrastructures to be rehabilitated have already been selected among a long list of sites identified by FAO as easy to rehabilitate at a
                              cost of approximately 1,000 to 1,500 USD/ha. The sites are distributed regionally as indicated in table 1 below. The selection of intervention sites
                              were based on specific criteria that will allow the project development objectives to be reached. These criteria include: (i) level of commitment/
                              engagement of beneficiary producer organizations to sustainable maintenance, (ii) accessibility of sites, (iii) the potential for increases in
                              productivity, and (iv) the unit cost associated with the rehabilitation.
                           To arrive at the final identification of project intervention sites, and a more precise estimate of the size and cost of the rehabilitation work and
                           postharvest investments, the following studies will be launched as soon as possible: (a) identification of sites to be rehabilitated by rigorously
                           applying the selection criteria, and in coordination with extension services (ANPROCA) and the producer organizations (unions and federations);
                           (b) prioritization of the identified work and postharvest investments, technical specifications and evaluation of costs; (c) preparation of the tender
                           documents. Preparatory studies will be entrusted to the National Directorate of Rural Engineering (DNGR) which will appoint a national
                           coordinator who will be supported by the technical offices of Rural Engineering (BTGR/SPGR) at the prefecture level.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Component 2: Access to improved inputs and post-harvest equipment (USD 9.9 million). This component aims to improve smallholder a ccess to
                           improved inputs and food processing equipment, enabling them to increase the yields of targeted commodities and their value-added.

                           Sub-component 2.1: Seed multiplication and distribution of technology packages (USD 8.3 million): This sub-component expands the successful
                           farmer-based seed multiplication system for rice that was supported by the PUAPA and disseminates improved technology packages and advisory
                           services to smallholders operating on 3,600 hectares of irrigated rice and 55,000 hectares of rainfed rice and maize. This subcomponent will also
                           finance a vaccination campaign for local poultry which will help reduce the mortality rate by 30 to 40%. A summary of the composition of the input
                           packages and annual distribution is provided in Table 2 below.

                           As with the PUAPA, the proposed project will work through the Confederation Nationale des Organisations Paysannes de Guinée (CNOP-G) and
                           its member federations and unions. The CNOP-G will be responsible for the distribution of the input packages following procedures piloted under
                           the PUAPA. Inputs are sold to members on a #cropping-season# credit basis. Seed is reimbursed in-kind at the end of the cropping season.
                           Fertilizers and herbicides are sold at subsidized prices (based on the government-set rate) and reimbursed in cash at the end of the cropping
                           season. The recovered funds (lodged in a separate account) are used to capitalize a revolving fund for the purchase of inputs in future seasons.
                           An evaluation of these procedures and a study detailing the proposed management and use of the revolving fund (including annual audit
                           procedures) is being carried out under the on-going PUAPA. Results will be incorporated into the implementation manual of the proposed project.

                           Sub-component 2.2. Support for post-harvest processing to increase value-added (USD 1.6 million): The sub-component aims to increase the
                           value-added of agricultural products by improving small-scale primary processing activities. More specifically it aims to develop economic
                           opportunities for rural women who are the main actors in agricultural transformation, and improve the quantity and quality of products processed
                           locally

                           This sub-component will finance (i) matching grants to women#s groups for the acquisition of small-scale processing equipment for the production
                           of parboiled rice and the processing of cassava into flour, (ii) training for members of the beneficiary groups in management and marketing
                           techniques, (iii) training of artisans for repairing the equipment, and (iv) possible studies and assessments for the establishment of food processing
                           micro-enterprises.

                           Component 3. Capacity Building, Project Coordination, and M&E (USD 2.3 million). This component will ensure th e effective management and
                           coordination of the project and finance capacity building activities for key stakeholders along the supply chain. The project will facilitate the
                           upgrading of technical skills of key staff and farmers involved in the process. Fiduciary oversight will be provided by the fiduciary unit of the Bank-
                           funded national CDD program (the PACV).

                           In particular, the component will finance (i) the preparation and implementation of a plan to strengthen the capacity of staff directly involved in the
                           implementation of the project including the CNOP-G, ANPROCA (Agence National de la Promotion Rurale et du Conseil Agricole), DNA (Direction
                           National de l# Agriculture), and DNSV (Direction National de la Protection des Végétaux) (ii) the rehabilitation of demonstration farms at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           National Agricultural and Animal Husbandry Schools (Ecoles Nationales d'Agriculture et d'Elevage, ENAE) of Tolo, Koba, Macenta, and Bordot-
                           Kankan for continuing education of extension agents and farmers (iii) additional contractual personnel, operational costs and the necessary
                           equipment for the project management, and (iv) supervision and monitoring, internal and external assessment studies, and studies to establish
                           baseline and monitor the evolution of the indicators.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           Overall, the project will intervene in 16 (of 33) prefectures which are distributed across all four agro-ecological zones of the country. The
                           perimeters proposed for rehabilitation are located in 8 of the 16 prefectures: 905 hectares in Boffa prefecture (Lower Guinea); 665 hectares in
                           Tougué prefecture (Middle Guinea); 314 hectares in Mamou prefecture (Middle Guinea); 46 hectares in Pita prefecture (Middle Guinea); 1105
                           hectares in Siguri prefecture (Upper Guinea); and 600 hectares of small scale community-based rehabilitations in the prefectures of N'Zerekore,
                           Yamou and Kissidougou (Forest Guinea). The Middle and Upper Guinea sites are in the watersheds of the Senegal and Niger River Basins
                           respectively.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           Although some institutional capacity for implementing safeguard policies and monitoring compliance exists, experience under other projects (e.g.
                           PUAPA-1) indicates that the borrower's capacity is in need of strengthening and close implementation support. The Project Coordination Unit, the
                           Ministry of Agriculture departments involved in project implementation, and the National Federation of Producers (CNOP-G) and their member
                           unions, will all need close implementation support and capacity building throughout the project cycle.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS)
                           Maman-Sani Issa (AFTEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                                Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                                Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                                Yes                    The project involves the rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure,
                                                                                                                        the rehabilitation and construction of post-harvest infrastructure (storage and
                                                                                                                        drying/threshing facilities), the rehabilitation of demonstration farms, and the
                                                                                                                        distribution of technology kits (seed, fertilizer, pesticide). Environmental and
                                                                                                                        social impacts are expected to be moderate and manageable in terms of
                                                                                                                        mitigation. An ESMF will be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed before
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        appraisal.
                                Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                        No                    This project involves rehabilitation of existing irrigation works and therefore will
                                                                                                                        not affect natural habitats.
                                Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                 No                     The project does not involve forestry/re-forestation/afforestation activities.

                                Pest Management OP 4.09                                            Yes                   The project will distribute technology kits, including pesticides. A PMP will be
                                                                                                                        prepared (drawing from the PMP prepared for the Guinea WAAPP-1C and used
                                                                                                                        by the first emergency agricultural productivity project) and will be disclosed
                                                                                                                        before appraisal.
                                Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                             No                     The project will not affect physical cultural resources.

                                Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                      No                     There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.

                                Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                Yes                   The project civil works may result in land acquisition leading to involuntary
                                                                                                                        resettlement and/or loss of access to resources and livelihoods. An RPF will be
                                                                                                                        prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed before appraisal.
                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No                    The project does not involve existing dams, nor will it finance the construction
                                                                                                                        of new dams.
                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          Yes                    OP7.50 is triggered because several of the sites proposed for the rehabilitation
                                7.50                                                                                    of irrigation & drainage infrastructure are in the Niger and Senegal River Basin
                                                                                                                        watersheds. However, since the project is only financing the rehabilitation of
                                                                                                                        existing schemes (no expansion) which are small-size and scattered over the
                                                                                                                        country, no adverse effect is foreseen on the quality and the quantity of water
                                                                                                                        flows (to be confirmed during the preparation of the ESMF). But, the team plans
                                                                                                                        to prepare a memo requesting an exception to the notification requirement (as
                                                                                                                        per para 7a) and submit, following clearances, to the RVP before appraisal.
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No                     N/A



                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Public Disclosure Copy




                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 20-Apr-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    Preparation of relevant safeguard documents began in early December (as soon as the TdR were approved and appropriate consultants
                                    identified / recruited). Preliminary drafts of the ESMF and RPF were completed in mid-January 2012 and the PMP at the end of February.
                                    The documents have been reviewed and validated nationally and will be disclosed and submitted to the Bank in mid-April.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: Jane C. Hopkins
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                     Date: 16-Apr-2012
                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Martien Van Nieuwkoop (SM)                                                                      Date: 19-Apr-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
