                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSA265
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Nov-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Mongolia                                Project ID:                      P122320
                              Project Name:                  Ulaanbaatar Clean Air Project (P122320)
                              Task Team Leader:              Gailius J. Draugelis
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 18-Oct-2011                                  Estimated Board Date:            22-Dec-2011
                              Managing Unit:                 EASCS                                   Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        General energy sector (100%)
                              Theme:                         Pollution management and environmental health (90%), Other urban development (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                  Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                  BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                        6.89
                                  International Development Association (IDA)                                                                              15.00
                                  Total                                                                                                                    21.89
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The development objective (PDO) is to enable consumers in ger areas to access heating appliances producing less particulate matter emissions
                              and to further develop selected medium-term particulate matter abatement measures in Ulaanbaatar in coordination with development partners.

                              3. Project Description

                              A.         Project components
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The proposed project would comprise the following components: (A) Ger Area Particulate Matter Mitigation; (B) Particulate Matter Mitigation in
                              Central Ulaanbaatar; and (C) Public Awareness Raising, Program Coordination and Project Management. The UBCAP is designed to fill
                              abatement program gaps (i) to ensure a key short term measure, replacement of heating appliances in ger areas, is implemented as fully as
                              possible, (ii) to facilitate development of a second generation of investments in access to cleaner heating options and dust control # where there
                              are significant co-benefits but which would not be picked up by the Government or donors without appropriate preparation, and (iii) to build
                              capacity in abatement program coordination by the Government, especially the Municipality of UB.

                              Component A. Ger Area Particulate Matter Mitigation. (total estimated cost, US$16.1 million, indicative IDA financing $9.2 million) The objective
                              of this component is to implement a stove replacement program and a low pressure boiler replacement program, by providing subsidies, financed
                              from the IDA credit, to households to partially bring down the capital costs of eligible stoves and low pressure boilers. The UBCAP will cover as
                              many households as possible in those stove and low pressure boiler market segments that are uncovered by the ongoing stove replacement
                              program financed by the United States Millennium Challenge Account (MCA), set to expire in September 2013, and will provide additional market
                              development support needed to help sustain the clean stove technology market. The UBCAP stove replacement program will use the sales and
                              distribution mechanism used by the ongoing MCA stove replacement program to maintain continuity and avoid duplication.

                              The component will finance: (a) capital subsidies to households for stoves, stoves for heating walls and low pressure boilers, including old stove
                              replacement; (b) technical support to stove and low pressure boiler suppliers through (i) additional equipment, materials, technical assistance and
                              operating expenses for the Stove Emissions and Efficiency Testing (SEET) laboratory, which will test products for emissions performance, and
                              verify performance of stoves in use; (ii) technical assistance and equipment for technical advice in addressing problems with design and
                              production of stoves and low pressure boilers; (iii) technical assistance in the development of emissions standards for stoves and low pressure
                              boilers; (iv) technical assistance to design adjustments to the stove replacement program for accommodating low pressure boilers; (v) technical
                              assistance in establish a system of monitoring quality of stoves and low pressure boilers selected for UBCAP support; (c) monitoring and
                              evaluation; and, (d) training and study tours for knowledge exchange.

                              Component B: Central Ulaanbaatar Particulate Matter Mitigation (total estimated component cost US$ 2.3 million, indicative IDA financing $2.3
                              million.) The objective of this component is to help the government accelerate approval of action plans for larger scale, medium term pollution
                              reduction measures. Current barriers to approval are the lack of feasibility studies and policies that encourage sustainable investments. The
                              Component has four subcomponents:

                              Subcomponent (B1) Mitigation of Fugitive Dust from lack of City Greening: (estimated cost $0.78 million, indicative IDA financing $0.78 million)
                              This subcomponent will prepare an action plan for city greening and prepare and implement a pilot, including: (a) an assessment of of the current
                              greening programs of the city and evaluation of options to seed grass and other greenery for the purpose of reducing dust throughout the city and

                                                                                                                                                                       Page 1 of 4
                         development of recommendations to improve greening; (b) preparation of a pilot project, including support for bid document preparation,
                         supervision and monitoring and evaluation of the pilot; (c) investment support for the supply and installation of grass and other eligible plants/trees
                         in UB on a pilot basis.

                         Subcomponent (B2) Mitigation of dust from Power Plant Emissions and Ash Ponds: (estimated cost $0.4 million, indicative IDA financing $0.4
                         million) This subcomponent will finance: (a) a feasibility study for (i) the installation of improved emission controls in Ulaanbaatar#s combined heat
                         and power plants and (ii) the mitigation of dust from power plant ash ponds, studying their environmental impacts and recommending cost effective
Public Disclosure Copy




                         solutions.

                         Subcomponent (B3) District Heating Feasibility Study and Knowledge Building: (estimated cost $0.6 million, indicative IDA financing $0.6 million)
                         This subcomponent will support: (a) a feasibility study for the rehabilitation and sustainable expansion of district heating in Ulaanbaatar; and (b)
                         complementary study tours on district heating policy, regulation and management # addressing current sector issues of fragmentation
                         (transmission and distribution are separately owned and managed), billing (heating and hot tap water are unmetered, wasting energy for heating),
                         and planning.

                         Subcomponent (B4) Affordable Housing Policy Technical Assistance: (estimated cost $0.5 million, indicative IDA financing $0.5 million) This
                         subcomponent will support: (a) assessments of current policies, laws and practices for affordable housing provision in UB, evaluating effectiveness
                         toward meeting policy objectives, and introducing lessons from international experience on affordable housing and (b) developing an affordable
                         housing strategy for UB City from which policies and programs can be identified. This task will be carried out in a participatory and consultative
                         manner by establishing a Stakeholder Forum to develop a shared vision among all actors and thereby ensure that the strategy can be
                         implemented.

                         Component C. Public Awareness Raising, Program Coordination and Project Management (estimated component cost US$ 3.0 million, Indicative
                         IDA financing US$ 3.0 million) In addition to project management support, this component will build capacity in the MUB to more systematically
                         collect information on air pollution programs in its city, use that information to strengthen coordination efforts and its dissemination of public
                         information through this enhanced program monitoring capability.

                         Subcomponent (C1) Air Quality Monitoring, Management and Analysis (estimated cost $0.8 million, indicative IDA financing $0.8 million) The
                         component will support (a) air quality monitoring and analysis equipment, including for the Ulaanbaatar Air Quality Agency, in charge of air quality
                         monitoring in the city; (b) training, including study tours, in urban air quality analysis and management to the UB municipality. This subcomponent
                         is designed to maintain momentum after an ongoing Japan International Cooperation Agency air quality capacity building project winds down.
                         JICA program#s recommendations will identify follow up actions that, if acceptable to the Bank and MUB, this subcomponent plans to support.

                         Subcomponent (C2) Program Coordination Support (estimated cost $0.3 million, indicative IDA financing $0.3 million). The subcomponent will
                         support (a) consultants to support UB city#s air pollution program coordination efforts, including to (i) maintain links with stakeholders; (ii) collect,
                         synthesize and archive information on air quality for use by decision makers and the public; (iii) provide support to various air quality working
                         groups that UB participates in or leads itself to improve effectiveness and sharing of information; and (b) study tours on air quality management
                         and policy making # to gain knowledge on various approaches and common difficulties associated with air quality improvement programs.

                         Subcomponent (C3): Project Management, Public Awareness, and Monitoring and Evaluation: (estimated cost $1.8 million, indicative IDA
                         financing $1.8 million) This component will support (i) the hiring of a PR firm to assist the UBCAP PIU with developing a communications program
                         for the project; (ii) a management fee for the Project Implemenation Unit, covering (a) operation and vehicle maintenance; (b) rent, operation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         maintenance of office and office equipment; (c) transportation and travel, including per diem allowances for Project staff in travel status; (d) rental
                         of vehicles; (e) office supplies, utilities and office administration, including translation, printing and advertising; (f) goods for project management,
                         including vehicles, office equipment and software; (g) communication costs; (h) public awareness raising costs; (i) reasonable bank charges; (j)
                         meeting costs; (k) insurance premiums; (l) auditing and (m) staff salaries and benefits; and (iii) project level monitoring and evaluation activities to
                         report to the Government and the World Bank, including an air quality monitoring and evaluation study.

                         The Bank team will agree with the Government on a rolling annual work plans to allow the subcomponent activities to adjust to changing work
                         programming priorities. The first annual work program is agreed. Retroactively financed activities are (a) capital subsidies for low pressure boilers;
                         (b) support for stove and low pressure boiler producers including (i) technical assistance for the SEET Laboratory and for product development; (ii)
                         equipment and operating costs of the SEET Laboratory; (iii) market study for low pressure boilers; (iv) monitoring and evaluation of the subsidy
                         mechanism implemented in winter 2011-2012; (c) technical support to UB city for establishing a monitoring system for air quality programs and
                         coordination; (d) training and study tours; and (f) management fee for project management services.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         Ulaanbaatar (UB), Mongolia's capital city, is located in the foothill of the Khentii Mountain range, at an elevation of 1,350 m, along the Tuul River
                         and in valleys of its tributaries- the Tolgoit, the Selbe, and the Uliastai. UB's climate is continental, with very cold and dry winters with limited
                         snowfall, and short summers (June-August). The temperature is below zero from November through May. The annual precipitation is 250mm, of
                         which 94% falls from April to October.

                         Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia's only international gateway, remains nearly unlivable in certain times in winter due to severe air pollution. Particulate
                         Matter (PM), which in its fine form is inhaled and causes major health damage, is severe. Among all measurements taken in a recent World Bank
                         air pollution study, the worst recorded annual average concentration was more than 10 times higher than the Mongolian Air Quality Standard
                         (AQS) for PM10 and 25 times higher than the Mongolian AQS for PM2.5 and Mongolian AQS is already 2-3 times higher than WHO standards.
                         (The Mongolian annual ambient air quality standards are 50 /m3 and 25 /m3 for PM10 and PM2.5, respectively, while the WHO interim targets for
                         developing countries are 70 /m3 for PM10 and 35 /m3 for PM2.5. See Air Quality Analysis in Ulaanbaatar: Improving Air Quality to Reduce Health
                         Impacts (forthcoming, World Bank).) Concentrations in Ger Areas, where the vast majority of the urban poor live, are more severe than in the city
                         centre. The extreme seasonal variability in air quality - the summer months are very clean and wintertime air quality some of the worst recorded
                         anywhere - reduce annual average concentrations and divert attention of the fact that the situation is one of high importance.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Bernard Baratz (MNSEG)

                                                                                                                                                                        Page 2 of 4
                               Jun Zeng (EASCS)

                               6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                    Yes        No      Explanation
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                 ✖
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                    ✖
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                                             ✖
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                                        ✖
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                         ✖
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                  ✖
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                            ✖
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                      ✖
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                      ✖
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                          ✖

                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                 Potential environmental impacts associated with the project are currently anticipated in the (a) operation of the laboratory to test cook stoves
                                 and low pressure boilers; (b) planting of trees, grass and other eligible plants/trees in UB on a pilot basis to mitigate fugitive dust from a lack of
                                 city greening, and (c) upstream and downstream issues regarding the subsidy and promotion of new stoves, including: management of scrap
                                 metals from the old replaced stoves, and domestic stove fabrication facilities.

                                 In addition, the project will also support a number of feasibility studies, namely: (a) a Power Plant Emissions Control Strategy to (i) improve
                                 emission controls in Ulaanbaatar#s three power plants and to (ii) improve mitigation of dust from power plant ash ponds, studying their
                                 environmental impacts and recommending cost effective solutions; (b) district heating rehabilitation and expansion opportunities. There could
                                 be potential environmental issues associated with the recommended investments resulting from preparation of the feasibility studies.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                 N/A
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                 The project is based on dialogue conducted through the Bank#s Economic and Sector Work on evaluating urban air pollution, health impacts
                                 and mitigation options as well as an ADB supported pilot project examining the stove subsidy mechanism. The project has selected measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 where gaps have been identified to ensure feasible short term measures have the best chance of successful implementation and medium term
                                 measures have time for preparation. The project was designed as the optimum selection of mitigation strategies to reduce one of the worst air
                                 quality situations in the world.
                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                                  and implement the measures described.
                                 A safeguards report was prepared by the Borrower to address all the potential environmental and social aspects of the project discussed above
                                 (see Section II A 1). The report was reviewed and accepted by the World Bank.

                                 The Project will be implemented by the UBCAP Project Management Unit (PMU) of the Municipality of Ulaanbaatar (MUB). This PMU has one
                                 of the best project preparation and implementation capacities in the country. It has adequate and appropriately qualified staff (over 15 staff),
                                 including seconded staff from utility companies and related divisions of MUB. PMU has over 10 years of implementation experience with World
                                 Bank-financed projects (USIP1 and USIP2) and other donor funded projects (JSDF1, NEMO, JSDF2). It has deep operational experience in
                                 World Bank procedures, especially, procurement, accounting and financial management, environment, and resettlement, in management of
                                 technical assistance, construction supervision, and handling of contractors. It has also developed good capacity in mobilizing communities for
                                 community-led small scale infrastructure. The Task Team assessed PMU capacity to implement the specific safeguard requirements for the
                                 project as adequate. The Task Team plans to provide training to the PIU to reinforce requirements of the project. No additional safeguard
                                 capacity strengthening is considered to be necessary.
                               5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                                  on potentially affected people.
                                 The Safeguards Report was publicly disclosed on July 16, 2011, on the PIU website. Interviews of stove producers and users were conducted
                                 jointly between the Bank team and the PIU during the preparation of the rapid assessment of upstream and downstream impacts of
                                 development of new stoves and discarding of old stoves. The PIU plans to conduct consultations after the 2011-2012 winter season to obtain
                                 further feedback on the current stove replacement program funded by another donor so as to incorporate the most recent lessons learned into
                                 the current design.

                               B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                               Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                                 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                               Yes
                                 Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                  06-Jul-2011
                                                                                                                                                                            Page 3 of 4
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          16-Jul-2011
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           26-Sep-2011
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                              Directors
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?               Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?               Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language       Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for    Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?               Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard     Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same         Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Signed and submitted by:                                                Name                                                    Date
                            Task Team Leader:                    Gailius J. Draugelis                                                        18-Nov-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                      Paul Kriss (SM)                                                             21-Nov-2011
                            Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 4
