                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC650

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Jun-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Cote d'Ivoire                   Project ID:      P119308
                            Project Name:      Agriculture Sector Support Project (P119308)
                            Task Team          El Hadj Adama Toure
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          17-Sep-2012                     Estimated        27-Nov-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTAR                           Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector:            Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (60%), General agriculture, fishing and
                                               forestry sector (30%), Crops (10%)
                            Theme:             Other rural development (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          20.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                       70.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           12.     The project development objective (PDO) is to improve productivity and access to markets
                           for smallholder export crop farmers and strengthen the governance structure and institutional
                           framework for the management of selected supply chains.

                           13.    This would be achieved through focusing on smallholder-industry interaction jointly aiming
                           at competitiveness (value-added creation) on selected value chains and on geographic areas of
                           concentration.
                           C. Project Description
                           Proposed Project Component Names:
                         Component 1: Promotion of public-private partnership for sustainable cocoa development in the
                         Nawa Region (South-West): will support the newly established Coffee and Cocoa Council (CCC) to
                         implement the Coffee/Cocoa Public-Private Partnership Platform (PPPP).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Support to smallholder rubber and oil palm extension in South-East Cote d’Ivoire: will
                         support the rubber and oil palm inter-professions (APROMAC and AIPH) for extension of village
                         plantations through technical and commercial linkages with the agro-industries.

                         Component 3: Revamping of the cotton sector and Promotion of Cashew processing in Central and
                         Northern Cote d’Ivoire: will focus on strengthening institutional capacity of the cotton inter-
                         profession (INTERCOTON) to develop funding mechanisms for access to technologies and more
                         effective agriculture extension services, supporting the Government of Cote d’Ivoire (GoCI) through
                         the cashew regulatory body (ARECA) and nascent inter-profession (INTERCAJOU) and establishing
                         a feeder roads rehabilitation and maintenance program and funding mechanism in the area involving
                         both the cashew and the cotton inter-professions.

                         Component 4: Project coordination and Support to the coordination of the National Agricultural
                         Investment Plan (PNIA): will cover costs associated with the staffing, equipment and functioning of
                         the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) and contribute to the coordination and supervision of overall
                         PNIA for the first two fiscal years.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the            safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Considering that the exact project geographic coverage is not yet determined with certainty, the
                         Bank has recommended Borrower to prepare and disclose an Environment and Social Management
                         Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and a Pest Management Plan (PMP)
                         both in-country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal. These documents could build upon/be based
                         on frameworks developed for ARD project in Cote d’Ivoire (for the Rural Land Management and
                         Community Infrastructure Development Project – PNGTER, closed in August, 2010, and for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         WAAPP-1B, which became effective in September 2011 ) and for similar projects in other
                         neighboring countries (Benin – Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Project, March 2011,
                         for the cotton and cashew value chains, and Liberia - Smallholder Tree Crop Project, for the coffee/
                         cocoa, rubber and oil palm value chains).

                         Safeguards provisions and corresponding institutional capacity will be developed and deployed
                         ahead of time to ensure adequate implementation of safeguards requirements as prescribed in the
                         instruments with the view of avoiding adverse social and environmental impacts. To this effect,
                         special attention to oil-palm will be required in view of the ongoing international discussion about
                         environmental and social impacts of oil-palm plantation. In February 2012, GoCI already prepared a
                         Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment for the oil palm sector, which will be reviewed and
                         complemented as needed during the preparation of the overall project safeguards documents.
                         Envisaged certification efforts supported under the project will further strengthen managing social
                         and environmental concerns.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The line Recipient capacity for environmental and social safeguards implementation and reporting
                         remains limited despite the implementation by the line ministries of several Bank-financed projects.
                         A limited understanding of the World Bank policies exists, which would need additional capacity
                         building to help streamline the proper implementation of safeguards recommendations. To that aim,
                           an environmental and social focal point will be included in the PCU to ensure that appropriate
                           safeguards instruments are implemented by executing agencies and to monitor and report on project
                           safeguards. He/she will also ensure training of designated safeguards focal points within the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           executing agencies, including liaising with designated Social and Environmental Focal Points in the
                           respective, Cotton, Cashew, Rubber and Coffee and Cocoa inter-professions. Close technical support
                           will be provided by Bank safeguards specialists (BSS) during preparation and throughout the project
                           implementation cycle to ensure good compliance with World Bank safeguards policies. Moreover,
                           the team (BSS) will further liaise with the National environmental agency (ANDE) to also ensure
                           that national legislation is adequately taken into consideration. GoCI’s team will also benefit from
                           the continuous advice and guidance of BSS in the project team during project implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
                           Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTN1)
                           Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (SDV)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             This policy is triggered because of direct
                           BP 4.01                                             potential environmental impacts associated with
                                                                               currently chosen commodities retained by the
                                                                               project. Activities will have direct impacts in
                                                                               planted areas, soils, vegetation, and the human
                                                                               population in the project areas. However, these
                                                                               impacts will not be significant and will be site
                                                                               specific and easily manageable. Since the exact
                                                                               geographic coverage of proposed activities is
                                                                               still to be determined, the Recipient will prepare
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               an Environmental and Social Management
                                                                               Framework (ESMF) to set forth the principles
                                                                               and guidelines to be followed by the Borrower
                                                                               when the exact physical location of proposed
                                                                               project activities are known. The ESMF
                                                                               provides an environmental and social screening
                                                                               form (ESSF) that would be applied to each
                                                                               subproject to ensure proper compliance with
                                                                               safeguards requirements. Since this project will
                                                                               be implemented in regions that are hosting
                                                                               activities under the West Africa Agricultural
                                                                               productivity Program (WAAPP-1B), the
                                                                               Borrower will update the ESMF of WAAPP-1B
                                                                               and disclose the revised version both in-country
                                                                               and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes             Though the project activities will be
                                                                               implemented in the savanna and forest habitats,
                                                                               this project will not affect critical habitats.
                                                                               Nevertheless, provision will be made in the
                                                                 ESMF to ensure that proper mitigation measures
                                                                 are put in place to adequately address any
                                                                 potential impacts in natural habitats that may
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 arise.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   Some interventions will be in forest landscapes;
                                                                 but these are not expected to lead to the
                                                                 destruction of primary forests or logging.
                                                                 However, provision will be made in the ESMF
                                                                 to ensure that proper mitigation measures are
                                                                 put in place to adequately address any potential
                                                                 impacts that could arise.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   This policy is triggered because the potential
                                                                 expansion, intensification of agricultural and
                                                                 livestock activities could lead to increased use
                                                                 of pesticides, fungicides and herbicides. A Pest
                                                                 Management Plan (PMP) will be prepared to
                                                                 ensure that all stakeholders involved in the
                                                                 project implementation (producers
                                                                 organizations) have the necessary institutional
                                                                 support to achieve the project objective. The
                                                                 borrower will elaborate a consolidated PMP
                                                                 built upon the PMP of the existing WAAPP-1B,
                                                                 which will be disclosed both in-country and at
                                                                 the Infoshop prior to appraisal.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   No activity would be implemented in known/
                         BP 4.11                                 existing physical cultural resources areas.
                                                                 Nevertheless, Chance-Find approach will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 explored in the ESMF to make provision for any
                                                                 unexpected discovery during project
                                                                 implementation.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                 area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   This policy is triggered because of the
                         4.12                                    envisaged land acquisition and/or potential
                                                                 restriction of access to assets or sources of
                                                                 livelihood as a result of the proposed project
                                                                 activities. Since the exact geographic coverage
                                                                 of proposed activities is still to be determined
                                                                 and in compliance with World Bank safeguards
                                                                 operational policies, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                 Framework (RPF) will be prepared by the
                                                                 Borrower for the project to clearly outline the
                                                                 basic principles and guidelines for mitigating
                                                                 any potential impact that may require
                                                                 compensation in the event of land acquisition
                                                                 and in some cases involuntary resettlement in
                                                                                                                                 the broad sense. Because the project will be
                                                                                                                                 implemented in the same regions as for the
                                                                                                                                 ongoing WAAPP-1B and the recently closed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 PGNTER; this new RPF will build pretty much
                                                                                                                                 on those of the WAAPP-1B and the PGNTER
                                                                                                                                 and ultimately disclosed both in-country and at
                                                                                                                                 the Infoshop prior to appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not involve any dams, nor is
                                                                                                                                 construction/rehabilitation or use of irrigation
                                                                                                                                 waters from a dam envisioned in this project.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project will not take place in or near, nor
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            involve the use of international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             No project activity will be implemented in
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 25-May-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      By April 15, 2012 studies for the revised and updated version of the ESMF, RPF and PMP of the
                                      Cote d’Ivoire Project of the West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program prepared in 2010, and
                                      recently closed PNGTER’s will be launched. This is expected to be completed by mid-June, 2012;
                                      and disclosed both in-country and at the Info-shop prior to the appraisal mission planned for June
                                      11, 2012.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: El Hadj Adama Toure

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 03-Jun-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Martien Van Nieuwkoop (SM)                                                                                           Date: 26-Apr-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
