                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA2561
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Mar-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Niger                             Project ID:    P126049
                            Project Name:      Skills Development for Growth Project (P126049)
                            Task Team          Boubou Cisse
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          27-Feb-2013                       Estimated   30-Apr-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTEW                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:            General information and communications sector (10%), Secondary education
                                               (20%), Tertiary education (20%), Vocational training (50%)
                            Theme:             Education for the knowledge economy (80%), Managing for development results
                                               (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     30.00                       Total Bank Financing:       30.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                  Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  30.00
                              Total                                                                        30.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to improve the effectiveness of formal technical and vocational
                           training, short term skills development and apprenticeship programs in priority sectors.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project will be in the amount of US$30 million and will consist of the following three main
                           components.


                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         The first component will support interventions that aim at improving the effectiveness of formal
                         technical and vocational training through supporting new demand-driven institutions and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strengthened school to work transition. The second component will target short-term skills needs and
                         the stock of out of school youth by promoting informal skill delivery programs. Both components
                         target selected priority sectors in both the formal and informal sector. The third component will
                         mainly support the institutional strengthening of the main implementing agency, the Ministry of
                         Professional Training and Labor, and co-executing or other implementing institutions.

                         Component 1: Improving the Effectiveness of Formal Training (US$ 11.4 millions )

                         The objective of this component is to help Niger address the demand for skills in the economic
                         sectors with the highest growth and employment potential and improve youth employability by
                         supporting interventions that aim at improving the effectiveness of formal technical and vocational
                         training. Effectiveness improvements will be undertaken, specifically, by supporting new demand-
                         driven institutions and a strengthened school-to-work transition.

                         Sub-Component 1.1: Demand-Driven Approach to Formal Vocational Training (US$ 9.8 millions)
                         The objective of this sub-component is to improve the quality and relevance of TVET institutions in
                         four key sectors.

                         Sub-Component 1.2: Improving School to Work Transition (US$ 1.6 million)
                         The objective of this sub-component is to strengthen the transition from formal education and
                         training to the labor market. It will do so by supporting job counseling and internships for technical
                         secondary and tertiary graduates.

                         Component 2: Developing Short Term Skills Development and Apprenticeships Programs (US$ 12.5
                         million)
                         The objective of this second component is to help Niger address the demand for skills in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         economic sectors with the highest growth and employment potential and improve youth
                         employability by supporting short term skills development and apprenticeships programs. While
                         medium and longer-term capacity is improved through Component 1, informal shorter-term training
                         mechanisms are necessary to promote faster response to economic opportunities in the formal and
                         informal sector. At the same time, these mechanisms can also be helpful to address the skill needs of
                         out of school youth with limited education and therefore support youth employability in the short
                         run. This component focuses on apprenticeships for out of school youth with limited education (sub-
                         component 2.1), and short term training programs for out of school youth with varying education
                         levels. Short term courses include an on-demand training scheme (sub-component 2.2) and
                         entrepreneurship training (sub-component 2.3). The component includes support to a pilot reform
                         (the on-demand training mechanism) and the scaling-up of an existing pilot (the dual apprenticeship
                         program) striving to achieve a good balance between innovation and mainstreaming and limit risks.

                         Sub-component 2.1: Expanding Apprenticeships (US$ 4.9 million)
                         The objective of this sub-component is to expand apprenticeship programs in priority sectors.
                         Sub-component 2.2: Developing Short-Term On-Demand Training Programs (US$ 4.7 million)
                         The objective of this sub-component is to support short-term skills development by developing an
                         on-demand training program.

                         Sub-component 2.3: Promoting Short-Term Entrepreneurship Training (US$ 2.9 million)

                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         The objective of this sub-component is to support short-term skill development for Niger’s youth by
                         promoting short-term entrepreneurship training.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Institutional Capacity Strengthening and Project Management (US$6.1 million)
                         The main objective of this component is to provide effective implementation of the project and
                         support its implementation arrangements, by establishing a project coordinating unit (PCU)
                         embedded within MFPE and reporting to the SG as well as the Project Steering Committee. The PCU
                         will be a small group of dedicated staff assisting MFPE and all participating agencies for effective
                         coordination and monitoring and evaluation, as well as the implementation of an information and
                         communications strategy. The proposed component will fund key staff to be hired for the
                         implementation of the proposed Project. This will, inter alia, include an Executive Director,
                         Procurement Officer, Financial Management Officer, M&E Officer, IT Specialist and consultants in
                         different areas of expertise. The component will also fund institutional strengthening activities for
                         FAPCA, the main agency involved in the second component, and FNAN; ANPE; and CCIA. Finally,
                         other activities to be financed under this component will include an Independent Monitoring Firm
                         (IMF) to support M&E activities for the project and the ministry; the impact evaluations of the
                         school to work transition, on-demand and entrepreneurship sub-components, TA and operational
                         costs related to the bi-annual beneficiary assessments; and, as needed, TA on supporting the new
                         Law on Technical and Professional Training.; and the funding of minor goods and materials related
                         to overall project implementation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project areas will potentially cover the eight regions of the country. The salient physical
                         characteristics relevant to safeguards analysis are to be determined.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Serigne Omar Fye (CICAF)
                         Africa Eshogba Olojoba (MNSEN)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Melissa C. Landesz (AFTSG)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes                Due to the planned civil works and
                          BP 4.01                                              infrastructure expansion in clearly defined areas,
                                                                               the project triggers the OP on Environmental
                                                                               Assessment and since there are three different
                                                                               sites where construction will take place, the most
                                                                               appropriate safeguards instrument is an ESMP.
                                                                               The ESMP covers the three sites where the small
                                                                               civil works will occur (rehabilitation of existing
                                                                               buildings; new construction of classrooms and
                                                                               laboratories; construction of latrines, etc).
                                                                               Although the small scale civil construction
                                                                               activities under the Project are not expected to
                                                                               trigger OP 4.11 on Physical Resources, as a
                                                                               precautionary measure, chance finds procedures
                                                                               will be included in civil works contracts terms of
                                                                               reference.


                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No                The project will not support any activities that
                            4.12                                                 trigger OP 4.12 The project will not finance
                                                                                 activities involving involuntary taking of land,
                                                                                 loss of assets or access to assets, loss of income
                                                                                 sources or means of livelihood or the voluntary
                                                                                 restriction of access to legally designated parks
                                                                                 and protected areas.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project is not restructured and there are no large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts
                              as the best part of the project is rehabilitation of existing structures /buildings and limited new
                              construction in designated areas. In the construction /rehabilitation and decommissioning phases,
                              adverse effects will include increased noise, vibration, air pollution (dust) levels due to
                              decommissioning and construction, and to a lesser extent soil erosion, water flows obstruction,
                              impairment of non-critical natural habitat, and minimal water pollution due to construction related
                              activities. No major contamination of soil or surface water is envisaged. The bidding documents
                              will include chances fines procedures for any physical cultural artifacts that may be found during
                              construction.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               No direct or indirect long term impacts are anticipated from the implementation of the project.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                               Since there is no long term direct or indirect impacts anticipated from the project activities,
                              alternatives to the proposed approach were not considered.



                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The Project is not expected to have adverse environmental and social impacts on the human and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           biophysical environment as it will finance the rehabilitation of existing training facilities and the
                           construction of new facilities in designated areas. Measures taken to address safeguard policy
                           issues are primarily to prepare ESMP to ensure that the activities at each site will be implemented
                           with no or minimal negative impact on the environment and the populations. Measures required to
                           prevent minimize, mitigate, or compensate for any potential adverse impacts include improved
                           environmental performance to be included in the bidding documents and contracts documents to
                           ensure that good engineering, environmental management, and occupational health and safety
                           practices will be applied during construction/rehabilitation. The contractors will be made aware of
                           this obligation and their safeguard performance during construction/rehabilitation will be closely
                           supervised and monitored by the project team with close supervision by the supervision
                           consultants.

                           The implementation capacity of the Executing Agency (MFPE) is low given its recent creation.
                           This could lead to slow or poor implementation of the ESMP.

                           MEASURES TO MITIGATE THESE IMPACTS. To mitigate these impacts, a team of staff and
                           contract-hired environmental and social consultants will be hired by the project to ensure proper
                           screening and implementation of the mitigation measures .Coupled with these measures, Niger’s
                           National Environment Agency is fully involved in the implementation of the ESMP. The role of
                           the Bureau will be to assist the PCU with the analysis of impacts and efficacy of corresponding
                           mitigation measures. It will also be charged with the responsibility of monitoring and reporting to
                           the MFPE through the PCU. Existing capacity of the co-executing agencies will be strengthened to
                           effectively monitor and enforce the simple environmental safeguards required for the rehabilitation
                           of training facilities and the construction of new ones.
                           Furthermore, technical assistance will be provided to ensure proper implementation of the ESMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders in this process are:
                           •        Direct beneficiaries of skills training ;
                           •        The local communities in the participating Districts.
                           •        The District Administrations
                           •        The Prefectures
                           •        The Government
                           •        Local NGOs
                           •        Other international donor agencies
                           •        Local civil society associations,
                           •        The Chamber of Commerce, University of Niger, Center of Arts, National Environment
                           Agency, etc.

                           CONSULTATION .This stage involved consultation with the client, and all the relevant key
                           stakeholders who were identified through a Stakeholder Identification Process. Through a scoping
                           study which entailed an initial and broad assessment of the project, policies, regulations and
                           baseline data, the team generated a scope for the study including geographical coverage,
                           stakeholders (interested parties), significant impacts (areas of study) and the levels of detail in
                           each particular impact study. The scoping exercise in addition involved review of literature and a


                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                           field visit that generated the spatial dimensions on the zones of influence of the project. The
                           consultant proceeded to assess the environmental context and baseline data within which the
                           project is to be set. Parameters that were examined were varied and included physical
Public Disclosure Copy




                           environment, biological environment and socio-cultural environment. A public consultation for
                           stakeholders was held on March 1, 2013 to discuss the contents of the ESMP. The ESMP will be
                           disclosed in country and at the Bank InfoShop on before project appraisal.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      28-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-Mar-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Niger                                                            06-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?



                                                                    Page 6 of 7
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Boubou Cisse
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 12-Mar-2013
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (SM)     Date: 25-Mar-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Page 7 of 7
