                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSA1319
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Sep-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Samoa                               Project ID:    P126504
                            Project Name:      Enhancing Climate Resilience for West Coast Road (P126504)
                            Task Team          James A. Reichert
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Oct-2012                         Estimated   13-Dec-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASNS                               Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector:            Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (85%), General transportation sector
                                               (15%)
                            Theme:             Climate change (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              Borrower                                                                          2.22
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                     14.80
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                            17.02
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The project development objectives are to (i) improve the climate resilience of the West Coast Road;
                           and (ii) enhance local capacity to strengthen the climate resilience of Samoa's road network.
                            3. Project Description
                           The West Coast Road (WCR) is a key infrastructure component of the Samoa Economic Corridor. It
                           provides a vital land transport link between Apia, Faleolo International Airport and Mulifanua inter-
                           island ferry wharf. The road runs parallel, and occasionally adjacent to, the coast. It is vulnerable to
                           high rainfall events (leading to surface flooding and deterioration of the road surface), and extreme
                           high sea levels (leading to accelerated erosion of the road profile). In addition, the road surface is
                           compromised, particularly at its eastern end, by a high water table, which contributes to deterioration
                           of the road pavement.


                                                                         Page 1 of 7
                         Under the Second Infrastructure Asset Management Project (SIAM-2), technical assistance was
                         provided to carry out a detailed feasibility study to upgrade the drainage of the WCR to increase its
Public Disclosure Copy




                         resilience to extreme weather events. The Enhancing Climate Resilience of the West Coast Road
                         Project (CRWCR) will implement the study's findings and extend the works to include a general
                         rehabilitation of the road profile and surface in the affected areas

                         The proposed project comprises three components as described below:

                         Component 1: (US$15.70 million) Improving Climate Resilience of the WCR.

                         Proposed works under this component will improve the West Coast Road (WCR) pavement by
                         raising and strengthening, where necessary, sealing shoulders, improving longitudinal and cross
                         drainage, and associated costs for drainage easements. These investments will serve to: (a) reduce
                         road closures during extreme weather events and high sea levels; (b) avoid surface flooding and
                         impounding of water, which contributes to road deterioration and adversely impacts roadside
                         communities; (c) reduce road deterioration due to runoff and increasingly high water tables, and
                         generally improve pavement quality to reduce future maintenance requirements; and (d) contribute to
                         increased road safety by providing a roadside pathway for pedestrians and dedicated bus stops and
                         facilities.

                         The proposed construction works on the WCR will address these recommendations of the drainage
                         study by making improvements to the road pavement, including raising and strengthening where
                         necessary; sealing the road shoulders, and improving longitudinal and cross-drainage.

                         All road reconstruction works are planned to take place within the existing road reserve, but the need
                         to access roadside properties to complete the associated drainage works was identified in the SIAM2
                         study.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Technical assistance will also be included in this component for the detailed design and supervision
                         of the WCR works. This will mitigate capacity and delivery quality risk to project implementation.

                         Component 2: (US$0.80 million) Vulnerability Assessment of the Samoa Road Network.

                         Although the WCR is the main focus of the CRWCR, many other links of the Samoa road network
                         share similar vulnerability issues, in particular: (i) coastal exposure to sea level rise; (ii) storm surge;
                         (iii) wave action during cyclones and tsunamis; (iv) inland flooding and landslips during extreme
                         rainfall events; (v) earthquake damage; and (vi) accelerated pavement deterioration due to extreme
                         weather and rising water tables in some locations.

                         This component involves technical assistance designed to bring about transformative change in the
                         way that climate change is addressed in the Samoa roads sector. The assistance will assess the
                         climate change and disaster vulnerability of the main road network of Samoa as a whole, and prepare
                         a climate resilience/adaptation strategy for the road network. This will involve using best available
                         climate change and natural hazard risk information to identify key hazard types and risk levels (sea
                         level rise, tropical cyclones, extreme rainfall and temperature events, tsunami, etc), and then
                         assessing the likely severity and timing of risk impacts for all links of the major road network. In
                         particular, the analysis will use latest results from the Pacific Climate Change Science Program and
                         the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative. Based on this analysis, the study

                                                                         Page 2 of 7
                         will then prepare a road network adaptation strategy that will (a) outline a general climate change
                         adaptation policy framework and objectives for the road network; (b) identify and prioritize specific
                         locations that require investments to improve the resilience of the road network; (c) identify and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         define specific measures to update design and planning standards and maintenance procedures taking
                         into account expected climate change; and (d) review the institutional and legal framework and
                         recommend specific reforms required to facilitate climate change resilience in the roads sector from
                         infrastructure and operational perspectives.

                         Component 3: (US$0.74 million) Project Management.

                         Recognizing the current work load of the Land Transport Authority (LTA), the size and significance
                         of the proposed project, and following the satisfactory arrangements of SIAM-2 and the PTRP,
                         technical assistance for project management will be provided under the project. A PMU would assist
                         with the preparation of procurement documentation, financial management arrangements, and
                         monitoring and evaluation of results and indicators. Incremental operating costs associated with
                         LTA's costs to carry out adequate management and supervision of project activities would also be
                         financed under this component.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The CRWCR will be implemented along the West Coast Road from Faleolo International Airport to
                         Apia. The technical assistance components will be carried out throughout Samoa.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (EASPS)
                         Gerardo F. Parco (EASPS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The rehabilitation of the West Coast road will
Public Disclosure Copy




                          BP 4.01                                            involve road carriageway improvement,
                                                                             pavement rehabilitation and improvement of
                                                                             drainage and road shoulders, among others. These
                                                                             activities may have some adverse impacts on the
                                                                             physical environment, communities along the
                                                                             road and the public using the road. Impacts
                                                                             related to construction activities and other project
                                                                             related impacts will be managed through an
                                                                             Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP), which
                                                                             will be based on the existing relevant Samoa
                                                                             Codes of Environmental Practice.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               There are no known sensitive natural habitat
                                                                             areas along the West Coast Road. The
                                                                             improvements works on the will be limited to the
                                                                             current alignment and
                                                                             right way. No natural habitats will be affected.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               Improvement works will be limited to the
                                                                             current alignment and existing road right of way.
                                                                             The works will not affect any forests.


                                                                     Page 3 of 7
                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No               The project will not be using or promoting use
                                                                               of pesticides.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No               The road exists and the road right of way is clear
                            BP 4.11                                            of any structures which may be considered as
                                                                               PCR. No issues on PCR were raised during
                                                                               public consultations.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No               This policy is not triggered because the Samoan
                                                                               society is homogenous and is considered to be of
                                                                               a shared ethnicity.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes              Although the road is existing, minor land
                            4.12                                               acquisition may be required in certain areas for
                                                                               road enhancement. However, the settlement
                                                                               pattern of the area shows that structures and other
                                                                               developments are not situated at the road
                                                                               boundary, therefore few encroachments are
                                                                               expected. To account for possible land acquisition
                                                                               and easements required, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                               Framework (RPF) will be formulated for the
                                                                               project. Existing RPFs for ongoing Bank Assisted
                                                                               infrastructure projects (e.g. SIAM2, SPTRP) may
                                                                               serve as guides in this project. During
                                                                               implementation, together with the detailed
                                                                               engineering design, a Resettlement Action Plan
                                                                               based of the RPF will be drafted as necessary.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No               Not applicable.

                            Projects on International        No                  Not applicable.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  Not applicable.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Rehabilitation of the West Coast Road will involve road carriageway improvements, pavement
                              rehabilitation, and improvements of drainage and road shoulders, among others. There will be no
                              new road openings. Rehabilitation work will be limited to within the existing road right of way.
                              The rehabilitation of the existing road may have some adverse impacts on the physical
                              environment, communities along the road and the public using the road. These impacts are mostly
                              construction related, such as increased dust, noise and traffic congestion. These are typical
                              impacts associated with construction activities, which are local, temporary and can be mitigated
                              through proper measures. Consultations with the communities in the area, have identified issues
                              of concern to the stakeholders, including the importance of preserving community bathing pools
                              along the road. The operation of quarry sites as a source of materials will also have potential
                              negative impacts on the environment, if not managed properly.

                                                                       Page 4 of 7
                           Only minor impact on land acquisition is expected with the CRWCR. Aside from the fact that
                           most activities will happen within the legal road reserve, the settlement pattern is Samoa is
Public Disclosure Copy




                           generally many meters away from the road. Concrete fences and other developments made of
                           permanent building materials are not common. The impact would be minor land take and
                           temporary disruption due to construction of drainage discharge runoff to the coast. During
                           consultations with various groups, attendees acknowledged and accepted that improved drainage
                           run off would benefit both the road users and owners of flood prone areas over the long-term.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The long-term impact of the proposed improvements to the road is mostly positive. Having a
                           climate resilient road will ensure that the country's most important transport corridor would be
                           more resilient to climate events and remain open more of the time. Faster travel times and a more
                           reliable connection between the airport and the capital Apia will have economic and personal
                           benefits to the community. Improvement of the sidewalks and bus stops will also improve safety
                           along the road. Better road conditions will lead to increased travel speed of vehicles which may
                           have consequences on safety of motorists and pedestrians. Construction related impacts from civil
                           works will be short-term and temporary.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Not applicable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             An Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP) has been prepared for the project to mitigate the
                           impacts of construction-related activities during construction. This ECOP will be included in
                           works contracts and contractors will be obligated to comply with the guidance in the ECOP during
                           construction and implementation of the project. Impacts identified during the community
Public Disclosure Copy




                           consultations and impacts related to quarry sites have also been included in the ECOP. The cost of
                           implementing the mitigating measures embodied in the ECOP will be part of the overall project
                           cost of the winning contractors. The Planning and Urban Management Agency (PUMA) and the
                           LTA will monitor compliance of the contractor/s with the ECOP. An Information Education
                           Campaign will also be carried out by the LTA after completion of the road to educate the
                           stakeholders regarding safety rules and proper road safety.

                           A Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework (LARF) was prepared for the CRWCR. This
                           was discussed during several consultations with multiple stakeholders. The Bank reviewed the
                           LARF and found it to be compliant to OP 4.12. The LTA/PUMA has also demonstrated adequate
                           knowledge and skills in implementing resettlement action plans through an ongoing Bank project
                           (SIAM-2). The Government will provide funds for any compensation payments, as well as other
                           activities associated with resettlement.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Key project stakeholders include the LTA, PUMA, Ministry of Natural Resources and
                           Environment, and other government entities expected to have specific roles in the implementation
                           of the project. Stakeholders from the communities are residents and village leaders, Matais (heads
                           of families) and representatives of non government organizations. Samoa has a very complex
                           system of consultation and it is guided by written and oral guidelines sensitive to their culture.


                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                           The Samoa Codes of Environmental Practice, dated April 2007, strictly prescribes acceptable
                           procedures for carrying out consultations. For this project a series of consultations were carried
                           out, as summarized in the following table:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Dates Venue Participants
                           January 20, 2012        Samoa National Council of Churches Hall, Sogi 28 Sui o le Nuu (Village
                           Mayors)
                           January 25, 2012        Tooa Salamasina Hall, Sogi, Apia         14 representatives of government
                           agencies and private sector entities affected by road improvements
                           January 19 to 27, 2012 At individual locales and offices 20 individual consultations
                           February 7, 2012        Tooa Salamasina Hall, Sogi, Apia         87 village leaders and residents

                           The results of the consultations showed strong support for the CRWCR, and suggestions for better
                           design and implementations were provided by participants, particularly in the area of safety and
                           land acquisition. Documentation of these consultations is annexed to the LARF and has been
                           disclosed on the websites of the LTA and MNRE, and at the InfoShop in Washington, DC.

                           The ECOP was disclosed locally on the websites of the Land Transport Authority and the Ministry
                           of Natural Resources and Environment, and in the Bank's InfoShop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Aug-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  07-Aug-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Aug-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Aug-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  07-Aug-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Aug-2012
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
                         ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [       ]   No [   ]    NA [       ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [     ]   No [   ]    NA [       ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?



                                                                      Page 6 of 7
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      James A. Reichert
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Michel Kerf (SM)                            Date: 25-Sep-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       Page 7 of 7
