                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC1984

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Dec-2012
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                           Project ID:       P130164
                            Project Name:      Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization Project (P130164)
                            Task Team          Mesfin Wodajo Jijo
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          29-Jul-2013                     Estimated         29-Oct-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDT                           Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (10%), Other rural
                                               development (70%), Managing for development results (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    470.00                     Total Bank Financing:        325.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     145.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        325.00
                              Total                                                                        470.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to assist the Public Works Department, Rajasthan to improve
                           the quality, connectivity, and management of its road network.
                           C. Project Description
                           Description: The proposed project is designed to enhance the effectiveness of Bank support by
                           combining critical road investment needs with the Bank’s technical and knowledge support to
                         facilitate gradual transformation of PWD into a modern and highly performing road agency by
                         putting in place best practice examples for sector policies and financing strategies, strategic planning,
                         project preparation and implementation, cost-effective road construction, road safety, and asset
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management (in support of Government of India’s Finance Plus strategy). It would also improve
                         PWD’s institutional structure and systems, staff capacities, and business processes including those
                         for procurement, monitoring and controls, and grievance handling. It offers unique opportunity,
                         flexibility, and additional choices to GOR to use Bank support more widely and strategically across
                         the road sector to improve the overall road network efficiency by filling the critical investment gaps
                         in various road programs and, thus, further enhance the benefits of sector investments. This would
                         help PWD to: (a) enhance both the quality of delivery and value for money of sector investments,
                         specifically facilitating GOR’s efforts to provide road connectivity to about 72,000 small habitations
                         at significantly lower costs by leveraging MNERGA funds and strengthening the partnership
                         between PWD and local governments/communities; (b) sustain its road assets build under various
                         programs and avoid the estimated losses of about INR 25 billion in road asset value and realize the
                         vehicle cost savings of about INR 17 billion per annum; and (c) improve road safety management. It
                         will also help GOR to leverage private sector funds through strengthening the PPP regulatory and
                         policy framework of “Mega Projects?. The project will have the following three components :

                         Component A: Road Network Quality and Connectivity Improvement (USD 445 million; civil
                         works): This component will support critical investment needs and introduction of good practice
                         examples for design and construction of roads (including road safety engineering measures and
                         procurement) within PWD through (a) construction of about 3,200 km rural road core network roads
                         mainly through strengthening of existing MNREGA roads to provide all-weather road connectivity to
                         habitations below 500 population including pilots on low-cost technologies suitable for earth and
                         gravel roads to effectively use MNREGA funds and environment friendly road construction
                         techniques; (b) rehabilitation/improvement mostly within the existing right-of-way of about 1,000
                         km priority sections of SHs/MDRs to effectively link PMGSY and other rural roads with major
                         markets/NH network/important tourist places; (c) construction of a model SH (about 70 km) to
                         demonstrate good practice examples of design, construction, road safety measures, and wayside
Public Disclosure Copy




                         facilities; and (d) stand-alone road safety engineering measures to treat accident prone locations and
                         safety hazards on high traffic corridors.

                         Component B: Road Sector Modernization and Performance Enhancement (USD 20 million;
                         technical assistance and goods): This component will support implementation of RSMP in the
                         following key areas: (a) Improved policy framework: strengthening of existing road sector policies
                         and strategies including a robust financing framework for both road construction and maintenance,
                         strengthening of policy framework for PPP and participation of local governments in managing road
                         access to small communities; (b) Modernization of Engineering Practices and Business Procedures:
                         including introduction of modern project preparation and management practices, design and
                         construction standards, new technologies specifically to promote cost-effective road construction for
                         low trafficked roads (about 5 0,000 km), improved procurement procedures, and a PWD-wide
                         procurement and contract management manual; (c) Sustainable Asset Management: modifying and
                         putting to use the current MMS into a simple asset management system to prepare prioritized plans
                         for both construction and maintenance of state roads using rational criteria for investment decisions;
                         introduction of area-wide maintenance contract system and other forms of maintenance contacting ;
                         (d) Institutional and Human Resource Development: Strengthening of PWD institutional structure,
                         building of staff capacities to keep them abreast with latest road industry practices, and
                         computerization of PWD offices; and (e) Governance & Accountability Action Plan (GAAP).
                               Component C: Road Safety Management (USD 5 million; technical assistance and goods): This
                               component will support improving road safety management through establishing and implementing a
                               multi-sector Road Safety Strategy including capacity building of PWD and other agencies in road
Public Disclosure Copy




                               safety engineering; establishing a crash data collection, analysis, and management system; road
                               safety education and awareness programs; integration of road safety into asset and project
                               management.
                               D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                               analysis (if known)


                               E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                               PWD, Rajasthan is already aware of Bank’s safeguard requirements through implementation of Rural
                               Roads Project (RRP I) and PMGSY Rural Roads Project. PWD has also documented the good
                               practices for the management of social and environment aspects based on the experiences gained
                               under Rural Roads Project. The same institutional set-up (headed by Chief Engineer (CE) office at its
                               Head-quarters and Project Implementation Units (PIUs) at field levels to implement Rural Roads
                               Project) will also have the responsibility for the proposed project. PWD would require strengthening
                               its capacity by deputing additional officials and providing adequate training.
                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Venkata Rao Bayana (SASDS)
                               Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      Yes
                                 BP 4.01
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       TBD

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                TBD

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   TBD
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     TBD

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Apr-2013
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The specific studies and their timing will be specified and incorporated in the PAD-stage ISDS
                             and the Data sheet will be modified.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Mesfin Wodajo Jijo

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Zia Al Jalaly (RSA)                               Date: 20-Mar-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (SM)                      Date: 26-Mar-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
