                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA169
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Feb-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Mongolia                                 Project ID:                       P122535
                              Project Name:                  Third Ulaanbaatar Urban Services Improvement Project (P122535)
                              Task Team Leader:              Toyoko Kodama
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 20-Apr-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:             08-Jan-2013
                              Managing Unit:                 EASCS                                    Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        Solid waste management (40%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (40%), Flood protection (20%)
                              Theme:                         Urban services and housing for the poor (85%), Municipal governance and institution building (15%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                         1.10
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                               20.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                     21.10
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The Project Development Objective is to support the Municipality of Ulaanbaatar in prioritizing infrastructure investments in selected ger areas
                              through an integrated district level planning system and targeted interventions.

                              3. Project Description

                              Component 1: District Planning and Local Government Capacity Building (total estimated cost, $1.55 million; indicative IDA financing $1.21 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Sub-component 1-1: District Development and Infrastructure Plan (total estimated cost, $1.20 million; indicative IDA financing $0.86 million). This
                              sub-component finances (i) preparation of Development Plans for six districts through a participatory planning process; (ii) capacity building for
                              district governments and key stakeholders on planning; and (iii) updating of planning manual based on implementation experience under the
                              project.

                              Sub-component 1-2: Capacity Building for MUB (total estimated cost, $0.35 million; indicative IDA financing $0.35 million). This sub-component
                              finances training for officials at the MUB on relevant topics of urban development and public service provision. The detail scope of training will be
                              determined during the course of implementation of the proposed project.

                              Component 2: Priority Infrastructure Investments (total estimated cost, US$ 12.36 million; indicative IDA financing $10.86 million)

                              Sub-component 2-1: Priority Infrastructure Investment (total estimated cost, $11.55 million; indicative IDA financing $10.40 million). This sub-
                              component finances construction of priority infrastructure projects, consisting of the construction of hard surface roads and associated structures
                              (e.g. road side drains, pedestrian ways and street lighting), and construction or rehabilitation of network drains and flood protection structures in
                              pilot ger areas in five districts.

                              Potential investments have been identified based on selection criteria, agreed with the Bank. These investments will be further examined and
                              confirmed through the district planning exercise in Component 1, except for local access roads and drainage works under Component 2 and 3 in
                              four pilot khoroos (Khoroo 12 in Chingeltei District, Khoroo 22 in Bayanzurkh District, and Khoroo 7 and 9 in Songino Khairkhan District).

                              Sub-component 2.2: Engineering Detailed Design and Supervision of Construction (total estimated cost, $0.81 million; indicative IDA financing
                              $0.46 million). This sub-component finances preparation of detailed designs and bidding documents for works under the component and
                              supervision of the construction.

                              Component 3: Solid Waste Collection Improvement (total estimated cost, $4.07 million; indicative IDA financing $3.71 million)

                              Sub-component 3.1: Establishing a Solid Waste Collection System (total estimated cost, $3.62 million; indicative IDA financing $3.25 million). This
                              sub-component supports establishment of solid waste collection system, which includes financing construction of waste collection depots (WCDs)
                              alongside road access, and provision of associated equipment, such as waste containers and collection vehicles.

                              The proposed WCD approach introduces a new and more efficient system for solid waste collection in ger areas. Instead of the current door-to-

                                                                                                                                                                          Page 1 of 4
                         door collection system, where service is provided once every 1 or 2 months, residents will be able to dispose waste at WCDs at anytime. The
                         placement of WCDs alongside paved roads, provides easy access for the collection vehicles, permitting them to increase frequency of collection to
                         twice a week.

                         Sub-component 3.2: Community Outreach and Social Accountability in Solid Waste Management (total estimated cost, $0.2 million; indicative IDA
                         financing $0.2 million). This sub-component finances activities to promote social accountability among residents for better solid waste
                         management. Activities include placing information display boards at activity sites and developing a feedback gathering system from citizens
Public Disclosure Copy




                         including text message and photographs using mobile technology, as in Sub-component 2.4.

                         Sub-component 3.3 Capacity Building for District Authorities in Solid Waste Management (total estimated cost, $0.25 million; indicative IDA
                         financing $0.25 million). This sub-component finances technical assistance to District authorities in charge of solid waste management. Activities
                         include (i) contract management of private operators; (ii) establishing and reviewing service standards and verifying that they are being met; (iii)
                         establishment and implementation of an operations and maintenance plan for solid waste assets; (iv) lease agreement for project financed
                         equipment to private operators; and (v) enhancement of responsiveness to public feedback.

                         Component 4: Project Management (total estimated cost, $2.10 million; indicative IDA financing $1.80 million)

                         This component finances project management and operating costs for the Project Management Unit (PMU) to carry out (i) project management
                         and supervision; (ii) independent social, environmental and financial account monitoring; and (iii) project monitoring, evaluation and reporting, all in
                         accordance with the Operations Manual and Institutional Manual. An external monitoring and evaluation consultant will be also hired under this
                         component to carry out external safeguards review.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         USIP3 will be implemented in mid-tier ger areas in five districts within which 12 pilot areas have been selected: Songino Khairkhan (khoroos 7, 9,
                         10), Bayanzurkh (khoroos 19, 22, 24), Chingeltei (khoroo 12, 18), Sukhbaatar (khoroos 14, 15) and Bayangol (khoroos 22, 23).

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Songling Yao (EASCS)
                         Yiren Feng (EASCS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes              The project includes three subcomponents in mid-tire ger areas of Ulaanbaatar
                                                                                           City: access roads, solid waste collection, and drainage network. Based on the
                                                                                           review of the potential sub-projects, the project is Category B due to the type,
                                                                                           location and scale, nature and magnitude of the potential impacts during the
                                                                                           construction and operation phase.. An Environmental Management Framework
                                                                                           (EMF) was prepared prior to appraisal. The EMF includes standardized
                                                                                           Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP) to be applied to each type of the small
                                                                                           scale projects.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           For solid waste collection, the collected solid waste will be transported to an
                                                                                           existing landfill site, Naranjiin Enger Landfill, constructed with financial and
                                                                                           technical assistance from Japan International Cooperation Agency and started
                                                                                           operation in 2009. The due diligence review was conducted for this landfill, it
                                                                                           includes review of layout; landfill design; treatment capacity; total service year;
                                                                                           environmental monitoring in place etc. it is concluded that the design, operation
                                                                                           and management of the site is well designed and implemented to ensure
                                                                                           environmental protection in the area as well as providing due consideration to
                                                                                           waste pickers.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      No               According to the project proposal, and the initial screening conducted by the
                                                                                           project team, the proposed project is located in mid-tier ger areas of Ulaanbaatar
                                                                                           City. The project will not affect any protected areas, known natural habitats, or
                                                                                           established or proposed critical natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                               No               The project will not finance activities that would involve significant conversion or
                                                                                           degradation of critical forest areas or related critical natural habitats as defined
                                                                                           under the policy.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                          No               The Project will neither procure any pesticides nor cause an increased use of
                                                                                           pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11           No               The project will not adversely affect any sites with archaeological, paleontological,
                                                                                           historical, religious, or unique natural values. In the event of any chance find of
                                                                                           culturally significant sites, appropriate procedures to be followed will be included in
                                                                                           the ESMF and the related clauses will also be included in the related construction
                                                                                           contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                    No               Residents of the ger areas where the project is expected to take place are recent
                                                                                           migrants from rural areas. No indigenous peoples or communities are found in
                                                                                           these areas based on our experience in the previous projects (USIP2 and CLIP).




                                                                                                                                                                      Page 2 of 4
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            Yes              The project component 2 and 3 will probably cause land acquisition and/or
                                                                                               resettlement, so the Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12 was be triggered.

                                                                                               The focus of the preparation is on establishing the appropriate procedures and
                                                                                               methodologies for prioritizing investments. The client has prepared a Resettlement
                                                                                               Policy Framework (RPF, as part of the Environmental and Social Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Framework), given that the exact investments are not known and will only be
                                                                                               finalized once the investments have been identified through the District
                                                                                               Development and Infrastructure Investment Plans.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No               The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams as defined
                                                                                               under this policy.
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP      No               The project is not located in any international waterways as defined under the
                               7.50                                                            policy.
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No               The project is not located in any known disputed areas as defined under the policy.


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  The main environmental issues associated with the proposed components are expected to include limited negative impacts during
                                 construction on soil erosion, air, water, acoustic environments, waste, worker safety, and social and traffic disturbance. Due to the small scale
                                 of the project, these impacts will be of temporary nature and localized with standard measures and engineering code of practice to effectively
                                 mitigate.

                                 The project will finance flood control, solid waste collection and treatment, roads, etc. in some ger areas, which will probably cause land
                                 acquisition and/or resettlement.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                  The project would bring significant positive environmental, social and economic impacts to the selected communities and ger residents in the
                                 project areas. Ger residents would benefit greatly from improved access to pubic transportation, water supply kiosks, businesses, and a series
                                 of social services. Improved road drainage and street lighting would reduce risk of flash flood and injuries due to road hazards, while at the
                                 same time, spur local economic growth and employment.

                                 Implementation of solid waste collection system and the associated capacity building with community participation will improve local sanitation
                                 conditions and reduce risk to public health. In addition, the establishment of waste collection depots in ger area would promote public
                                 awareness and participation for waste minimization, waste separation and facilitate waste recycling activities that is likely to take place with
                                 extensive engagement of community stakeholders.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                  N/A
                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                                  and implement the measures described.
                                   Environment. The first year of project implementation will focus on technical assistance and preparatory studies such as mapping of drainage
                                 networks, developing procedures for maintenance of drainage networks etc. Because the bulk of the investments for the project will be
                                 identified during implementation and will not be known at appraisal, an EMF (including ECOPs for three types of component) was prepared
                                 prior to appraisal. It includes identification of potential adverse impacts, mitigation measures, implementation requirements including
                                 institutional arrangements, monitoring, supervision and reporting and, as well as budget requirements. This EMF and ECOPs also incorporated
                                 experience and lessons learned from USIP1, USIP2, and other previous Bank/donor-funded projects in MUB. This documentation contains
                                 clear arrangements for program implementation with effective community engagement based on the experience, concerns and capacity of sub-
                                 district administration (khoroos). This EMF and the ECOP will form a part of all bidding documents. A due diligence review was also conducted
                                 for the linked landfill, which will dispose the solid wastes financed by the project. The project also includes training activities on environmental
                                 safeguards issues targeting relevant departments of MUB (Roads, Environmental Protection, Engineering, EPWMD, CMPUA), District
                                 governments, PMU and Field Engineers.

                                 Resettlement. Specific project contents in Component 2 and 3 will gradually become clear, so the focus of the preparation is on establishing the
                                 appropriate procedures and methodologies for prioritizing investments. Therefore, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the entire
                                 project, included in the overall ESMF has been prepared and disclosed locally and in Infoshop. The project activities in the first year will be
                                 identified as early as possible, for which a RP will be prepared accordingly, reviewed, disclosed, and approved by the Bank prior to any land
                                 taking and resettlement.

                                 In addition, given that the project will have considerable social benefits and since implementation would rely on participation of the ger area
                                 residents, social assessment work was implemented and the findings are presented in the Institutional Structure of Community Group report
                                 where issues related to participation, complaint handling mechanisms, gender, etc. are addressed.

                                 The Component 1 would have social impacts, so the District Development Plans Manual will be prepared with reference to the prepared RPF
                                 and the social assessment output.

                                 Capacity. The proposed Project will continue to be managed by the Municipality of Ulaanbaatar (MUB) Project Management Unit (PMU),
                                 currently implementing the Ulaanbaatar Services Improvement Project (USIP2). Composed of a highly competent team of 15, the PMU has one

                                                                                                                                                                          Page 3 of 4
                              of the best project preparation and implementation capacities in the country. It has technical capacity, thanks to seconded staff from utility
                              companies and related divisions of MUB as well as financial management, procurement and safeguards specialists with knowledge of Bank
                              procedures. It has over 10 years of experience in implementing Bank projects (USIP1, USIP2, Community Led Infrastructure Project 1 and 2,
                              financed through the Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF) and is currently responsible for the preparation of the Ulaanbatar Clean Air
                              Project). The investments planned under USIP3 are similar in scale and type of investment as those it has already implemented in the past.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                               on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                A series of stakeholder consultations (from April 2010 to August 2011) were conducted during the course of preparing the EMF and ECOPs,
                              that included separate meetings with each of the District Governors’ offices, khoroo and khaseg leaders and community groups and residents
                              for each of the five pilot districts. In addition, a general public consultation meeting (with over 80 attendees) was conducted to seek feedbacks
                              on community needs and concerns.

                              Local officials, Koroo leaders, communities were consulted in the EMF and RPF preparation process and will be consulted during project
                              implementation. The EMF and RPF were disclosed locally and in Infoshop. Any RP required during project implementation will be prepared with
                              further consultation and will be disclosed locally and in Infoshop.

                            B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                             Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                03-Nov-2011
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                            05-Nov-2011
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                             07-Nov-2011
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                              Directors
                             Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                             Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                09-Sep-2011
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                            13-Oct-2011
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                             20-Sep-2011
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                 Yes [     ]       No [    ]       NA [    ]

                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the         Yes [     ]       No [    ]       NA [    ]
                              plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                 Yes [     ]       No [    ]       NA [    ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language         Yes [     ]       No [    ]       NA [    ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for      Yes [     ]       No [    ]       NA [    ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                 Yes [     ]       No [    ]       NA [    ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard       Yes [     ]       No [    ]       NA [    ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same           Yes [     ]       No [    ]       NA [    ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Toyoko Kodama
                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Paul Kriss (SM)                                                          Date: 15-Feb-2012



                                                                                                                                                                     Page 4 of 4
