INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA1396
b  Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Feb-2012
0
1 1. BASIC INFORMATION
U)    1. Basic Project Data
0
0
.U,
Q      Country:               Brazil                       Project ID:             P121495
.      Project Name:         Tocantins Integrated Sustainable Regional Development (P121495)
Task Team Leader:      Eric R. Lancelot
Estimated Appraisal Date: 12-Jan-2012               Estimated Board Date:   26-Jul-2012
Managing Unit:        LCSTR                         Lending Instrument:     Specific Investment Loan
Sector:                Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (70%), Sub-national government administration (15%), General public
administration sector ( 10%), General education sector (5%)
Theme:                 Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Municipal governance and institution building (30%), Environmental
policies and institution s (15%), Other public sector governance (10%), Education for all (5%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Financing Source                                                                      Amount
Borrower                                                                                 75.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                  300.00
Total                                                                                   375.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Is this a Repeater project? No
2. Project Objectives
The objective of the Project is to foster improved effectiveness of road transport and enhanced efficiency of selected public services, in support of
the Borrower's integrated and territorially balanced development agenda.
3. Project Description
0
0      The Project, Projeto de Desenvolvimento Regional Integrado Sustent6vel (PDRIS), will support the State development agenda - through a US$
a     375 million operation supported by a US$300 million Bank loan - that aims at contributing to improved competitiveness and regional integration,
M     social inclusion and environmental sustainability. The Project consists of the following parts (see also Annex 2 of the PAD):
0
0     Component 1 - Improving effectiveness of rural transport (Estimated cost US$304 million of which US$240 million will be financed by the Bank
o)    loan)
Provision of support to improve accessibility of the Borrower's remote populations and, at the same time, foster regional economic integration and
support the Borrower's competitiveness and social inclusion agendas, through the carrying out of the following activities:
1.1.    Improving transport conditions on the municipal roads (US$73 million). Improvement of accessibility of rural population to employment
opportunities, services and resources and markets by the elimination of about 2,600 critical spots on selected municipal feeder roads through, inter
alia, the design, construction and supervision of concrete hydraulic structures (bridges and culverts) of municipal feeder roads, all to ensure year
round traffic (the Municipal Road Subprojects).
1.2.    Rehabilitating the Borrower's paved network through performance based contracts (US$160 million). Improvement of transport
conditions on the Borrower's paved roads through the carrying out of: (a) a set of performance based CREMA Contracts on about 1,500 kilometres
of selected Borrower-managed paved roads (the State Road Rehabilitation Subprojects 1); and (b) performance-based CREMA Contracts in
selected Borrower-managed paved roads in accordance with criteria acceptable to the Bank (the State Road Rehabilitation Subprojects II);
1.3.    Improving road and transport safety conditions on Borrower's unpaved roads (US$62 million). Improvement of connectivity and transport
safety conditions on the Borrower's unpaved roads, through, inter alia (i) the elimination of about 20 critical spots on unpaved feeder roads through
the design, replacement and supervision of concrete hydraulic structures of selected deficient infrastructures; and (ii) design, surfacing and
supervision of approximately 50 km of unpaved road sections to close the network and facilitate access to the national trunk network (the State
Road Improvement Subprojects);
1.4.   Transport management capacity institutional strengthening (US$9 million). Improvement of the Borrower's capacity in transport planning
and management, logistics and safety (all under terms of reference acceptable to the Bank), through the provision of goods, consultants' services,
Non-consulting Services and training for institutional strengthening (US$9 million) of SEINFRA in the following areas: (i) transportation planning
and logistics management, (ii) road safety, and (iii) social and environmental management.
Component 2 - Enhanced efficiency of public services (Estimated cost US$62.25 million of which US$51.25 million financed by the Bank loan)
Provision of support for institutional strengthening, through the provision of goods, works, Training, Non-consulting and consultants' services,
through the carrying out of the following activities:
Page 1 of 12


﻿2.1.    Modernization of the Borrower's administration. Provision of support to the SEPLAN (US$24.75 million) to improve public services
efficiency (all under terms of reference acceptable to the Bank) through, inter alia (i) the introduction of results-based management methodology,
(ii) a de-concentration of Borrower's administrative services to its regions, for purposes of strengthening the municipalities' management
capacities, (iii) the improvement of environmentally and socially sustainable land use planning processes and natural resource management
policies; and (iv) the improvement of service delivery to users as well as work conditions for the Borrower's civil servants by carrying out
rehabilitation and/or construction activities of public premises and/or facilities in accordance with the criteria set forth in the Operational Manual.
2.2.    Fostered local and regional development. Provision of support to SEAGRO and Ruraltins (US$10 million), through the carrying out of
O     pilot activities aimed towards the promotion of rural businesses and the creation of opportunities to attract sustainable investments in selected
Borrower's regions (all under terms of reference acceptable to the Bank), which activities consist of, inter alia (i) the promotion of a more efficient
a)    agribusiness sector with social and gender inclusiveness, as well as environmental and economic sustainability in the Borrower's territory, by
cn    fostering increased productivity and better access to markets for subsistence production and small and medium producers, and attracting
0
_Z)    sustainable investments while fostering environment sustainability, (ii) the preparation of a renewable energy policy for the Borrower, and (iii) the
.U)    development of ecotourism in the Borrower's territory.
Q      2.3.   Improvement of environmental management. Provision of support to SEMADES and Naturatins (US$17.5 million) to improve
environmental management (all under terms of reference acceptable to the Bank) through, inter alia (i) the improvement of the Borrower's
environmental licensing system and its monitoring and enforcement activities (excluding any enforcement police-type activity), and its water rights
.      registration system, (ii) (A) the carrying out of studies on the evaluation of the need for new public policies for the conservation and sustainable use
of natural resources and development of biodiversity, and if applicable as determined by the results of said studies, the development of regulatory
mechanisms and technical instruments for the conservation and sustainable use of natural resources and development of biodiversity; and (B) the
carrying out of pilot activities in support of areas mentioned in (A) herein to be selected in accordance with criteria acceptable to the Bank;, and (iii)
(A) the carrying out of studies on the evaluation of the need for new public policies in water management, and if applicable as determined by the
results of said studies, the development of regulatory mechanisms and technical instruments for a more sustainable use of water; and (B) the
carrying out of pilot activities in support of the area mentioned in (A) herein to be selected in accordance with criteria acceptable to the Bank.
2.4.    Improvement of quality, relevance and returns in the education system. Provision of support to SEDUC (US$ 10 million) to improve
quality in the Borrower's education system in a pilot set of selected Borrower's municipalities with high vulnerability (all under terms of reference
acceptable to the Bank), through, inter alia: (i) supporting the selected municipalities in providing quality early child development, (ii) increasing
quality of education through identifying strengths and weaknesses in the quality of teaching and providing targeted training to ameliorate
weaknesses, and (iii) improving the relevance and returns to schooling through supplementary courses in upper secondary schools and improved
education materials.
Component 3 - Project Management (Estimated cost US$8 million of which US$8 million financed by the Bank loan)
Provision of support for Project management in connection with the implementation and supervision of the Project.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
For Component 1 - Rural Transport, the project interventions will be located in the 72 municipalities of Western Tocantins, for Sub-Component 1.1;
and across the state territory for Sub-Component 1.2 and 1.3. Only for the Sub-Component 1.2 - rehabilitation works, the borrower has already
identified a set of interventions in seven feeder corridors of the paved State road sections with a total length of 1,500 km (R1 and R7, program first
phase; and R2 to R6, program second phase). The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment screened all seven corridors identified for
rehabilitation and confirmed that as of November 2011, the proposed civil works can proceed without any need to acquire land or displace any
physical assets. In addition, none of the identified road sections are located in areas occupied or claimed by indigenous peoples. For
>N    subcomponents 1.1 and 1.3, the precise location of the investments is not yet known.
0
0      Sub-Component 1.1 will also operate in up to six indigenous lands located in the western sector of the state. These are likely to include the Terra
a     Indigena Xambio6, Terra Indigena Funil, Terra Ind[gena Utaria Wyhyna/Ir6du Irtna, Terra Indigena lIiaw6bohona , Terra Indigena Zerente, and
U)    Reserva Indigena Krah6-Kanela. These areas are governed by federal legislation and will require additional permits before civil works can
0      proceed. The national indigenous agency (FUNAI) is assisting with consultations in indigenous areas, such that indigenous peoples will select their
U)    own priority road works for implementation.
b
.0    All the proposed interventions are in existing municipal and state roads, no opening of new roads.
0..    For Component 2 - Public Services, the project interventions will be in North Extension (three municipalities of Bico do Papagaio region: Colinas,
Nova Olinda e Wanderl5ndia), and also Southeast Jalap5o and Cant5o regions.
With an integrated and sustainable regional development focus, the project has statewide relevance addressing improved effectiveness of road
transport and enhanced efficiency of selected public services in support of the State of Tocantins' integrated and territorially balanced development
agenda.
The Project does not entail any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative impacts. It has statewide relevance addressing
improved effectiveness of road transport and enhanced efficiency of selected public services in support of an integrated and territorially balanced
development of the State of Tocantins. As key benefit, the Project is expected to contribute to increased economic production through increased
viability, notably in agriculture, where more land would be used for production, though in relatively limited extension, as a result of improved
accessibility, and increased productivity, thanks to lower costs of production. Potential limited direct impacts on land use could be experienced, but
most of the proposed investments will take place on roads that pass through existing farming areas that have already been consolidated in the
state. Additionally, while the State already has a sound protected area policy framework and monitoring capacity, the environment management of
road works under the Project will be supervised by independent consulting companies, following best practices inherited from other Projects
transport in Brazil.
While most direct impacts on environment from the projects are expected to be limited in time and localized near the interventions sites, cumulative
impact with potential pressure on environment might result from the regional economic growth expected as an outcome of the Project.
Notwithstanding, the Project will encompass a wide environmental institutional strengthening building on the successes of the previous operation
expected to breed sustainability in the State economic growth, in areas such as: biodiversity protection, sustainable land use management,
environmental monitoring strengthening, sustainable hydrologic resources management.
The Project supported cutting edge innovative practices in environment and social management: On the environment, the Project supported the
Page 2 of 12


﻿setting up of the State environment policy and regulatory framework in biodiversity protection, land use management, environment monitoring and
licensing, and water resource management and initiated the implementation in operational terms of some of those policies. This translated in an
impressive number of studies and institutional strengthening activities and allowed the initial development of cutting edge practices such as:
ecological corridors, integrated management strategies for water particularly in semi-desert areas, a number of watershed masterplans and
orientations for basin com mittees, studies on land cover and fauna and flora, studies for 16 new protected areas, etc.. The Project activities in
environment have been further supported by the recent Sustainable Cerrado GEF Initiative (P091827/TF096766). On the social front, the previous
Project has fostered empowerment of rural poor populations through original participatory mechanisms both to incentive peoples' reflection on the
municipal development agenda and to concretize initial actions through the execution of works on municipal road accesses following priorities
O     determined by the populations. Those works have concretely improved accessibility to employment opportunities, schools, and services (including
social services) for some of the poorest in Tocantins. The Project also supported specific pilot activities to support inclusiveness by, for example,
a     fostering support to particular fragile and remote populations such as Quilombolas, fostering the development of new activities such as ecotourism
cn    in remote municipalities with potential, etc. Finally, an impact evaluation has been undertaken in the Project to better assess the Project outcome
0
_Z)   for the main direct and indirect beneficiaries and, while the evaluation was underway at the time of preparation, initial results showed a positive
.U)   feedback from the targeted populations and overall positive outcome of Project activities. The proposed project intends on capitalizing on such
Q      successful experiences.
At the regional and local level, experience shows that, while rural road improvements directly contribute to foster local economic growth by
.      improving access to jobs and markets, positive impacts also lay on the social side. Indeed, improved rural transport contributes to improved access
to schools and health facilities, which, in turn, contribute to increasing productivity and income of the rural population, with an important impact on
reducing poverty and improving well-being. Improvements on the municipal road networks are expected to contribute to increase agricultural and
livestock production and productivity in the road's area of influence.
From Component 1, the proposed interventions in the municipal road networks will contribute to improve access to schools and health facilities in
several regions of the State. All the proposed interventions are on existing municipal and state roads, with no opening of new roads. There are a
number of notable benefits expected from carrying out works on existing roads, with direct actions improving road safety, elimination of dangerous
and critical spots, improving traffic conditions. In addition, positive social benefits are expected from investments in the education sector, as well as
other technical assistance activities to improve environmental management.
While some of the proposed activities will operate in sensitive environmental and social contexts, the participatory mechanisms envisioned in the
decision process for investments at municipal level might contribute to better address the management of those social and environmental issues.
Some studies prepared by the SoT, also supported by the World Bank under the previous project, indicate that the improvement of road circulation
should not significantly change the spatial pattern of conversion of native vegetation in the state. The proposed investments will take place on road
sections that traverse existing farming areas which had already been consolidated in the state, and thus are expected to increase productivity and
occupation of lands which are already in use. In parallel, other studies were performed by the SoT, such as the EEZ - Ecological-Economic Zoning
and by the implementation of Management Plans for Protected Areas. The demarcation of protected areas has proven to be an effective tool in
curbing deforestation. Some studies have also demonstrated that deforestation was significantly lowered inside Conservation Units (UCs) than
outside those areas, reinforcing the clear effect that protected areas have for preventing deforestation. Still, existing (or in preparation)
environmental management plans for conservations units in Tocantins indicate the need for strengthening of state institutions, especially
NATURATINS, to promote continuous and more efficiently actions.
The Borrower has addressed safeguard policy issues by conducting an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA). An Environmental
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was also prepared to outline the set of guidelines, procedures and criteria to be used for screening
0.    activities and ensure that such activities will not cause any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative environmental and social
0     impacts. Specific Environmental Management Plans (EMP) for works identified at appraisal have been prepared accordingly to the ESMF.
In order to effectively minimize or mitigate the above potential impacts, the ESIA has developed screening procedures, mandatory Action Plans
U)    and institutional strengthening measures. The ESIA identified for each proposed Component and Sub-Component the type of interventions
0
05 expected, with a description of technical issues (design, project, dimension and needs), as well as, for each one, an environmental screening. Four
.U     different types of interventions have been identified, three for Component 1: (i) elimination of critical spots on unpaved roads, at the local and state
Q     level; (ii) rehabilitation works (CREMA); (iii) surfacing unpaved state roads; and one for Component 2; (iv) fostered local and regional development.
3     Gender: positive impact is expected for specific activities as detailed in the Project description. Impacts on gender will be evaluated through
surveys, as mentioned in Monitoring and Evaluation section of the PAD.
The most commonly expected negative impacts would arise from the construction phase under Component 1, which includes works interventions
mostly within the rights of way of existing roads, with no opening of new roads. Impacts from these interventions are expected to be limited,
transitory and of short duration. In this sense, the social and environmental risks associated with this project are limited due to the nature of the
proposed interventions, which will mostly take place within the existing rights-of-way of the road and in sites associated with road projects.
The ESMF specifies guidelines and procedures to be followed by the construction contractors, covering aspects such as location of construction
camps, clearance of vegetation, noise, traffic control, safety signaling, disposal of construction debris and waste material to be incorporated in the
bidding documents for civil works, among others. Compliance with the practices outlined in the Project Operational Manual will be a contractual
obligation of the contractors.
To better address issues that arise from the ESIA, the Borrower prepared a set of mandatory Implementation Manuals to be applied for all four
types of interventions: Works Environmental Manual (Annex 5 of the ESIA); Social Communication Plan (Annex 6 of the ESIA), Environmental
Education and Social Responsibility Plan (Annex 7 of the ESIA), and also a Monitoring and Supervision Plan (Annex 9 of the ESIA). The ESIA
report comprises three main parts: (i) Part A: an Environmental and Social Assessment, (ii) Part B: an Environmental Management Plan; and, (iii)
Part C: an Institutional Strengthening Program to support demands coming from the project. Finally, the Borrower incorporated in the EISA a Right
of Way management framework (Annex 8 of the ESIA). This framework will result in specific programs aimed at improving the management of the
use of the state's roads' right of way. The ESIA (final draft) was submitted to the Bank (December 14, 2011), and has been disseminated in the
Infoshop and on the Borrower's web site (www.seinfra.to.gov.br) (January 17, 2012).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Page 3 of 12


﻿Jason Jacques Paiement (LCSSO)
Clarisse Torrens Borges Dall Acqua (LCSEN)
6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
0
C-)
0
0
.U,
Q
0
0P
0
.U)
Q,
Pae40f1


﻿Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01  Yes        According to OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, mandatory safeguard policy, the
Borrower has addressed safeguard policy issues by conducting an Environmental
and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA). An Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) was also prepared to outline the set of guidelines, procedures
and criteria to be used for screening activities and ensure that such activities will
not cause any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative
environmental and social impacts. Specific Environmental Management Plans
0                                                      (EMP) for works identified at appraisal have been prepared accordingly to the
ESMF.
0
cn                                       The civil works consist of rehabilitation of existing State paved roads, a limited
extension of surfacing of existing State unpaved roads, specific improvements to
critical spots/bridges on the municipal roads and State unpaved roads; and also
Q                                                      public facilities construction or rehabilitation. Impacts from these works are
expected to be minor, site specific and mostly limited to civil works' execution
period.
The other interventions (elimination of critical spots, surfacing, infrastructure and
possible building or public facility construction), unknown at preparation, will be
subject to specific Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) under the national
legislation for new works before initiating.
Regarding Sub-Component 1.2 - Rehabilitation Works, with identified set of
interventions, the environmental screening was applied by the Borrower for each
one of the 56 road sections proposed. Environmental guidelines for contractors will
be part of a mandatory protocol, as well as a set of mandatory Implementation
Manuals prepared by the Borrower (including: Environmental Manual for Works,
Environmental Education and Social Responsibility, and also a Monitoring and
Supervision Plan).
In particular, the proposed Environmental Manual for Works includes
recommendations already contained in the Operational Manual of Environmental
Management adopted by the SEINFRA with environmental control measures
aimed at contractors' works and supervision of works. Besides the clauses on
conduct and standards that promote the safety of the user contained in the
contracts, those higher value contracts also require that the contractor provide
insurance for their employees. It is noteworthy that the ESIA's Environmental
Education and Social Responsibility proposed to include a set of training and
presentations on the topic of health and safety of workers.
Regarding Sub-Components 1.1 and 1.3- Improving Municipal Roads and
Improving Safety Conditions on Unpaved State Roads and also Sub-Components
of Component 2, as the exact site-location of subprojects is not known ex ante (i.
e., prior to project appraisal), the Borrower has prepared an Environmental and
Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), drawing on lessons from the previous
0                                                      operations implemented by the State and after a widely consulted upon document
a)                                                    (TORs & results). An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
for these sub-components was also prepared, with guidelines to prepare specific
EMPs for each sub-project once the road is identified, with specific measures to
0                                                      be adopted regarding resettlement issues, natural habitats, forest, indigenous
people, safety of dams and pest management, as needed.
Q
The ESMF focused on project-specific aspects, such as institutional arrangements
and capacity, regulatory framework, environmental screening procedures and
criteria and licensing. The ESMF also provides guidance on: (i) identifying the
potential impacts associated with the typology of subproject investments; (ii)
minimizing potential impacts for productive and infrastructure projects; (iii)
specifying procedures to be used in assessing environmental and social impacts
during the subproject design stage; and (iv) addressing identified impacts during
the subproject implementation. The ESMF also presented a budget and
implementation schedule, both of which will be integrated into the overall project
operational manual. The Borrower also carried out an Environmental and Social
Management Strengthening Program, to better support demands for building
capacities, after doing an institutional capacity assessment of the borrower,
focused in NATURATINS, the environmental agency of the State, as part of the
ESMF. The implementation agency has shown adequate procedures and capacity
to identify and mitigate similar impacts under the previous Bank funded operations.
In addition, all works will be closely supervised by an independent supervision to
ensure appropriate environmental management, following best practices and
lessons learned from previous operation and other Bank financed Projects in
Brazil. Finally, the Borrower prepared a Right of Way Management Framework to
improve the management of the use of the roads' right of way.
The ESIA (final draft) was submitted to the Bank (December 14, 2011), and has
been disseminated in the Infoshop and on the Borrower's web site (www.seplan.to.
gov.br) on January 17.
Page 5 of 12


﻿Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        Yes          The Natural Habitats policy safeguard (OP 4.04) was triggered and the ESIA
addresses the safeguard requirements, screens out all subprojects resulting in any
significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats, and includes
provisions to regenerate and reforest degraded areas, as needed, as well as
Management Plans for Protected Areas. The OP 4.11 is triggered since envisioned
works and planned activities may affect Physical Cultural Resources (PCR). At this
stage, it is however not possible to determine the presence of PCR in the project's
0                                                      area of influence.
As the set of interventions for rehabilitation works was already known at appraisal ,
U)                                                    the Borrower has undertaken environmental and social screening and
Environmental Management Plans for each defined sub-project (56 road sections,
with 1,660 km) confirming that of the 56 road sections, 5 sections on four roads are
Q                                                      located in fully protected areas or sustainable use protected areas: (i) TO-010 (1
road section), an existing state road located in the buffer zone of Lajeado State
Park (R1 - Program First Phase); (ii) TO-222 (2 road sections), an existing state
road through the protected area named "Monumento das Arvores
Fossilizadas" (R2 - Program Second Phase); and (iii) TO-407 and TO-404 (1 road
section each) (R3 - Program 2nd phase) - an existing road through a conservation
area. For these specific sub-projects, investments under Sub-Component 2.3
should promote actions to better structure and execute the biodiversity
conservation policy of the SoT, especially to promote the effective implementation
of these Management Plans of Protected Areas (Plano de Manejo da Area de
Proteg5o Integral) already carried out by the SoT, and also following the provisions
of the Brazilian Forest Code, as well as the mandatory implementation of
Environmental Manual for Works, as mentioned in the ESMF (Conclusions and
Recommendations post environmental and social screening of sub-projects
proposed by Component 1.2 - Rehabilitation Works).
In addition, the screening process has identified a number of serious erosion
processes, reaching the rights-of-ways, and as a result Recovery Manuals of
Degraded Areas (Plano de Recuperag5o de Areas Degradadas), as part of the
EMP, were prepared by the Borrower (Annex 14 of the ESIA) and was disclosed
prior to appraisal. Proposed technical assistance activities in Sub-Component 2.3
- Improving Environmental Management entail benefits regarding Natural Habitats,
with a focus on structuring and executing a biodiversity conservation policy, and
structuring and executing water resources management.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                 Yes          OP 4.36 was triggered as a precautionary basis, particularly focused on Sub-
Component 2.2, as needed, as particular local development activities, unknown at
preparation, could imply using forest in a productive fashion and/or using water
resources from existing dams.
0
U.                                                     Finally, to further mitigate Project environmental risk, a negative list, recorded in
a)                                                    the ESIA, was agreed with the Borrower, with types of project activities that will not
be supported by the loan as described in the ISDS.
0
0                                                      Pilot activities under the Project Component 2.2 - Fostered Local and Regional
Q                                                      Development, the sub-project for agro-business and ecotourism sectors will
include a Negative List (as defined by the ESIA and ESMF) and also consistent
with the Brazilian Forest Code. The Negative List includes types of project
activities that will not be supported by the loan, including: (i) productive activities
that require commercial forest harvesting, wood extraction or firewood use in the
production chain; (ii) interventions that include purchase of equipment for use in
tropical forests; (iii) interventions that promote degradation of critical natural
habitats, deforestation or loss of native vegetation; (iv) interventions in the
productive chains located in areas under the process of degradation without the
adoption of appropriate management plans; (v) interventions in areas of high risk
of natural disasters; (vi) interventions in areas of dispute and /or petition for
recognition as indigenous lands; and (vii) interventions in water supply and
irrigation that rely on existing dams 15 meters or more in height.
Page 6 of 12


﻿Pest Management OP 4.09            Yes         The OP 4.09 Pest Management was triggered regarding proposed investment
under Component 1, mainly as vegetation clearing under road maintenance could
use sporadically pesticides/chemical products (theoretically, such case should not
occur as it is specifically prohibited for works and services financed by the Project
under the Operational Manual) pesticides also regarding Component 2.2, where
the project could encourage and support technical assistance including activities
requiring particular use of pesticides.
0
As mentioned above, to minimize expected adverse impacts on environmental and
social conditions, the ESIA and ESMF include a negative list with types of project
ci)                                                   activities that will not be supported by the loan, excluding, among others,
interventions that include the use of chemicals in categories IA and IB defined by
World Health Organization - WHO; and, also making use of the Recommended
Q                                                     Classification of Pesticides by Hazard and Guidelines to Classification (Geneva;
WHO 1994-95), as needed. In addition, the use of any chemical to clear the
vegetation in the case of works and services undert the Project is specifically
prohibited in the Operational Manual.
The need to use pesticides or herbicides should be indicated in each subproject,
as well as the Integrated Pest Management (IPM) measures to be adopted. When
the use of pesticides of herbicides is justified, an analysis of potential negative
impacts resulting from the use of these chemicals and the risks associated with the
inappropriate handling or storing of their containers will be conducted. The project
will also include measures to reduce those risks, in compliance with the Law
7802/89.
A Pest Management Framework was prepared in a satisfactory manner by the
Borrower. Regarding Component 2.2, where particular sub-projects are not yet
identified, no investment will occur without detailed prior assessment of actions
and activities as well as potential mitigation measures in accordance with the
framework. The prohibition to use chemicals for the vegetation clearing under
component 1 was incorporated in the OM.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11  Yes    The OP 4.11 is triggered since envisioned works and planned activities may affect
Physical Cultural Resources (PCR). At his stage, it is not possible to determine the
presence of PCR in the project's area of influence.For the set of interventions
already identified in Sub-Component 1.2 - Rehabilitation Works, the environmental
screening of all 56 road sections shows that there are 2 (two) road sections
located in fully protected areas: (i) TO-280 (2 road sections, R5), an existing state
road bordering the historic city of Natividade and, (ii) TO-222 (2 road sections, R2),
an existing state road through the protected area named "Monumento das Arvores
Fossilizadas", both roads included in Program Second Phase (R2 -). For these
0                                                     specific sub-projects, any type of actions involving excavations, earth movements,
U                                                     flooding or other major environmental changes is prohibited. For these specific
a)                                                    sub-projects, the SoT has already carried out the Management Plan of Protected
Areas (Piano de Manejo da Area de Protego Integral do Monumento das Arvores
0                                                     Fossilizadas) which includes the implementation of the Environmental Manual for
U)                                                    Works as mentioned on the ESMF (Conclusions and Recommendations post
Q                                                     environmental and social screening of sub-projects proposed by Component 1.2 -
o                                                     Rehabilitation Works) and guidelines from the national institute for historical and
artistic patrimony (IPHAN.).
Project implementation is not expected to cause any negative impact on known
PCR. Proposed subprojects with expected direct and negative impacts on known
archeological, paleontological, historical or other culturally significant sites will not
be eligible for financing under the Bank project. The EMP included screening
criteria to avoid any known areas with PCR and to address any "chance findings"
which may arise during implementation. The "chance findings" procedures are part
of the Works Environmental Manual, particularly in regions with PCR sites already
mapped by Regional IPHAN. The borrower may engage IPHAN and Secretaria da
Cultura with the proven experience to implement "chance findings" procedures.
Brazil has a well-developed legislative and normative framework, which is under
Federal oversight by the National Institute for Protection of Historical and
Archeological Sites (IPHAN). Tocantins also has the State Agency, Regional
IPHAN (Superintend6ncia do IPHAN em Tocantins) and Secretaria da Cultura,
tasked with the identification, restoration and protection of PCR in the State.
Page 7 of 12


﻿Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      Yes         As several of the proposed project activities contemplated under Component 2 are
state-wide in scope, they could potentially affect any of the roughly 13,000
Indigenous peoples present in the state. In addition, Indigenous Peoples are
expected to directly benefit from the municipal roads subcomponent under
component 1. As a result, the Indigenous People policy has been triggered. For
the municipal subcomponent, the plan is to treat the five indigenous lands located
in the western region of the state independently from the municipalities with which
0                                                     they overlap. The national indigenous agency (FUNAI) is assisting with
consultations in indigenous lands, such that indigenous peoples will select their
own priority road works for implementation. An initial pilot will be tested in one of
U)                                                   the five indigenous lands to refine the methodology for subsequent adaptation to
the other territories in case of success. As the exact location of the municipal
U)                                                   works and the potential direct and indirect benefits from the Project for these
Q                                                     populations remain unknown at appraisal, an Indigenous Peoples Planning
Framework (IPPF) has been prepared in agreement with OP 4.10.
As of appraisal stage, the exact location of several of the pilot activities proposed
for project financing under Component 2 have yet to be identified. Others, for
example the education sector activities, will be implemented in a fairly
circumscribed area along the Brasilia-Belem road because of the high rates of
school dropout and other social ills including the spread of HIV/AIDS. Specific
clauses in the contractors' contracts will provide awareness on HIV/AIDS and the
requirement is included in the Operating Manual. The Environmental and Social
Impact Assessment screened all known project areas for the presence of
Indigenous Peoples and confirmed that none of the pilot projects identified to date
will affect directly or indirectly indigenous peoples either positively or negatively.
Should this evaluation change during project implementation, the IPPF will be
applied and site specific Indigenous Peoples Plans will be implemented. The
participatory process involving reflections of the local population on the local
development open to all western municipalities, including indigenous people, under
the municipal roads subcomponent, might constitute an opportunity to identify
particular local development priorities. Should such development priorities result in
particular activity financed under the Project for Indigenous Populations, the IPPF
will apply. The IPPF will assist the executing agencies to determine whether
indigenous peoples are present in any of the project areas, and if so, to ensure
that the interested communities support the proposed activities as well as any
additional measures required to maximize their culturally appropriate benefits and/
or avoid potentially adverse impacts.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12  Yes       While the Project is not expected to require any significant land acquisition nor
impose restrictions of access to protected areas, localized impacts are possible,
notably under the surfacing of state unpaved roads subcomponent. The only
known locations are for rehabilitation works which do not require any resettlement
or land acquisition. As the exact location and design specifications for the
remainder of the proposed civil works and policy recommendations are unknown at
C,,                                                   appraisal stage, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared in
0                                                     agreement with Bank policy OP 4.12. Although it is unlikely that any of the
0                                                     activities to be implemented through component 2 will result in restrictions of
Q                                                     access to natural resources in parks or protected areas, the RPF includes a
Process Framework (PF) that provides policy guidance and procedures to mitigate
any such impacts as needed. The ESIA included screening of the seven feeder
corridors of the paved state road sections (total of 1,660 km) identified for
rehabilitation during the first year of project implementation. As all proposed civil
works under this subcomponent will take place within the existing roadway or road
right of way, these will proceed without any need to acquire land or displace any
physical assets.
Page 8 of 12


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          Yes          The OP 4.37 is triggered as a precautionary measure, not to limit any eventual
possibility of using existing water sources in Sub-Component 2 - Fostered Local
and Regional Development, with pilot interventions in agro-business and
ecotourism sectors. Possible investments may include the use of water from
existing dams for irrigation (agro-business sector) or for water supply (ecotourism).
However, no new dam construction will be financed by this operation.
0                                                      The borrower has prepared a conceptual framework of procedures to be adopted
during the implementation phase of the project. If needed, the borrower should
arrange for one or more independent dam specialists to: (a) inspect and evaluate
U)                                                    the safety status of the existing dam, its appurtenances, and its performance
history; (b) review and evaluate the owner's operation and maintenance
U)                                                    procedures; and (c) provide a written report of findings and recommendations for
any remedial work or safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the existing
dam to an acceptable standard of safety. Previous assessments of dam safety or
recommendations of improvements needed in existing dam may also be accepted
by the Bank, if the borrower provides evidence that (a) an effective dam safety
program is already in operation, and (b) full-level inspections and dam safety
assessments of the existing dam, which are satisfactory to the Bank, have already
been conducted and documented.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP  No   N/A
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60  No       N/A
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any potential I arge scale,
significant andlor irreversible impacts:
The Project does not entail any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative impacts. It has statewide relevance addressing
improved effectiveness of road transport and enhanced efficiency of selected public services in support of an integrated and territorially
balanced development of the State of Tocantins. As key benefit, the Project is expected to contribute to increased economic production through
increased viability, notably in agriculture, where more land would be used for production, though in relatively limited extension, as a result of
improved accessibility, and increased productivity, thanks to lower costs of production. Potential limited direct impacts on land use could be
experienced, but most of the proposed investments will take place on roads that pass through existing farming areas that have already been
consolidated in the state. Additionally, while the State already has a sound protected area policy framework and monitoring capacity, the
environment management of road works under the Project will be supervised by independent consulting companies, following best practices
inherited from other Projects transport in Brazil.
While most direct impacts on environment from the projects are expected to be limited in time and localized near the interventions sites,
0
C)       cumulative impact with potential pressure on environment might result from the regional economic growth expected as an outcome of the
a       Project. Notwithstanding, the Project will encompass a wide environmental institutional strengthening building on the successes of the previous
operation expected to breed sustainability in the State economic growth, in areas such as: biodiversity protection, sustainable land use
0        management, environmental monitoring strengthening, sustainable hydrologic resources management.
0
.)   While some of the proposed activities will operate in sensitive environmental and social contexts, the participatory mechanisms envisioned in
Q        the decision process for investments at municipal level might contribute to better address the management of those social and environmental
issues. Some studies prepared by the SoT, also supported by the World Bank under the previous project, indicate that the improvement of road
circulation should not significantly change the spatial pattern of conversion of native vegetation in the state. The proposed investments will take
place on road sections that traverse existing farming areas which had already been consolidated in the state, and thus are expected to increase
productivity and occupation of lands which are already in use. In parallel, other studies were performed by the SoT, such as the EEZ -
Ecological-Economic Zoning and by the implementation of Management Plans for Protected Areas. The demarcation of protected areas has
proven to be an effective tool in curbing deforestation. Some studies have also demonstrated that deforestation was significantly lowered inside
Conservation Units (UCs) than outside those areas, reinforcing the clear effect that protected areas have for preventing deforestation. Still,
existing (or in preparation) environmental management plans for conservations units in Tocantins indicate the need for strengthening of state
institutions, especially NATURATINS, to promote continuous and more efficiently actions.
In light of these recognized opportunities and risks, an integrated Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was conducted and an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared. The ESIA and ESMF provide both a thorough assessment of
the Project's social and environmental opportunities and challenges and detailed mitigation measures to be undertaken in the event that any
particular risks cannot be avoided. The ESIA included screening of the seven feeder corridors of the paved state road sections (total of 1,500
km) identified for rehabilitation through subcomponent 1.2 during the first year of project implementation. As all proposed civil works under
subcomponent 1.2 will take place within the existing roadway or road right of way, these will proceed without any need to acquire land or
displace any physical assets. In addition, none of these specific road sections identified for rehabilitation are located in areas occupied or
claimed by indigenous peoples.
In order to effectively minimize or mitigate these potential impacts, the ESIA and ESMF have developed screening procedures, mandatory
Action Plans and institutional strengthening measures. The ESIA/ESMF identified for each proposed Component and Sub-Component the type
of interventions expected, with a description of technical issues (design, project, dimension and needs), as well as, for each one, an
environmental screening. Four different types of interventions have been identified, three for Component 1: (i) elimination of critical spots on
unpaved roads, at the local and state level; (ii) rehabilitation works (CREMA); (iii) surfacing unpaved state roads; and one for Component 2; (iv)
Page 9 of 12


﻿fostered local and regional development.
The most commonly expected negative impacts would arise from the construction phase under Component 1, which includes works
interventions mostly within rights of way of existing roads, although these impacts are expected to be small, transitory and of short duration. In
this sense, the social and environmental risks associated with this project are limited due to the nature of the proposed interventions, which will
mostly take place within the existing rights-of-way of the road and in sites associated with road projects.
The ESMF specifies guidelines and procedures to be followed by the construction contractors, covering aspects such as location of
O        construction camps, clearance of vegetation, noise, traffic control, safety signaling, disposal of construction debris and waste material to be
incorporated in the bidding documents for civil works, among others. Compliance with the practices outlined in the Project Operational Manual
will be a contractual obligation of the contractors.
0
To better address issues that arise from the ESIA, the Borrower prepared a set of mandatory Implementation Manuals to be applied for all four
.U"      types of interventions: Works Environmental Manual (Annex 5 of the ESIA); Social Communication Plan (Annex 6 of the ESIA), Environmental
Q        Education and Social Responsibility Plan (Annex 7 of the ESIA), and also a Monitoring and Supervision Plan (Annex 9 of the ESIA). The ESIA
report comprises three main parts: (i) Part A: an Environmental and Social Assessment, (ii) Part B: an Environmental Management Plan; and,
(iii) Part C: an Institutional Strengthening Program to support demands coming from the project. Finally, the Borrower incorporated in the EISA
0..      a Right of Way management framework (Annex 8 of the ESIA). This framework will result in specific programs aimed at improving the
management of the use of the state's roads' right of way. The ESIA (final draft) was submitted to the Bank (December 14, 2011), and has been
disseminated in the Infoshop and on the Borrower's web site (www.seinfra.to.gov.br) (January 17, 2012).
2. Describe any potential indirect andlor long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
The Project does not entail any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative impacts. It has statewide relevance addressing
improved effectiveness of road transport and enhanced efficiency of selected public services in support of an integrated and territorially
balanced development of the State of Tocantins. As key benefit, the Project is expected to contribute to increased economic production through
increased viability, notably in agriculture, where more land would be used for production, though in relatively limited extension, as a result of
improved accessibility and increased productivity, thanks to lower costs of production. Potential limited direct impacts on land use could be
experienced, but most of the proposed investments will take place on roads that pass through existing farming areas that have already been
consolidated in the state. Additionally, while the State already has a sound protected area policy framework and monitoring capacity, the
environment management of road works under the Project will be supervised by independent consulting companies, following best practices
inherited from other Projects transport in Brazil.
While most direct impacts on environment from the projects are expected to be limited in time and localized near the interventions sites,
cumulative impact with potential pressure on environment might result from the regional economic growth expected as an outcome of the
Project. Notwithstanding, the Project will encompass a wide environmental institutional strengthening building on the successes of the previous
operation expected to breed sustainability in the State economic growth, in areas such as: biodiversity protection, sustainable land use
management, environmental monitoring strengthening, sustainable hydrologic resources management.
Mitigation measures will be fostered under the Project activities aiming at mainstreaming environmental management in the State and
improving land use management. Moreover, positive impacts are expected to result from improvements in drainage slopes, retaining walls and
other structures related to the works in regard to the prevention of erosive processes and sediment carriage to water resources. Road works in
areas located near indigenous lands may lead to increased economic activities that could, over the long term, generate some cumulative social
and environmental impacts. These will be minimized, mitigated and/or compensated through the screening, consultation, and various risk
0        management programs included in the ESMF.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
U)        Not applicable as no significant adverse impacts are foreseen for the project as designed.
0
0      4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
Q        and implement the measures described.
O         The specific measures taken by the Borrower to address each of the safeguard issues are lengthily detailed in the above table 6.
0.       The Borrower's institutional capacity for safeguard issues management is considered adequate. The Bank team assessed the capacity of the
State, including the implementing agency and partners. Tocantins has benefited from continued Bank support in the environmental area since
the early 1990's. Initial support aimed at establishing and strengthening the State's capacity for natural resources and environmental
management capacity (under the Natural Resources Policy Project- P006565/1994 and the Second State Highway Management Project-
P006555). Support in this area continued under the Tocantins Sustainable Regional Development Project (P060573), which has a specific
environmental component (US$ 6 million as per PAD) supporting environmental management, land use planning, biodiversity protection and
water resources management which were implemented successfully. Support in the biodiversity protection, land use planning and management
and management of water resources will be furthered under the Tocantins sub-project under the Sustainable Cerrado Initiative (P091827).
Although the Project executing agencies have experience with World Bank safeguards policies and instruments from previous Bank financed
operation, many of these did not require any land acquisition, nor did they operate in indigenous areas. For these reasons, the Project has
sought to strengthen measures and systems already in place, such as: Environmental and Social Screening requirements, independent
environmental and social supervision contracts, public consultation and participatory decision-making processes, and gender disaggregated
social impact assessments, among others. Capacity building for safeguards management has also been an instrumental part of project
preparation, for example workshops were conducted on involuntary resettlement and indigenous peoples issues during preparation missions in
October and December 2011.
The PIU will be responsible for ensuring that all Bank safeguards triggered by the Project are complied with and that all works under
implementation apply the ESMF, RPF and IPPF. The PIU will also provide support to the beneficiary agencies on the preparation of specific
social assessments, public consultations and preparation of resettlement / indigenous peoples plans, whenever they may be required. To do
this, the PIU has hired a qualified social specialist to support project implementation. The Bank team will also continue to work closely with
State counterparts to ensure adequate adherence to all Brazilian and Bank social and environmental standards.
Page 10 of 12


﻿The approach for identifying and managing environmental and social impacts and risks under the Project is considered adequate. The
Environmental Assessment safeguard is mandatory to all sub-projects that may potentially have an environmental and social impact. Most of
the other safeguards policies have been triggered on a precautionary basis. The Borrower has addressed safeguard policy issues by preparing
a satisfactory Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a
Environmental Management Plans (EMP) for works identified at appraisal requiring particular mitigation activities in accordance with the set of
guidelines, procedures and criteria for screening activities and to ensure that the Project will not cause any potential large scale, significant and/
or irreversible negative environmental and social impacts.
c.     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
0
U        on potentially affected people.
a)        The Project benefited from ample consultations with representatives from local institutions and the civil society held across the State during
preparation, both at concept (3 consultations in SoT regions over the course of 2010) and preparation stages (five consultations in SoT regions
0        both on ToR and outputs of the ESIA) and specifically included representatives of Indigenous Peoples, local residents and municipal
__       authorities, private sector producers, public service providers, NGOs, etc. The ESIA reports that the principal concerns of participants included
Q        questions about the overall value of investments, the geographic and technical scope of operations to be supported, the formula for municipal
.O       allocations, the prioritization process for municipal works, the implementation calendar, etc. These comments and suggestions were recorded in
consultation reports detailing responses provided and attesting to the overall endorsement given to the Project's objectives, components and
safeguards instruments.
The Borrower also prepared a Public Consultation Manual that describes the consultation process required to prioritize municipal roads
investments, and covers the objectives, methodology, and resources required. All the works under the municipal road improvement component
will be prioritized and decided on a participatory basis, upon completion of a first set of participatory processes to define the municipal
development agenda in an objective to foster greater transparency, accountability and public engagement in municipal affairs. Subsequently,
participants will decide on a list of roads to be improved, ranked in order of priority, in conjunction with the development strategy previously
discussed. The national indigenous agency (FUNAI) will assist with consultations with indigenous peoples, such that these communities can
select their own priority road works for implementation. Although the surfacing subcomponent is expected to be relatively small, a public
consultation will be conducted before the beginning of each surfacing subproject with beneficiary communities, nearby towns and road users.
The Borrower has also developed a technical note for management of state road rights of ways (ROW). This note provides guidance on how
the State road agency (SEINFRA) will monitor occupations and other unauthorized uses of road side areas. The main recommendations
include the need to sensitize occupants to the potential dangers due to proximity to the road way, and to coordinate these outreach campaigns
with municipal authorities and other government agencies required to design and implement sustainable solutions with the ROW occupants.
These tasks will be facilitated through the activities included in the Project's Social Communications Plan.
Finally, to handle any eventual requests for information or grievances regarding Project activities, the State of Tocantins already has a well-
developed system for addressing grievances through the intervention of an independent third party, via the State Public Attorney Office.
Beyond this, an Ombudsperson linked to the PIU will be set up. SEPLAN will prepare an Ombuds Manual defining timeline and document
standards for the handling of public communications. The Ombudsperson will receive and channel suggestions and concerns voiced by the
public to the responsible authorities. The Ombudsperson will receive communications through a telephone "hot-line", advertized on signs
posted at all work sites. Comments and questions will also be received through email and the Borrower's website . The Ombudsperson will
ensure that adequate and timely replies are provided to the public. These data will further be analyzed in the Progress Reports, so as to identify
any key issues or problems to be addressed during project implementation. These data will be analyzed in quarterly Monitoring Reports, and
may also be used by the State Public Attorney Office in the treatment of disputes at the state level, wherever such measures are found to be
0        necessary.
All documents from the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), including the final report and related frameworks and plans are
U)       available to the public on the Borrower's website: http://www.seplan.to.gov.br/seplan/br/
0
.UL    B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Q
.O     Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
M       Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   22-Nov-2011
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              12-Jan-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                               22-Dec-2011
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors
Resettlement Action PlanlFramework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  14-Dec-2011
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              12-Jan-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                               22-Dec-2011
Indigenous Peoples Development PlanlFramework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  21-Dec-2011
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              12-Jan-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                               22-Dec-2011
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  14-Dec-2011
Page 11 of 12


﻿Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              12-Jan-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                              22-Dec-2011
If the project triggers the Pest Management andlor Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
It is part of the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment/ESIA
0
a)    C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
U)     OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
0
Z5       Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?  Yes [ x ]  No [  ]  NA [
.U,
Q      OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are  Yes [] No [] NA [X]
PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [
cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for  Yes [  ]  No [ X]  NA [
certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements been made  Yes [  ]  No [ x]  NA [
for public awareness and training?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
O       Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?  Yes [ x]  No [  ]  NA [
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language  Yes [x]  No [  ]  NA [
that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
0
All Safeguard Policies
.U,
Q        Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
o       the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
-O       Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard  Yes [ x]  No [  ]  NA [
impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same  Yes [  ]  No [ X]  NA [
been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
Ill. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:          Eric R. Lancelot
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                      Date: 31-Aug-2012
Sector Manager:            Name Aurelio Menendez (SM)                             Date: 28-Aug-2012
Page 12 of 12


