                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA553
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Sep-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Uzbekistan                         Project ID:   P127486
                            Project Name:     SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE AND CLIMATE CHANGE MITIGATION
                                              PROJECT (GEF) (P127486)
                            Task Team         Dilshod Khidirov
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       25-Sep-2012                          Estimated   06-Dec-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: ECSS1                                 Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Focal Area:       Multi-focal area
                            Sector:           Irrigation and drainage (30%), Other Renewable Energy (30%), Agricultural
                                              extension and research (20%), Crops (20%)
                            Theme:            Climate change (70%), Land administration and management (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                           Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                            12.70
                              GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - Associated IDA Fund                                     67.96
                              Total                                                                        80.66
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The Global Environmental Objectives of the proposed Project are to (i) promote the introduction of
                           renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies of relevance to agri-businesses and farms; and
                           (ii) strengthen capacity for improving degraded irrigated land and water conservation.
                            3. Project Description
                           The GEF SACCMP project would be implemented over a four year period and will conclude at the
                           same time as the RESP-2 project (December 2016). It will include three components designed to
                           complement the four RESP-2 components (Rural Financing, Irrigation and Drainage, Rural Training

                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         and Advisory Services, and Project Management). The three GEF project components are: (i)
                         Investments for Sustainable Technologies; (ii) Irrigated Land Degradation Mitigation; and (iii)
                         Project Technical Support and Advisory Services (this component also includes the additional project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management costs).

                         SACCMP will comprise a GEF-funded environmental addition to the RESP-2, with the objective of
                         mainstreaming environmental considerations into agricultural activities undertaken by RESP-2 and
                         its AF. The RESP-2/SACCMP collaboration would broadly be on three levels: (i) provision of grants
                         to introduce renewable energy and energy efficiency for climate change mitigation; ii) grant-funded
                         irrigated land degradation improvement measures, linked to the I&D activities under RESP-2; and
                         iii) grant-funded training for farmers, agribusiness owners, rural advisory service providers and
                         RESP-2 credit officers, to complement ongoing training provided under Component 3 of RESP-2.

                         Component 1: Investments for Sustainable Technologies (US$9.0M GEF funding; US$36.7M co-
                         financing)

                         This component would be implemented in close association with the RESP-2 Rural Enterprise
                         Finance component throughout all eight regions covered by RESP-2 and its AF. This component
                         would promote the market for low carbon technologies (both renewable energy and energy efficient)
                         in the agricultural sector and is consistent with the GEF Climate Change (CC) Mitigation focal area
                         objectives. It would also contribute to the CC focal area Strategic Objective 3 "promote investment
                         in renewable energy technologies," with emphasis on agri-businesses and rural communities. It
                         would also be consistent with GEF's Climate Change Mitigation objective 2 (CCM-2) "promote
                         market transformation for energy efficiency in industry and the building sector". The proposed
                         project would directly respond to the strategic goals of the GEF-5 strategy in the Climate Change
                         Mitigation focal area, namely, promoting the use of renewable energy and enhanced energy
                         efficiency in the provision of rural energy services. As such, it supports the adoption of new, low-
                         GHG emitting energy technologies. This component addresses priority needs identified by the
                         Government through supporting measures to mainstream renewable energy in Uzbekistan's energy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         It will support the introduction of relevant renewable and energy efficient technologies and
                         undertaking related capacity building in rural areas.

                         While RESP II and its AF support improved rural access to credit, they do not provide dedicated
                         resources to introduce renewable energy or energy efficient technologies in agribusinesses or on
                         farms. Rural communities, large private farmers and small farmers, especially those in remote
                         regions subject to unreliable power and gas supply, would benefit greatly from off-grid energy from
                         renewable sources. At the same time, the introduction of renewable energy technologies in rural
                         areas throughout the country would support a key Government development objective. The rural
                         communities and agribusinesses depend on irrigation and livestock for their livelihoods, creating
                         both opportunities for renewable energy utilization (eg., use of manure for biogas) and enhanced
                         energy efficiency (eg. for water pumping). While Uzbekistan has good supplies of natural gas, the
                         Government is keen to develop renewable energy sources and increase energy savings by efficiency
                         improvements both to free up for export gas currently sold at low domestic prices, to stimulate
                         sustainable rural development and to fulfill their obligations under UNFCCC.

                         1.1  Technology Demonstrations (US$ 1.0M GEF funds; US$0.3M beneficiary co-financing)

                         Activities under this sub-component would aim to demonstrate renewable energy technologies in
                         small- and medium-sized (SME) agribusinesses and on small, medium and large farms in the eight

                                                                     Page 2 of 9
                         RESP-2 project oblasts. The GEF grant would su pport the introduction of innovative technologies
                         that could have a significant impact in the long run on reducing GHG emissions and developing
                         capacity for adaptation to climate change. This could also include renewable energy (RE)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         technologies that are available but have not yet been tested and or widely adopted in Uzbekistan,
                         such as bio-gas digestors, solar water heaters, solar photovoltaics, biomass, wind and micro-
                         hydroelectric installations. Emphasis would be given to remote agribusinesses and farms that are
                         prone to disruptions in electricity supply. Energy efficiency (EE) upgrades would be introduced
                         through demonstrations of more efficient use of energy in irrigation water pumps, focusing on the
                         seven RESP-2 I&D project raions. Selection criteria, typologies and preliminary calculations for the
                         demonstrations have been prepared. It is estimated that the demonstrations could include
                         approximately 20 small biogas digestors, 2 medium-sized and 1 large installation; 4 PV pumping
                         demonstrations for watering animals (and humans) in remote locations; and 5 solar water heaters for
                         rural farm applications. Except for the largest biogas demonstration, all demonstrations will receive a
                         grant to cover 80% of costs and require a 20% loan/equity contribution from the applicant. Grant
                         support to the largest biogas demonstration unit will be capped at $500,000, estimated at slightly
                         more than 60% of the cost, with the owner required to contribute the remainder. Further preparation
                         and dissemination of information on the demonstrated technologies would be supported through
                         workshops and materials produced under Component 3.


                         1.2 -- Renewable Energy Technology Investments (US$8M GEF funding, US$36.4M co-financing
                         from RESP II)

                         This sub-component would provide matching grant funds to scale up and expand the introduction of
                         renewable energy (RE) technologies in small- and medium-sized (SME) agribusinesses and on small,
                         medium and large farms in the eight RESP-2 project oblasts. Typologies (e.g., technical parameters,
                         inputs required), vendors and costs would be identified for several technologies, including bio-gas
                         digesters, solar collectors, PV-powered applications, biomass, wind and micro-hydroelectric
                         installations. Energy efficiency (EE) upgrades through installation of more efficient irrigation water
Public Disclosure Copy




                         pumps would also be eligible for matching grant financing. The number and type of investments
                         cannot be predicted, as the selection would be driven by client demand. The beneficiaries of the
                         grant program are expected to be farmers and rural entrepreneurs who (i) meet the eligibility criteria
                         for the RESP-2 Credit Line, as spelled out in the RESP-2 Rural Enterprise Investment Guidelines,
                         and, (ii) are interested in investing in the types of renewable energy technologies mentioned above.
                         Sub-projects would have to be financially viable and economically justified. Under the investment
                         activities of the project, early beneficiaries would receive grant financing for 60% of the RE
                         investment cost during years 1 and 2 of the project. During years 3 and 4, the grants would cover a
                         maximum of 40% of the investment costs, with loans and/or equity required to cover the balance.
                         The need for subsidies is expected to decrease as the renewable industry grows, costs decline, and
                         financing of renewable energy investments becomes more familiar to the participating rural financing
                         agencies. The declining subsidy is also expected to ease the transition to the post-project no-subsidy
                         market regime. The decline in the rate of the subsidy from 60% to 40% means that over the project's
                         lifetime, the grant element will have financed an average of 50% of investments. However, if at the
                         time of mid-term review, the Steering Committee perceives that the market is not growing fast
                         enough to justify the reduction in the grant element, they may choose to alter this proposed pace and
                         level of subsidy reduction. In all cases, the beneficiaries would be expected to provide the remaining
                         funding through their own equity and/or loans from the RESP-2 credit line, or other banks.

                         By providing grants to eligible sub-projects financed from the RESP-2 credit line, the environmental

                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                         sustainability of the RESP-2 sub-projects would be improved, while at the same time encouraging
                         credit line portfolio diversification under RESP-2. Information about the availability of the grant
                         financing, credit line resources and application procedures would be extensively publicized to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         potential beneficiaries through outreach activities supported under Component 3.

                         Component 2: Irrigated Land Degradation Mitigation (US$1.09 million GEF funding, approximately
                         US$26.6 million co-financing from RESP-2 and a US$6.6 million contribution from the GOU)

                         Resources from RESP-2, the GEF project, and Swiss Development Corporation (SDC) (parallel grant
                         financing) would be pooled to support improved management of agricultural systems and water
                         resources through the introduction of technologies and good practices for irrigated land. Activities
                         under this component would aim at introducing technologies and management approaches for
                         controlling and reversing irrigated land degradation. This includes the introduction, testing and
                         demonstration of integrated low-cost, low-risk water and land management technologies, such as drip
                         irrigation, salinity mitigation of marginal land, water re-use, soil quality enhancement, pumping for
                         groundwater extraction, alternative cropping, and other techniques and practices to increase water
                         use efficiency and agricultural productivity. This component would improve knowledge, skills and
                         know-how of farmers (including women farmers) and local communities and promote the transfer of
                         demonstrated technologies and SLM practices through the Farmer Field School (FFS) approach.
                         These activities would be targeted to the raions participating in the Irrigation and Drainage
                         Component of the parent project, which are receiving funds and technical assistance to repair and
                         upgrade irrigation infrastructure.

                         The fundamental reform of the structure of farming created a new challenge in relation to I&D.
                         There is now a specific division of responsibility, with inter-farm and upstream infrastructure and
                         works being the responsibility of GOU, while the on-farm I&D is now the responsibility of the newly
                         privatized farmers. Much of the I&D infrastructure is over 30 years old, and has suffered from a lack
                         of investment and maintenance (funding currently estimated at 40-50 percent of required levels) in
                         the past 15 years. Of equal importance is the establishment of Water Users' Associations (WUAs)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for managing on-farm I&D operations and maintenance. While initial steps have been taken in this
                         area, success to date in creating viable, sustainable WUAs has been elusive or mixed.

                         2.1: Farm-Level Land and Water Conservation Demonstrations (US$1.0 million GEF funding,
                         approximately US$33.0 million co-financing from RESP-2 and SDC)

                         Resources from RESP-2, the GEF project, and Swiss Development Corporation (SDC) (parallel grant
                         financing) would be coordinated for expenditures to demonstrate technologies and management
                         approaches for land and water conservation. The approach is to test and demonstrate an integrated
                         package in each subproject area, packaging low-cost and low-risk water and land management
                         practices and technologies. One demo package would target each of the seven raions participating in
                         RESP-2, which are receiving funds and TA to repair and upgrade I&D infrastructure. Each of these
                         seven subprojects may require a different demo package (e.g., depending on soil, crop type, climate,
                         etc.). Examples of technologies and management approaches for controlling and reversing irrigated
                         land degradation that could be introduced in the seven subproject areas include:

                         (i)     Farm-level (farmer/WUA command): Improved land leveling techniques (laser) to improve
                         on-field distribution uniformities; deep ripping to improve soil internal drainage and utilize soil-
                         moisture storage; micro-irrigation of various degrees of sophistication; soil-quality enhancement (e.
                         g., combined irrigation and fertigation techniques to improve fertilization efficiency); salinity coping

                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                         measures; diversify cropping (water-saving varieties, salt-tolerant crops).

                         (ii)    On-farm level (tertiary canals within WUA): Irrigation re-scheduling (amend irrigation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         rotations to utilize Readily Available Moisture); pilot sub-surface drainage and vertical drainage;
                         groundwater pumping to supplement surface irrigation; salinity mitigation of marginal l and.

                         (iii)   Inter-farm level (main/secondary canals within BAIS): Alternative canal lining options with
                         geo-textiles; managed reuse of land drainage (marginal water).

                         The goal is to: (a) introduce novel water management practices/technologies adapted to the local
                         system, and/or (b) reintroduce existing, successful but underutilized agricultural practices.

                         Subcomponent 2.2: Farmer Field Schools (US$0.09 million GEF funding; US$0.2 million co-
                         financing from RESP-2)

                         This sub-component would provide training for farmers (including women farmers) and WUAs on
                         using and scaling up the practices/technologies that prove successful. This sub-component would be
                         implemented in close coordination with Component 3, in cooperation with SDC, which is already
                         supporting the Farmer Field School (FFS) under RESP-2. Farmers would receive hands-on training
                         at the plots, and successful demonstrations would be compiled in technology packages for
                         dissemination via the BAIS, AIS, and the Rural Training and Advisory Services component of
                         RESP-2.

                         Component 3: Project Technical Support and Advisory Services (US$2.609 million GEF funding;
                         US$2.6 million co-financing from RESP-2)

                         Activities under this component would support key capacity development and analytical services
                         needed to introduce and scale up adoption of renewable energy technologies. This component would
                         provide (i) advisory services for the analysis and development of a regulatory framework to support
Public Disclosure Copy




                         broader adoption of renewable energy technologies, this work would be undertaken in close
                         cooperation with the ADB; (ii) financial analyses of the technically feasible renewable energy
                         options in Uzbekistan in order to ascertain which options are the most financially attractive
                         investments; (iii) workshops for information dissemination on the technologies that would be
                         demonstrated and to publicize the RESP-2 credit line; and (iv) capacity building for carbon
                         accounting, mobile data systems, renewable energy equipment and technical service providers.
                         These activities would complement the Rural Training and Advisory Services Component of the
                         RESP-2 and strengthen environmental oversight and impact of RESP-2 throughout all of the eight
                         regions covered by RESP-2.

                         The Bank team would also work in close cooperation with the Uzbekistan office of the Organization
                         for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which is providing technical assistance to the
                         ecological movement of Uzbekistan in drafting new law on Renewable Energy Development. It was
                         agreed with OSCE to further coordinate activities in development of legal and regulatory framework
                         for RE development.

                         This component would support the RRA's additional costs associated with implementation of the
                         GEF project, including: (i) the baseline, mid-term and end of project surveys; and (ii) supplemental
                         RRA HQ staff who will provide technical backstopping, environmental and monitoring and
                         evaluation (M&E) support for implementation of the GEF project activities. Fiduciary support would

                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                         be provided by current RRA financial management and procurement staff through 2016, when both
                         projects are scheduled to close.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The RESP II Irrigation and Drainage component will concentrate on a set of seven administrative
                         districts: Andijan (Ulugnor district), Bukhara (Alat district), Kashkadarya (Mirishkor district),
                         Samarkand (Pastdargom district), Syrdarya (Bayavut), Tashkent (Buka district), Fergana (Yazyavan
                         district)., while other project activities, including the Rural Finance component, will cover larger area
                         in eight provinces: Andijan, Bukhara, Kashkadarya, Samarkand, Syrdarya, Jizzak, Tashkent and
                         Fergana regions. The AF and the GEF Project will operate in the same oblasts (provinces) and rayons
                         (districts) as RESP II:
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Amy Evans (ECSHD)
                         Roxanne Hakim (ECSSO)
                         Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel Ghany (ECSAR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes                The GEF project will co-finance renewable
                          BP 4.01                                              energy investments under the RESP II credit line
                                                                               for on-lending to farmers and rural business
                                                                               related to farming (including but not limited to
                                                                               agro-processing, storage and distribution
                                                                               facilities, agricultural inputs and investments in
                                                                               tree-crops). The RESP Environmental
                                                                               Management Framework (EMF) provides a
                                                                               screening checklist and mitigation measures for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               the minor impacts that could occur as a result of
                                                                               the investments.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                          4.12
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                          Projects on International           Yes               OP 7.50 was triggered by RESP II because the
                          Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 project is on the Amu Darya and Syr Darya,



                                                                       Page 6 of 9
                                                                                which are international waterways under the OP.
                                                                                However, it was determined that RESP II falls
                                                                                under the exception to the notification
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                requirement under OP 7.50 as the works to be
                                                                                financed are limited to rehabilitation of existing
                                                                                inter-farm and on-farm works within the
                                                                                irrigation and drainage systems, and do not entail
                                                                                an expansion or other change that would
                                                                                negatively affect the quality or quantity of water
                                                                                flow to other riparians. No new or additional
                                                                                irrigation and drainage investments would be
                                                                                supported under the GEF project, such that the
                                                                                exception to notification approved by
                                                                                management prior to appraisal of RESP II
                                                                                remains in effect for the GEF project.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               There are no large scale, significant and/or irreversible environmental impacts or other
                              safeguards issues anticipated under the project.

                             The Rural Finance activities related to Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) will deal with
                             medium-to-small loans which are expected to be used for agricultural inputs and implements,
Public Disclosure Copy




                             equipment and trading activities with a minimal environmental impact. The project will not
                             finance pesticides. Members of PFIs involved in lending will also be provided with training on the
                             potential environmental impact of sub-projects and on mitigation measures. The participating
                             financial institutions (PFIs) for RESP-II are the commercial banks and leasing companies for the
                             mid-size credit line and leasing services. The AF would extend and expand the Rural Finance
                             component of RESP II, and would provide co-financing of renewable energy and energy
                             efficiency technologies together with the GEF Project. The GEF Project Component A
                             (investments in sustainable technologies) would support investments in renewable energy and
                             energy efficiency for farmers and agribusinesses. This will improve the environmental
                             sustainability of the sub-projects financed under the credit line, and contribute to Uzbekistan's
                             efforts to address climate change adaptation and mitigation.

                             Rehabilitation and small-scale construction works on irrigation and drainage networks, as in RESP
                             II, usually cause little environmental impact, however these still demand special precautions. The
                             GEF Project Component B (irrigated land degradation mitigation) would focus on the same rayons
                             as RESP II , and be designed to enhance the positive environmental impact of the RESP II I&D
                             Component.

                             The project would not involve any involuntary resettlement as it is financing improved
                             technologies that are used on existing farms and there is no land acquisition or restriction of access


                                                                        Page 7 of 9
                           to resources or services involved. There are no indigenous people issues nor is there any cultural
                           property that would be threatened as a result of project activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The GEF project will benefit from the institutional capacity developed under RESP I and II, which
                           stressed awareness of safeguard policies. The GEF Project Component C (technical support and
                           advisory services) would expand advisory services, training and information dissemination related
                           to renewable energy, energy efficiency and land degradation mitigation technologies and practices,
                           and would also support advisory services for analysis and development of the related legal and
                           regulatory framework
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             No negative long term or indirect impacts are anticipated
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The RRA has revised and updated the RESP II Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
                           so that it is applicable for the RESP II Additional Finance and the GEF project. The updated EMF
                           was disclosed in country by the RRA on 7 December 2011 and by the World Bank via InfoShop
                           the same day. The RRA has a qualified environmental specialist on staff, who will support these
                           aspects of the GEF project as well as RESP II and its AF. RRA capacity was last assessed by the
                           Bank environmental safeguards specialist during a November 2011 mission
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Public consultations on the revised EMF per se are not expected to be needed as these were held
                           in 2008 for the RESP II. However, the GEF project will carry out an extensive outreach and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           information dissemination program within the first three months of implementation to engage the
                           PFIs, RRA regional offices, potential project beneficiaries and other partners to describe the GEF
                           project objectives, EMF provisions, and provide details for participation in the project.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Dec-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  07-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Dec-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
                         ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)


                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Dilshod Khidirov
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)                    Date: 02-Oct-2012




                                                                       Page 9 of 9
