                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA1345
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Oct-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Honduras                          Project ID:    P130819
                            Project Name:      HN Safer Municipalities (P130819)
                            Task Team          Rodrigo Serrano-Berthet
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          22-Oct-2012                       Estimated   18-Dec-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSSO                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:            Other social services (50%), Sub-national government administration (50%)
                            Theme:             Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (25%), Participation and
                                               civic engagement (25%), Other urban development (25%), Social Inclusion
                                               (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             2.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              IDA Grant                                                                     15.00
                              Total                                                                         17.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objectives (PDO) are to support Honduras (i) to improve the capacities of
                           national and local actors in violence prevention, (ii) to ensure urban municipalities are addressing
                           crime and violence risk factors, and (iii) to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible
                           emergency. It aims to achieve objective (i) through greater capacity of national institutions to
                           coordinate violence prevention interventions, and to diagnose the sources and dynamics of violence.
                           It aims to achieve objective (ii) through improved capacity to design municipal violence prevention
                           plans and interventions that are evidence-informed, and invest in integrated approaches that address
                           the multiple risk factors contributing to specific types of violence, particularly intra-family and
                           gender-based, school-based, and community-based violence. In addition, objective (iii) will be
                           achieved through the Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) that enables IDA countries to have fast


                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         access to financial resources including part of the undisbursed balance of their investment lending
                         portfolio in the event of a crisis or emergency.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         As agreed with the Government, to achieve the second part of the PDO, the project will focus
                         initially on three municipalities in the Northern region (La Ceiba, Choloma, and El Progreso). This
                         reflects the prioritization done within the Safer Municipalities Program which puts a premium in
                         areas with high concentrations of crime and violence. For this Project, municipalities were selected
                         by ranking in decreasing order those with an urban population lower than 250,000 inhabitants and
                         with a homicide rate higher than 90 homicides per 100,000 inhabitants, which is about the national
                         average. In addition, the team verified that there were propitious conditions in those municipalities in
                         terms of engagement and commitment with citizen security . Additional municipalities may be
                         considered during project implementation if agreed between the Government and the Bank based on
                         the municipal participation criteria described in the Operations Manual.
                         3. Project Description
                         The project consists of the following four components:

                         Component 1: Strengthening of national violence prevention institutions (US$ 2 million)

                         Subcomponent 1.1. Strengthening national capacity to guide, coordinate, and oversee violence
                         prevention efforts at the municipal level, by supporting the Safer Municipalities Program (SMP) in
                         the Ministry of Security, through (a) strengthening the SMP’s advisory capacity and tools including
                         systematization of good practices, guidelines, organizing workshops and training and South-South
                         cooperation for selected municipalities; (b) strengthening SMP’s coordination capacity including
                         assessments of the supply of violence prevention services that can be offered at municipal level and
                         linking relevant national programs (such as Mi Primer Empleo) with municipal demand; and (c)
                         development of the monitoring and evaluation system of the program.

                         Subcomponent 1.2. Strengthening national capacity to collect and process violence data for evidence-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         based policymaking, by supporting the Instituto Universitario en Democracia, Paz y Seguridad
                         (IUDPAS), responsible for the National Violence Observatory at the Universidad Nacional
                         Autonóma de Honduras (UNAH), through (a) technical assistance and equipment (hardware,
                         software and a vehicle) to consolidate the capacity of the National Observatory; (b) improving its
                         geo-referencing capabilities for reporting and analyzing crime and violence incidents at the national
                         level; (c) design of victimization, attitude and social cohesion surveys; and (d) creation or
                         strengthening of municipal observatories in the three-targeted municipalities, connected to IUDPAS’
                         network of municipal observatories.

                         Component 2: Ensuring urban municipalities are addressing crime and violence risk factors(US$ 11
                         million)

                         Subcomponent 2.1. Improving municipal management and planning of citizen security in the
                         participating municipalities through: (a) training the Municipal Committees for Violence Prevention
                         (which are part of the Municipal Councils for Coexistence and Citizen Security), as well as different
                         violence prevention units in the municipality (e.g., Women’s Unit); (b) designing, monitoring and
                         evaluating municipal crime and violence prevention plans; (c) designing municipal ordinances for
                         crime and violence prevention (i.e. restricting alcohol use and availability of firearms); (d) designing
                         and implementing municipal-level complaint handling mechanisms (CHMs) oriented toward
                         municipal citizen security ; and (e) capacity building and training for municipal authorities in multi-


                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         sectoral crime and violence prevention through south-south exchange.

                         Subcomponent 2.2. Strengthening collective efficacy through community mobilization: building on
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the community participation methodology used by Barrio-Ciudad Project, this activity will engage
                         communities in the identification, prioritization, implementation and supervision of community level
                         subprojects. These interventions will foster residents’ trust on each other and enhances willingness
                         among residents to act together to prevent crime in their neighborhood (promotes collective efficacy).

                         Subcomponent 2.3. Financing of integrated delivery of crime and violence prevention interventions
                         in at least three ‘hotspot’ neighborhoods in each targeted municipality, based on the needs identified
                         in the municipal crime and violence prevention plans and neighborhood assessments. The project has
                         an indicative menu of potential evidence-informed subprojects from which municipalities and
                         communities will prioritize those most relevant to their situation. This menu includes:
                         •         Social prevention interventions: targeted towards at-risk populations, including: family
                         oriented (e.g., training in parenting styles, etc); gender-b ased (e.g., counseling and referrals to
                         women who are victims of violence, strengthening community-based networks to prevent GBV, etc);
                         school-based (e.g., conflict resolution skills and promotion of positive relationships between
                         students; supervised after-school programs involving sports, music and arts that also include life-
                         skills); and (iv) youth oriented (e.g., mentoring programs, job-training programs that includes a mix
                         of life-skills and work internships, etc).
                         •         Situational prevention interventions: including the construction of small-scale community
                         infrastructure that reduces the opportunities for committing crimes or creates safe community spaces
                         (parks, community gardens, playgrounds, street lighting and paving of certain streets); and (iii) the
                         construction and/or rehabilitation of spaces which could serve as the center for the delivery of these
                         services
                         •         Access to basic services: include typical urban upgrading interventions such as water &
                         sanitation connections, drainage, electricity connections, access roads, and risk mitigation works.
                         •         Alternative conflict resolution: expand municipal dispute resolution systems, including:
                         training Municipal Mediators; strengthening case registration systems; and expanding networks of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         volunteer mediators with an emphasis on women and youth and on priority communities.

                         Component 3: Project Administration and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$ 2 million)

                         Subcomponent 3.1. Supporting Project Management within FHIS, including (a) strengthening the
                         Project Implementation Unit (PIU); (b) supervision of municipal violence prevention specialists for
                         neighborhood planning and portfolio; (c) technical assistance to targeted municipalities for
                         subproject design; (d) carrying out the fiduciary aspects of the project such as financial management,
                         audits, and procurement; and (e) the supervision of subproject implementation by the municipalities.

                         Subcomponent 3.2. Supporting Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) of the Project, including (a)
                         establishing systems and capacities for process monitoring; (b) collecting baseline and follow up data
                         for the impact evaluation of the project; and (c) conducting impact evaluation of at least two types of
                         interventions (i.e.; youth employability, or public lightning).

                         Component 4: IRM Contingency Emergency Component (US$ 0)

                         Providing immediate response to an eligible emergency, as needed. This component would finance a
                         positive list of critical imports and/or the procurement of goods, works, and consultant services. A
                         specific IRM Operations Manual will apply to this component, or any other contingency emergency

                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                         components that may be established in other projects of the country portfolio. This manual will
                         detail financial management, procurement, safeguard and any other arrangements necessary to ensure
                         proper coordination and implementation of the IRM in the country.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         This project would be implemented in three municipalities that have different socio-environmental
                         characteristics but that meet the following criteria: high homicide rates, high poverty levels, and
                         located in urban areas. One of the municipalities, La Ceiba, has two small traditional Garifuna
                         communities, Corozal and Sambo Creek. These communities do not meet the eligibility criteria but
                         the project will include them in the benefits of project activities and investments as they are highly
                         vulnerable due to their geographical location and socio-economic status.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (AFTG1)
                         Kristyna Bishop (LCSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes                This policy is being triggered given the
                          BP 4.01                                              likelihood that the project will finance small-scale
                                                                               infrastructure. Given the technical characteristics
                                                                               of the works proposed in the project, the location
                                                                               in urban areas and the small scale of the
                                                                               subprojects, no significant environmental impacts
                                                                               are foreseen. For the project implementation the
                                                                               ESMF was reviewed and up-date for the Project.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No                 The majority of infrastructure investments will
                                                                               be in urban areas, or at most in peri-urban areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               During the site visit was confirmed that no
                                                                               natural habitats will be affect for the subprojects.
                                                                               The ESMF include environmental and social
                                                                               screening in order to review case by case if any
                                                                               subproject will affect natural habitats.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No                 The project will not result in changes to the
                                                                               management, utilization, or protection of any
                                                                               forested areas. Thus, this policy is not triggered.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No                 The project will not support the procurement or
                                                                               use of pesticides or other agricultural chemicals,
                                                                               or lead to the increased use of such chemicals.
                                                                               Thus, this policy is not triggered.
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes                Given that this project will likely include
                          BP 4.11                                              infrastructure works and that the locations of
                                                                               some if not all of these works will still be
                                                                               unknown, this policy is being triggered. The
                                                                               following safeguards instruments will be utilized:
                                                                               (a) screening procedures to ensure that
                                                                               construction sites are assessed for the presence of



                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                                                                        physical cultural resources and that no works will
                                                                        affect known cultural sites; and (b) chance find
                                                                        procedures is included in the ESMF in order to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        followed during site preparation and construction.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes             OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples is triggered as
                                                                        two small traditional Garifuna communities,
                                                                        Corozal and Sambo Creek, are located in the
                                                                        municipality of La Ceiba, one of the three
                                                                        municipalities in which the Project would be
                                                                        implemented. While these communities do not
                                                                        meet the eligibility criteria for Component 2
                                                                        direct investments Project's eligibility criteria -
                                                                        they are not located in the urban periphery of the
                                                                        city of La Ceiba, they are not densely populated
                                                                        and they do not experience high levels of
                                                                        violence - there is an opportunity to include them
                                                                        as beneficiaries for the more general activities
                                                                        that will be financed by the Project. For example,
                                                                        these communities could benefit from activities
                                                                        that focus on increasing opportunities for youth at
                                                                        risk or that address some of the broader risk
                                                                        factors for violence such as substance abuse or
                                                                        teenage pregnancy. In order to comply with the
                                                                        provisions of OP 4.10 and provide guidance to
                                                                        the executing agency, the borrower has prepared
                                                                        an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework that
                                                                        was will be consulted with Garifuna
                                                                        representatives in Corozal, La Ceiba on October
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        15, 2012 and disclosed on InfoShop and the
                                                                        external website of FHIS on October 232, 2012
                                                                        prior to appraisal.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             The Project will not finance any resettlement of
                         4.12                                           households, businesses or persons, restriction of
                                                                        access to natural resources or other forms of land
                                                                        acquisition. However, OP 4.12 on Involuntary
                                                                        Resettlement has been triggered as there is a
                                                                        small chance that community infrastructure such
                                                                        as playgrounds and green spaces will be built on
                                                                        abandoned plots of land if suitable alternatives
                                                                        are not available. For this reason, a Resettlement
                                                                        Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared by
                                                                        the borrower. The RPF includes a definition of
                                                                        abandoned plots, the process by which abandoned
                                                                        plots of land can be expropriated for a public
                                                                        purpose by the municipality and a grievance
                                                                        mechanism for any complaints or conflicts.
                                                                        Training on OP 4.12 and the application of the


                                                                Page 5 of 8
                                                                                instrument will be provided by the Bank team to
                                                                                the executing agency and the RPF wasill be
                                                                                disseminated and disclosed on October 232,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                2012 per the requirements of OP 4.12.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               The project will not finance the construction of
                                                                                new, or rehabilitation of existing, dams. Also, no
                                                                                project investments will rely on the operation of
                                                                                existing dams. Thus, this policy is not triggered.
                            Projects on International           No               This policy is not being triggered because the
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                project will not support activities which affect
                                                                                international waterways as defined under the
                                                                                policy.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  This policy is not being triggered because the
                            7.60                                                project will not be implemented in areas known
                                                                                to involve disputed areas as defined in the policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                There are no direct negative impacts anticipated by the project and most of the investments will
                              be small scale and fully supported by the community in which they will be made. As a result of the
                              successful experience of Barrio Ciudad, a strong methodology for engaging with the beneficiary
                              communities already exists and will be continue to be used during the implementation of this
                              project.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                              in the project area:
                                Is not expecting any indirect or long term negative impact
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                The overall social impact of the Project is expected to be positive and therefore no project
                              alternatives were considered.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                FHIS has prior experience with the Bank’s social and environmental safeguard policies and have
                              actively engaged technical assistance in order to comply with the safeguard policies during project
                              preparation. The UCP of the project will include an They have an environmental specialist as part
                              of the staff team project in order to assure the compliance and implementation of the ESMF; and
                              also contracted a social specialist who has assisted with the inputs for the Resettlement Policy
                              Framework and the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework and who will be providing safeguard
                              training to the project implementing unit supported by the Bank team.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                The ESMF will be socialized internally in FHIS, especially with the Environmental Unit (UGA)
                              and also with the local authorities during the project implementation. The Resettlement Policy

                                                                        Page 6 of 8
                           Framework was consulted within FHIS and with municipal government level stakeholders. It is
                           focused on abandoned plots only and was disclosed per the requirements of OP 4.12. In addition, it
                           will be publicly available as part of the municipal level planning and project implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           process. The Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework was consulted with the two Garifuna
                           communities located in the Municipality of La Ceiba on Oct 15, 2012. They have been fully
                           informed regarding the project and the provisions of the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework.
                           The final version of the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework was ill be disclosed on the FHIS
                           website and Infoshop on Oct 232, 2012 prior to the appraisal mission.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      22-Oct-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  22-Oct-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Oct-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Oct-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  23-Oct-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Oct-2012
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Oct-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  23-Oct-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Oct-2012
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
                         ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [     ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the    Yes [     ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design Yes [     ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement



                                                                    Page 7 of 8
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Rodrigo Serrano-Berthet
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                             Date: 26-Oct-2012
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Maninder S. Gill (SM)                             Date: 25-Oct-2012




                                                                        Page 8 of 8
