                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET


                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA3055
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed:
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Burkina Faso                     Project ID:    P130735
                            Project Name:      BF-Youth Employment & Skills Development (P130735)
                            Task Team          Hamoud Abdel Wedoud Kamil
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          22-Mar-2013                      Estimated   23-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTEW                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other social services (50%), Vocational training (20%), Adult literacy/non-
                                               formal education (20%), Public administration- Other soci al services (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Improving labor markets (75%), Education for the knowledge economy (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        50.00           Total Bank Financing:  50.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                         Financing Gap:          0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             50.00
                              Total                                                                                   50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to increase access to temporary employment and skills
                           development opportunities for out-of- school youth.
                            3. Project Description
                           3. Project Description:

                                                                      Page 1 of 7
                         A.      Project Components
                         I.      Component 1: Labor Intensive Public Works (about US$25 million).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2.       Operational Objective. The short-term objective of this component will be to provide
                         immediate employment for youth with no or little education through labor intensive public works
                         (LIPW). It will promote the participation of women by selecting activities that are supportive of
                         women employment and reserving a percentage of the LIPW jobs specifically for women. Because
                         LIPW Programs should be playing a major role in employment creation in Burkina Faso in many
                         years ahead, the component will also (with Component 3) support the mainstreaming LIPWs into
                         national policies, strategies and procedures and the establishment of a permanent capacity for LIPWs
                         in the country.

                         3.      Component target group. The target beneficiaries will be youth (defined as 16-35 years of
                         age) without a regular and legal source of income, in priority urban, peri-urban and rural areas. Over
                         the project period, it is estimated that about 31,000 young men and women will be enrolled in the
                         program, of which about 16,000 in urban areas and 15,000 in rural areas. Half of the beneficiaries
                         will be women.

                         4.       Cost of the component. The total cost of the component would be approximately US$25.0
                         million, of which US$ 15 million for urban PWs and US$ 10 million for rural public works (detailed
                         cost table at appendix 1). The component will finance (i) sensitization and communications
                         campaigns; (ii) participants’ wages and insurance against work-related accidents, (iii) tools and small
                         equipment, (iv) training costs; (v) the non-salary costs of rural investments; (vi) consultants; and (vii)
                         the administrative costs of program coordination. About US$ 13.0 million will finance beneficiaries’
                         salaries and employability enhancing activities.

                         5.      Results of the component. It is estimated that, over the project period, the component will:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Employ about 31,000 youth and create about 3.9 million man-days of labor (2.4 million in
                         urban areas and 1.5 million in rural areas) and distribute CFAF 6.0 billion (US$ 12.0 million) in
                         wages to beneficiaries (US$7.4 million in urban areas and 4.6 million in rural areas), which will also
                         benefit from CFAF 1.0 billion (US$2.0 million) of training activities;

                         •        Permit the establishment and/or regular maintenance of critical infrastructure (maintenance
                         of about 60 km of urban streets/roads; rehabilitation and maintenance of about 240 km of rural
                         roads;; and about 2,400 ha of reforestation/ community woodlots.


                         II.      Component 2: Skills development (US$ 20.0 million)
                         6.       The component aims to improve youth employability by offering youth with different skills
                         levels within their first training experience. This will be achieved through three sub-components: (i)
                         Development of initial vocational training through a dual training approach for economic sectors
                         with strong growth and employment creation potential, and establishment of a demand-driven
                         training system and provision of training; (ii) Dual apprenticeships programs; and (iii)
                         Entrepreneurship training and follow up support.

                         Sub-component 2-1: Development of initial vocational training through a dual training approach for
                         economic sectors (Sub-component 2-1 A) and establishment of a demand-driven training system and

                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         provision of training (Sub-component 2-1 B).

                         7.       Sub-component 2-1 (A): Establishment of the two Training Centers. The CCI-BF will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         finance the construction of the two training centers and the dual training of about 1,800 young people
                         from 16 to 24 years of age with a minimum of completion of primary education, including 30% of
                         girls. Therefore, activities under this sub-component will focus on the institutional set up for the two
                         training centers. The project will support (i) studies on the design and dimensioning of these two
                         centers, (ii) the necessary equipment of centers’ laboratories and workshops, (iii) training of trainers,
                         (iv) the development of specific curricula, (v) the external technical assistance required for the start-
                         up of these two centers as well as for the establishment of a dual training system and a management
                         and guidance approach, and (vi) the development of the surveys for the tracer study of trained Youth.

                         8.       Sub-component 2-1 (B): Establishment of an On-demand Training System and Provision of
                         Training. A total of 2,000 youth of ages 16 to 35 years will be trained under the sub-component. The
                         project will support (i) technical assistance for the establishment of the on-demand training system
                         and the preparation of a detailed manual of procedures, (ii) the implementation of an information
                         campaign (iii) the training of training counselors; (iv) the funding of training contracts negotiated
                         with selected training providers, (v) logistic support, operating costs and equipment; and (vi) training
                         costs of 2,000 youth including monthly allowances.

                         Sub-component 2-2: Apprenticeship Program
                         9.       About 4,000 jobless and uneducated urban and rural youth between the ages of 16 and 20 (in
                         agriculture, livestock and drafts, the age will be extended to 25) will be benefited under this Sub-
                         component. It will support: (i) a communications campaign to promote the new approach to
                         apprenticeships to youth and employers; (ii) consultations with private sector organizations; (iii)
                         capacity building of the ANPE and the Chamber of Crafts and Trade; (iv) equipment/tools and
                         pedagogical materials for training; (v) identification and training of participating master-craftsmen;
                         (vi) training of ANPE’s staff participating in the program and complementary equipment for its
                         centers; (vii) the provision of allowances(CFAF 20,000 per month) and toolkits to apprentices; (viii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the development of professional qualification standards for 10 trades; (ix) basic skills
                         entrepreneurship training and follow up support to apprentices after the completion of their
                         apprenticeship; (x) the monitoring and evaluation of the sub-component; (xi) the funding of training
                         contracts negotiated with selected training providers and (xii) technical assistance for the review of
                         the national regulatory framework for apprenticeships; and the training use of the tax.

                         Sub-component 2.3: Entrepreneurship training and provision of follow up support to entrepreneurs

                         10.      A total of about 8,000 youth (40% of whom will be girls), ages 16 to 35 years, will benefit
                         from the sub-component entrepreneurship training interventions. The sub-component will support (i)
                         an entrepreneurship promotion campaign; (ii) the design/ adaptation of suitable entrepreneurship
                         training modules; (iii) the training/retraining of 50 trainers in entrepreneurship, among ME staff and
                         its accredited service providers (iv) the selection of participating youth, recruitment of external
                         trainers and the organization of training and coaching sessions; (v) the costs of training and coaching
                         of the participating youth, (vi) capacity building activities for the ME and other structures supporting
                         the creation of enterprises; and (vii) the cost of the sub-component M&E system.

                         Component 3: Institutional Capacity Strengthening and Project Management (US$5.0) million)
                         11.      The purpose of this component is to (a) strengthen the capacity of private and public sector
                         institutions to engage in an informed policy dialogue on skills and employment on a regular basis, e.

                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                         g. through technical capacity strengthening and the creation of a mechanism for consultations and
                         collaboration; and (b) improve the knowledge base on employment and youth. In order to achieve
                         these objectives, the component will fund the following activities: (i) Project Coordination Unit
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (PCU); (ii) Capacity building and (iii) Monitoring and Evaluation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project interventions will concentrate on several geographic clusters with the most potential for
                         employment, e.g. Ouagadougou, Bobodioulasso and other urban and peri-urban hubs in the interior,
                         as well as rural areas which are clusters for specific agricultural activities and where vulnerable
                         youth are located.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
                         Africa Eshogba Olojoba (MNSEE)
                         Melissa C. Landesz (AFTSG)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes                This policy is triggered due to potential negative
                          BP 4.01                                             impacts that might occur under activities to be
                                                                              financed in component 1. These impacts are
                                                                              likely to be small-scale and site specific typical of
                                                                              category B projects. The labor intensive public
                                                                              works will consist of: (i) road and infrastructure
                                                                              maintenance, e.g. of local parks and green spaces;
                                                                              (ii) waste collection; and (iii) potentially clearing
                                                                              and cleaning of water canals/waste water. These
                                                                              interventions are site specific and have little or no
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              adverse impacts. At this time of project
                                                                              preparation, the locations for these community
                                                                              infrastructures are not known, thus an
                                                                              Environmental and Social Management
                                                                              Framework (ESMF) was prepared, reviewed,
                                                                              approved and disclosed in-country ( April 9,2012)
                                                                              and at the Bank infoshop ( submitted to infoshop
                                                                              April 9,2012)
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        Yes                This policy is triggered because of interventions
                                                                              in green areas and open parks within the cities.
                                                                              This is of positive benefit as it would entails
                                                                              cleaning of these green areas. Appropriate
                                                                              mitigation measures for any potential negative
                                                                              impacts on natural habitats are included in the
                                                                              ESMF.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No                 This policy is not triggered as there will be no
                                                                              reforestation or forest clearance.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09            No                 There will no use of pesticides or health related
                                                                              concerns with respect to vector management.



                                                                      Page 4 of 7
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No                 The small scale civil work and clean-up
                            BP 4.11                                              activities under the Project will be limited to
                                                                                 existing infrastructure and public spaces and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 therefore are not expected to trigger OP 4.11 on
                                                                                 Physical Resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No                 This policy is not triggered as there are no
                                                                                 indigenous peoples in the country or project
                                                                                 intervention sites.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes                The proposed interventions in component 1 are
                            4.12                                                 not likely to result to land-take or restriction of
                                                                                 access to assets or sources of livelihood.
                                                                                 However, for due diligence and to address the
                                                                                 potential risk of the OP/BP 4.12 under component
                                                                                 1, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was
                                                                                 prepared, reviewed, approved and disclosed in-
                                                                                 country ( April 9,2012) and at the Bank infoshop
                                                                                 ( submitted to infoshop April 9,2012)
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No                 This policy is not triggered, as there will be no
                                                                                 dam construction or rehabilitation of dams that
                                                                                 will necessitate dam safety status report.
                            Projects on International        No                    This policy is not triggered, for there are no
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 international waterways in the project sites.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                    This policy is not triggered because project
                            7.60                                                 intervention sites are not within disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                Consistent with an EA Category B, the potential environmental and social impacts of this project
                              will not be adverse; they are likely to be small-scale, site-specific and thus easily manageable. The
                              activities consist of primarily (a) road rehabilitation and maintenance of municipal roads; (b) road
                              paving , (c) clean up and gardening in urban parks, and (d) sanitation and drainage rehabilitation
                              and maintenance. With regards to road rehabilitation and maintenance, the specific activities
                              undertaken would consist of: clearing and pruning of bush/tree branches hanging onto roads,
                              filling of potholes, cleaning of existing drainage pipes/canals and culverts; clearing sand
                              ofroadways and road shoulders, road cleaning; and cleaning and maintenance of public green
                              spaces in urban centers like Ouagadougou and Bobodioulasso.
                              This demand-driven project will respond to the needs of local communities and is expected to have
                              significant positive social impacts through job creation for youth, rehabilitation and maintenance
                              of public spaces and infrastructure. Further, among the youth targeted by the LIPWs under
                              component 1, half will be women.

                              The project triggers three safeguards policies: OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment, OP/BP
                              4.04 on Natural Habitats, and OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. Two safeguards
                              documents were prepared: An Environmental and Social Management Framework(ESMF) and a


                                                                         Page 5 of 7
                          Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). These instruments outline the potential negative impacts
                          of the project, provide mitigation measures to eliminate or minimize these impacts, screening
                          mechanisms to assess the impacts of proposed activities, and the implementation arrangements for
Public Disclosure Copy




                          the mitigation measures. Moreover, the clauses and procedures for civil works rehabilitation will
                          be inserted into contracts. Detailed environmental assessments or Environmental Management
                          Plans and Resettlement Action Plans, if necessary, will be carried out for project activities that
                          require them and disclosed in-country and at the Bank's Infoshop before specific or rehabilitation
                          civil works can start.

                           Consultations were held with stakeholders to present and discuss the safeguards instruments. Both
                           the ESMF and the RPF have been reviewed, approved, and disclosed in-country and at the
                           Infoshop.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The potential negative impacts of this project are likely to be small, site-specific and easily
                           mitigated thus no direct or indirect long term impacts are anticipated from the implementation of
                           the project.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Not applicable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The borrower prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a
                           Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to cover all project-financed activities. These documents
                           outline detailed institutional arrangements and capacity building plans for relevant stakeholders.
                           This includes plans for technical and institutional support, and training. The implementing agency
                           for component 1 (PRT-HIMO) will hire an environmental and social safeguards specialist to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           oversee the implementation of the safeguards instruments as well as compliance with safeguards
                           policies triggered by the project. The consultant will act as a coordinator between all stakeholders
                           involved in implementating the safeguards instruments. During implementation, Environmental
                           and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs)
                           and/or Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) or Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) will
                           be prepared as needed.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Unemployed youth targeted by the project
                           Ministry of Youth, Professional Training, and Employment (PEJDC), in charge of the project;
                           Regional Head Office for Youth, Professional Training, and Employment (DRJFPE)
                           Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development (BUNEE) ;
                           Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security;
                           Ministry of Health;
                           Ministry of Land Management and Decentralisation
                           Ministry of Infrastructure (Labor Intensive Public Works Road project -- PTR-HIMO)
                           Local Governments ;
                           Private Sector (entreprises BTP, bureaux d’étude et consultants) ;
                           Local NGOs.
                           Regional Office of the National Bureau Employment Agency (ANPE)


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             The project promotes a participatory approach which will continue throughout implementation,
                             maintenance, supervision and evaluation of the project activities. All stakeholders (Government,
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Agencies and Ministries, NGOs, private sector, communities, development partners, etc.) will be
                             consulted regularly. The safeguards specialist within the implementation agency will oversee the
                             implementation of the safeguards instruments and coordinate the contribution of all key
                             stakeholders. As sub-projects are implemented and the appropriate instruments prepared (ESIA,
                             ESMP, RAP, etc) the implementing agency will make sure that adequate mitigation measures are
                             taken into account in accordance with National laws and the Bank’s safeguards policies and that
                             the required consultations with key stakeholders and safeguards documents disclosures are carried
                             out.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                      28-Mar-2013
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Apr-2013
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                              Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Burkina Faso                                                     09-Apr-2013
                              Comments:
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             report?
                                                                                            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]

                                                                                            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Hamoud Abdel Wedoud Kamil
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name:                                               Date:
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name:                                               Date:




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
