                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA167
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Sep-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        China                                    Project ID:                       P124978
                              Project Name:                   Changzhi Sustainable Urban Transport Project (P124978)
                              Task Team Leader:               Zhi Liu
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 28-Sep-2011                                    Estimated Board Date:             22-Mar-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  EASCS                                    Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         General transportation sector (100%)
                              Theme:                          Other urban development (60%), Municipal governance and institution building (40%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                  100.00
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                     100.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                     200.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The Proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve transport mobility in the central city of Changzhi in a safe, energy-saving, and
                              efficient manner for all users.

                              3. Project Description

                              The proposed Project includes four integrated components, as follows:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Component 1: Integrated Corridor Improvement. This component aims to improve transport mobility, energy efficiency and traffic safety on the
                              selected corridors in the city center, through the introduction of a combination of public transport priority, non-motorized transport, traffic
                              management, parking management and safety improvements. Improvement activities will include dedicated bus lanes, junction improvement and
                              channelization, improved pedestrian sidewalks and crossings, improved bicycle facilities, and street lighting.

                              Component 2: Intelligent Urban Transport Management System. This component addresses traffic management and safety issues in Changzhi
                              city through the introduction of the Intelligent Transport Systems. It includes installation of an area-traffic control (ATC) system, traffic enforcement
                              and monitoring system, provision of software and equipment for a traffic command center, procurement of auxiliary equipment, and installation of a
                              traffic information system.

                              Component 3: Public Transit Supporting Infrastructure. The component aims to improve public transport system through the provision of better
                              public transport infrastructure and services. It supports investments in a new bus hub at Bayi Square and two new bus depots, as well as
                              implementation of an advanced public transport system for supporting improved operations.

                              Component 4: Institutional Capacity Development. This component aims to help build urban transport institutional capacity to ensure the long-term
                              sustainability of the project. Specifically, the component includes training and study tours, urban transport planning modeling and applications,
                              thematic studies, training of an urban transport professional team, development of a public engagement platform, and project management
                              support.

                              4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                              The proposed project is located in Changzhi City in the central Chinese province of Shanxi, with a total area of 13,864 km2 and population of
                              about 3 million. The central urban area of Changzhi is about 55 km2, with a population of 390,000. All the proposed project components are within
                              the urban built-up area of the city.

                              5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                              Chaogang Wang (SDV)
                              Peishen Wang (EASIN)
                              Meixiang Zhou (EASCS)


                                                                                                                                                                           Page 1 of 5
                         6. Safeguard Policies Triggered          Yes   No   Explanation
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01      ✖          The proposed project is anticipated to have substantial net positive
                                                                             environmental benefits through integrated improvement of transportation
                                                                             corridors, public transport and traffic management, and consequent
                                                                             improvement of road safety and reduction of vehicle emissions at city level.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              The main physical activities include limited construction works related to
                                                                             channelization, junction improvement, and bus stops and parking facilities
                                                                             along the existing corridors, and a number (yet to be determined) of transit
                                                                             hubs, terminals and depots. All components are within the urban built-up area
                                                                             of the city. Based on initial screening, apart from some negative impact on
                                                                             urban green spaces, there are no ecologically and culturally sensitive sites
                                                                             (natural habitat, protected area or physical cultural resources) in the vicinity of
                                                                             the project.

                                                                              Environmental issues will be mainly related to construction activities, i.e. traffic
                                                                             disturbance and traffic safety, accessibility of pedestrian and business
                                                                             operation, nuisance of dust and noise, construction wastewater/solid waste
                                                                             management, etc.; and those related to operation, i.e. road safety, noise,
                                                                             safety and waste management of depots and terminals. Such impacts are site-
                                                                             specific, unlikely to be significant or irreversible, and mitigation measures
                                                                             could be readily designed with known engineering and management practices.
                                                                             Therefore, the project is classified as a Category B project as per OP4.01.

                                                                              Changzhi has established a Project Management Center with mandate for
                                                                             project preparation, which will hire an EIA institute to prepare the EA
                                                                             documents in accordance with national environmental laws/regulations and the
                                                                             World Bank safeguards policies. The Bank Team will provide safeguards
                                                                             training and guidance to PMC and EIA consultant throughout project
                                                                             preparation and implementation.

                                                                              The following documents will be prepared and submitted to the World Bank
                                                                             for review and approval prior to the project appraisal:
                                                                              -          An Environmental Impact Assessment Report, which will encompass
                                                                             all project components
                                                                              -          An Environmental Management Plan with site specific measures for
                                                                             each component and standardized environmental measures for all contractors
                                                                             based on EHS guidelines.

                                                                              The project will also include environmental enhancement measures such as
                                                                             landscaping and urban improvements along the corridors. All areas affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             during construction (by equipment or traffic deviation) will be restored. All
                                                                             green/recreational areas will be restored and enhanced. The project will
                                                                             include inclusive designs to guarantee access to the handicapped.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                    ✖    The project will not affect any natural habitats or critical natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                             ✖    The project will not cause significant conversion or degradation of natural
                                                                             forest.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                        ✖    The project will not involve procurement of pesticide or have any impact on
                                                                             pest management practice. This policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11         ✖    Based on currently available information, there are no physical cultural
                                                                             resources to be affected by the project. However, further detailed investigation
                                                                             and consultation with local authorities and communities will be conducted in
                                                                             this regards. Bus depots, bus stops, etc. will respect local architectural values.
                                                                             Chance-find procedures will be included in the EMP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  ✖    Initial screening found that a few Hui households live scattered in the affected
                                                                             villages. They speak mandarin Chinese, live in the suburban area of the city in
                                                                             almost the same way as the majority of the people, and are integral part of the
                                                                             population. They do not meet the Bank criteria for IP definition. The Social
                                                                             Development Specialist in the team has concluded that the Bank IP policy
                                                                             (OP/BP 4.                                   10) is not triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      ✖          The project will fund and support several major transport corridor
                                                                             improvements, one public bus hub and parking places and depots. These will
                                                                             require land acquisition as well as housing demolition. Thus the Bank
                                                                             safeguards policy OP/BP 4.12 is triggered.

                                                                              There will be construction of a public bus hub and a bus terminal parking
                                                                             station which will be located in the suburban area of the city, thus land
                                                                             acquisition will affect two villages. In total, about 100 mu (about 7 hectares) of
                                                                             village collectively-owned land needs to go through the whole land requisition
                                                                             procedures with the local government and affected villages. In addition, there

                                                                                                                                                      Page 2 of 5
                               6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                   Yes       No      Explanation
                                                                                                   will be a s                               mall number of street shops,
                                                                                                   possible street vendors, houses and buildings to be dismantled along the Bank
                                                                                                   project-supported transport corridors.

                                                                                                    Changzhi has established a Project Management Office with mandate for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                   project preparation, which will hire an institute to prepare the RAP document in
                                                                                                   accordance with national land acquisition laws/regulations and World Bank
                                                                                                   safeguards policies. The Task Team will provide safeguards training and
                                                                                                   guidance to PMO and the RAP consultants throughout the project preparation
                                                                                                   and implementation.

                                                                                                    A Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared and submitted to the World Bank
                                                                                                   for review and approval prior to the project appraisal.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                    ✖      Not applicable.
                               Projects on International Waters OP/BP 7.50                  ✖      Not applicable.
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                        ✖      Not applicable.


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                 Based on the social and environmental screening at PCN stage and confirmed through further project safeguard instrument preparation. Two
                                 safeguards policies triggered are: OP4.01 Environmental Assessment and OP4.12 Involuntary Resettlement.

                                 Environmental Impacts. The project is anticipated to have substantial net positive environmental benefits through integrated improvement of
                                 corridor, public transport and traffic management, and consequent improvement of road safety and reduction of vehicle emissions at city level.
                                 The main physical activities include limited construction works related to channelization, junction improvement, bus stops and parking facilities
                                 along the existing corridors, and a number of transit hubs, terminals and depots. There is no ecologically and culturally sensitive site (natural
                                 habitat, protected area or physical cultural resources) in the vicinity of the project, given its urban context.

                                 Since only limited civil works are foreseen in the project, manageable environmental issues are mainly those related to construction activities, i.
                                 e., traffic disturbance, accessibility of pedestrian and business operation, pedestrian safety during construction, nuisance of dust and noise,
                                 construction wastewater/solid waste management, etc.; and those related to operation, i.e., road safety, noise, safety and waste management
                                 of depots and terminals. These impacts are well known in nature and can be readily minimized and mitigated through proper project design and
                                 construction management practice. There is no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts envisaged in the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Based on the environmental screening at PCN stage and confirmed through later EA preparation, the project is a Category B as per OP4.01.
                                 OP4.01 Environmental Assessment is triggered.

                                 Social Impacts The project will bring in significant social benefits through improved public transport services and facilities. There may be very
                                 limited negative social impacts. The project physical activities are planned to be constructed within the existing land (such as roads, streets and
                                 public places) available. There is no involuntary land acquisition involved based on current project design after some adjustment of the specific
                                 locations of construction. For instance, a public bus hub which was previously planned to be located in Shijiazhuang (the suburban area) of the
                                 city, is not included in the project any more. Another location for the construction of a bus terminal parking station is in Mafangtou where 37.5
                                 mu (2.5 hectare) land was basically requisitioned by 2010. Nevertheless, at this stage, some locations of bus stops and terminals might be
                                 changed during implementation when the specific locations of the construction, such as some bus terminals and depots, can be finalized. In
                                 addition, the project construction may cause temporary inconvenience in accessing local markets, shops and public facilities during the
                                 construction period. These impacts can be minimized and mitigated through proper project design and construction management.

                                 During project design, efforts were made to avoid or minimize involuntary resettlement impacts. The exact locations of intersections, entrances
                                 and exits, overpasses and underpasses, and bus terminals cannot be fully determined until detailed technical design comes out# thus, the full
                                 extent of impacts will not be fully determined by project appraisal.

                                 A due diligence report on resettlement of the proposed Changzhi South Public Transport Parking Centre which will be built in Mafangtou where
                                 37.5 mu land (about 2.5 hectare, affected 28 households and 87 individuals) had been required before the project identification. The
                                 Construction of this public parking place has been discussed for several years, since it was included in the development plan of public
                                 transportation in the city. The land taking process started in 2006. A land acquisition agreement was signed between the General Bus Company
                                 (as the subproject owner) and Mafangtou Village. The compensation fees were paid by the project owner to the affected village committee in
                                 April 2010 and those fees for the directly affected people were also paid. The land requisition was basically completed in late 2010 except for
                                 two actions currently underway. A due diligence report on resettlement for this piece of land was prepared by an independent consulting
                                 institute on this land acquisition. The review report shows that the affected people and village are satisfied with the land compensation and
                                 assistance arrangements and their livelihoods have been restored without being worse-off. There are two minor remaining actions- One is some
                                 of the land compensation to be redistributed from the village committee to villagers which is under processing. The other is the relocation of
                                 some power facilities which has been agreed to be jointly done with the local branch of the State GRID before the project actual
                                 implementation. The PMO is committed to ensure satisfactory completion of the two remaining actions of this land acquisition and external
                                 monitoring is to be carried out during the project supervision.




                                                                                                                                                                         Page 3 of 5
                           Based on the screening at PCN stage, Alternatives related to land use were explored through optimizing locations and land use so as to
                            Describe any potential adverse impacts. The team concludes that the Bank safeguards policy OP/BP 4.12 is triggered.
                         2. minimize social risks andindirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                           N/A.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                           The main project activities are improvement of existing streets, and construction of public transport facilities (bus terminal, depots) at locations
                           that have been determined in the existing city master plan. While, alternatives are considered during the project feasibility study for more
Public Disclosure Copy




                           technical details, e.g. cross-section configuration for bus lane, road surface materials, and fuel options for bus. Comparisons were analyzed in
                           FS and EIA with comprehensive consideration of technical, economic, as well as environmental and social factors.

                           Alternatives are explored to minimize adverse impacts in relation to land taking and house demolition. Some location options for bus parking
                           places, public transport hub and depots were reviewed and adjusted from land to be requisitioned to existing ready-for-use land. Comparisons
                           of alternatives of major project activities were shown in the FS.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                           Environmental Safeguards

                           Changzhi PMC has commissioned Shangxi Academy of Environmental Science, a Class A licensed EIA consultant in China, to conduct the EIA
                           preparation, with guidance and advice from the Bank#s environmental team. The EIA report thoroughly addressed the potential environmental
                           and social impacts envisaged for the project, and developed adequate measures in the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) to avoid,
                           minimize, mitigate and compensate the potential adverse impacts.

                           A stand-alone EMP has been prepared based on the findings of the EIA report. The EMP detailed the environmental management and
                           supervision organizations and responsibilities, mitigation measures, capacity training plan, monitoring plan, and budget estimates of EMP
                           implementation. It also includes a set of Standard Environmental Specifications for contractors, which will be incorporated into bidding
                           documents and contracts to ensure effective implementation.

                           EMP implementation will be managed by Changzhi PMC. An environmental management unit will be established in the PMC with dedicated
                           environmental staff. The contractors and supervision engineers will be required to assign qualified environmental staff to their team to ensure
                           effective implementation of the EMP.

                           Social Safeguards-Involuntary Resettlement

                            The Changzhi PMC has hired a professional institute to prepare a resettlement policy framework (RPF) to handle possible land taking and
                           house demolition which might rise from the change of specific location of certain bus terminals or depots and so on. The task team will provide
                           training and consultancy services throughout the project cycle. The resettlement policy framework (RPF) and due diligence report were
                           reviewed by the Bank team and deemed acceptable in line with the Bank social safeguards policy. The RPF set detailed principles and
                           procedures as well as other crucial requirements for handling involuntary resettlement. Implementation of the RPF and the remaining work
                           mentioned in the due diligence report will be monitored periodically, internally and externally, during the Supervision stage of the Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Institutional Capacity for Resettlement Implementation. This is the first Bank financed project in Changzhi, and the institutions involved do not
                           have experience with Bank projects. However, the government has implemented many urban construction projects that have involved
                           significant resettlement impacts, and local institutions have strong experiences in resettlement implementation of domestic projects. Overall,
                           resettlement performance for domestic projects is satisfactory in the city, and to the Task Team#s knowledge, the local government has not
                           received any complaints regarding resettlement in last few years. The PMC will assign a dedicated social staff to coordinate social safeguards
                           work, together with the local government departments in charge of local land requisition and house demotion.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                           During the EA preparation, public consultations were conducted in accordance with the Bank#s OP4.01. These were supplemented by a
                           combination of opinion surveys and public meetings with general public along the transport corridors and the communities around the bus
                           depots. Information about the project, potential environmental and social impacts, and planned mitigation measures were provided to the public
                           during consultation. Main concerns from the public includes construction nuisance of noise and exhaust gas, night-light disturbance,
                           management of solid waste, provision of temporary access, and timely road restoration. These concerns have been addressed in the EIA, and
                           necessary mitigation measures were developed in EMP and the project design.

                           During the project RPF and due diligence preparation, public consultations were taken through surveys, interviews and meetings with affected
                           people. Information and alternative options about the project, plan of civil works, proposed locations of transport corridors, major parking and
                           depot sites were shared with the public and key stakeholders during consultation.

                           The EA documents have been locally disclosed in Changzhi PMC and the website of Changzhi Government (www.changzhi.gov.cn/info/
                           news/2011/nry/211315.htm) on September 12, 2011. Disclosure was announced through Changzhi Daily on September 10, 2011. The RPF
                           and due diligence report on resettlement were locally disclosed on September 21. The EA and RPF documents are disclosed in Infoshop on
                           September 21, 2011.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                             Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                15-Sep-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                            15-Sep-2011


                                                                                                                                                                     Page 4 of 5
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           21-Sep-2011
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                              Directors
                             Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                           Yes
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              16-Sep-2011
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          21-Sep-2011
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           21-Sep-2011
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?               Yes [     ]       No [      ]          NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the       Yes [     ]       No [      ]          NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?               Yes [     ]       No [      ]          NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language       Yes [     ]       No [      ]          NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for    Yes [     ]       No [      ]          NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?               Yes [     ]       No [      ]          NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard     Yes [     ]       No [      ]          NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same         Yes [     ]       No [      ]          NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS

                            Signed and submitted by:                                                Name                                                       Date
                            Task Team Leader:                    Xuan Peng                                                                   25-Sep-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                      Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez (SM)                                               24-Oct-2011
                            Comments:




                                                                                                                                                                       Page 5 of 5
