                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC1289

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Oct-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                            Project ID:       P132154
                            Project Name:      China: Nanchang Urban Rail Project (P132154)
                            Task Team          Gerald Paul Ollivier
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Jan-2013                      Estimated         13-Aug-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                            Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector:            Urban Transport (100%)
                            Theme:             Other urban development (90%), Municipal governance and institution building
                                               (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    2055.30
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        250.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                       2305.30
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve sustainable mobility in Nanchang
                           by providing integrated and accessible rail-based public transport of suitable capacity and quality
                           along the Line 2 corridor from Western HSR Station to Yudaihe Station.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project would support the development of Line 2 of the Nanchang urban rail system from
                           Western HSR Station to Yudaihe Station. The line will connect the two railway stations in the city
                           (the existing railway station as well as the new HSR station) and connectthe eastern and western
                           parts of the city. The project includes the construction of 23.3 km of urban rail, 21 stations and 1
                           depot; systems for power supply, signaling, communications, train control, fare collection, drainage,
                           fire fighting, ventilation, air conditioning and monitoring; rolling stock; integration with other
                         transport modes; all other ancillary activities required to complete construction and support
                         operations including technical services; and resettlement. The initial cost estimate is US$2.30 billion,
                         or US$99 million per km, in line with other recent similar investment costs for urban rail in China.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project components to be financed by the Bank loan are:

                         a) Construction of Stations (US$178 million): This would include the civil works for the construction
                         of five stations and some tunnels in between. These proposed stations include a range of typical
                         stations with different density levels and functions: one regular station in the city center, one station
                         with a single connecting line between two tracks, one multi-modal interchange station with railway,
                         long-distance bus, city bus, etc., and two transfer stations with other lines, of which one has a
                         connecting line with Line 3. The construction of stations would include the provision of the
                         necessary facilities for integration with other transport modes where appropriate.

                         b) Equipment Installation (US$70 million): Procurement and installation of critical systems to
                         support operations, including (but not necessarily limited to): elevator/escalators, train traction
                         system and substation equipment.

                         c) Capacity Building (US$2 million): Provision of workshops, study tours and technical assistance on
                         urban rail topics, tentatively including: (i) accessibility modeling for station location and catchment
                         analysis; (ii) travel demand surveys; (iii) parking management and policy planning; and (iv) land use
                         planning and urban design along Line 2.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the               safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in Nanchang City, capital city of Jiangxi Province.

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         This is the first Bank financed project to be prepared and executed by the City of Nanchang alone.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         As such, the City has limited experience with the Bank's Safeguard Policies. Established legal
                         procedures and institutional capacity are in place to manage the safeguards issues related to urban
                         construction activities.

                         In order to effectively address the social safeguard issues, Nanchang has retained the Engineering
                         Resettlement Research Center (ERRC) of Wuhan University with previous experience in preparing
                         social and resettlement components of the Bank funded projects. To address the environmental
                         issues, Nanchang has retained the Environmental Protection Center (EPC) of Ministry of
                         Transportation (MOT) to prepare the EA reports, and hired an EA expert with World Bank project
                         experience to strengthen the EA team. The EPC of MOT is a Class A EA Institute certificated by the
                         Ministry of Environment Protection (MEP), it has prepared the EIA reports for the urban rail projects
                         in Chengdu, Nanjing and Shenyang City etc., and it is preparing the EA documents for the Bank-
                         financed Zhengzhou urban rail project. To further assist them, the Bank mission provided them with
                         guidance, booklets and CD ROM on the World Bank Safeguard Policies. The Bank's social and
                         environmental specialists will work closely with the City and its Consultant to provide further
                         guidance and if necessary, training to assist them with successful preparation of the RAP and EA
                         reports.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Yiren Feng (EASCS)
                           Jun Zeng (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          Nanchang completed the preparation of its
                           BP 4.01                                     domestic EIA report. The report was prepared
                                                                       by the China Railway No 4 Survey and design
                                                                       Group Co. Ltd. The EIA report was approved
                                                                       by the Ministry of Environmental protection
                                                                       (MEP) on Sept 14, 2010.

                                                                       The proposed project will have substantial net
                                                                       positive environmental benefits by promoting
                                                                       mass public transport and reducing car
                                                                       emissions at city level.

                                                                       Based on the domestic EIA conclusions and an
                                                                       initial environmental screening, there are no
                                                                       ecologically sensitive sites affected by the
                                                                       project, given its urban context.

                                                                       The major environmental concerns related to the
                                                                       project are expected to be as follows:
                                                                       disruptions of urban utilities and traffic; reduced
                                                                       accessibility to business during construction;
                                                                       tunnel construction safety; potential impacts on
                                                                       surrounding buildings and physical cultural
                                                                       sites; transportation and disposal of spoil
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       material during the construction stage; noise/
                                                                       vibration impact; aesthetics integration;
                                                                       groundwater, and waste management from rail
                                                                       operation facilities. The project is classified as a
                                                                       Category A project as per OP4.01.

                                                                       The Client will prepare a full EA including an
                                                                       Executive Summary, EIA and the relevant
                                                                       Environmental and Social Management Plan
                                                                       (ESMP). The project EA will meet the content
                                                                       of the category A projects and address the gaps
                                                                       identified between the existing national EA
                                                                       report and the OP 4.01 requirements. The
                                                                       environmental safeguards documents will
                                                                       include an EA, ESMP, and EA Executive
                                                                       Summary, addressing, aside from other common
                                                                       construction / operation impacts, the following
                                                                       key aspects:
                                                                       (i) analysis of alternatives including line and
                         station locations.
                         (ii) any cumulative impacts of the new project
                         as well as possible environmental impacts with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Line 1 as well as cumulative impacts brought by
                         the project itself and other ongoing or
                         reasonably foreseeable future related projects;
                         (iii) disruption of urban traffic, access to
                         businesses, NMV/pedestrian access and
                         connectivity around metro stations during
                         construction;
                         (iv) impacts on land use, and urban planning;
                         (v) noise and vibration during construction and
                         operation;
                         (v) spoil material transport and disposal
                         management including sites;
                         (vi) ground water;
                         (vii) waste management from rail operation
                         facilities;
                         (viii) geological risk assessment;
                         (xi) construction safety and potential impact on
                         surrounding buildings, especially cultural
                         property sites; and
                         (xi) assessment that the project is not expected
                         to use/encounter any Polychlorinated biphenyls
                         (PCBs) or related materials during the
                         construction of the Line 2 railway.
                         (xii) social impacts related to the project under
                         OP 4.01 such as impacts on residents and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         businesses, accessibility for vulnerable groups
                         including gender considerations when
                         applicable.
                         (xiii) public consultations following national
                         guidelines and OP 4.01 which requires public
                         consultation that is commensurate to the
                         potential issues and for a Category A project
                         which includes a minimum two consultations:
                         one at the beginning of the EA preparation; the
                         second on the draft EA.
                           - Environmental and Social Management Plan:
                         A detailed ESMP will be prepared for the
                         project including sufficient mitigation measures
                         (activities and impacts, mitigation measures,
                         implementation and supervision responsibility,
                         monitoring indicators and cost estimates) for
                         incorporation into bidding documents. The
                         ESMP will include procedures and mitigation
                         measures to deal with any project site that is not
                                                                 determined at the time of preparation.
                                                                 Environmental supervision of construction and
                                                                 environmental monitoring will also be included
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 in the ESMP. The ESMP measures will be
                                                                 developed in consistency with IFC's EHS
                                                                 Guidelines.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    Given the urban context, and sites visit
                                                                 confirmed that the project will not affect any
                                                                 natural habitats or critical natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project will not cause significant
                                                                 conversion or degradation of natural forest.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not involve procurement of
                                                                 pesticide or have any impact on pest
                                                                 management practice.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The proposed line 2 rail project will pass nearby
                         BP 4.11                                 some cultural relics including the August First
                                                                 Uprising site, Jiangxi Provincial Library Site,
                                                                 Maozedong Memorial Hall among others.
                                                                 Therefore there is a potential risk of impact
                                                                 from tunnel excavation during construction and
                                                                 vibration during operation. The PCR policy is
                                                                 therefore triggered.

                                                                 The potential impacts will be carefully
                                                                 addressed through project design, selection of
                                                                 construction technologies, and good
                                                                 construction management including monitoring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 of settlement. Adequate consultation with
                                                                 relevant authorities will be ensured during EA
                                                                 preparation. It is agreed that PMO, FS team and
                                                                 EA team will consult with the relevant cultural
                                                                 relic bureau for further survey during the
                                                                 preparation process of EA, to ensure all the
                                                                 relevant cultural relics along the rail are
                                                                 identified, and mitigation measures are
                                                                 incorporated into the design, construction and
                                                                 operation appropriately. Chance-finding
                                                                 procedures will include provisions and
                                                                 procedures stipulated in the Cultural Property
                                                                 Law and will be included in bidding documents
                                                                 and contracts. A Physical Cultural Resources
                                                                 (PCR) Management Plan will be prepared for
                                                                 Component 1 (incorporated in the EIA/ESMP)
                                                                 to address any possible impacts during the
                                                                 project implementation given the proposed
                                                                works in areas of identified cultural
                                                                significance.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No    The Social Specialist visited the project area to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                conduct a screening to determine whether ethnic
                                                                minority peoples are present in, or have
                                                                collective attachment to, the project area. The
                                                                project will be constructed within the downtown
                                                                of Nanchang City and no indigenous people
                                                                groups as defined in Bank's OP4.10 have been
                                                                identified within the project area. The Social
                                                                Specialist concluded that the policy is not
                                                                triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   Based on the site visit and primary project
                         4.12                                   alignment, land taking caused by the project
                                                                construction will be unavoidable. The main
                                                                involuntary resettlement impact will include
                                                                urban house demolition, land acquisition,
                                                                removal of shops/restaurant and other public
                                                                facilities. Therefore, the Bank's Social
                                                                Safeguards policy on Involuntary Resettlement
                                                                will be triggered and a Resettlement Action Plan
                                                                will be prepared by the client in both English
                                                                and Chinese, and an experienced consultant is
                                                                hired to assist the RAP preparation. The RAP
                                                                will cover all resettlement impact caused by
                                                                Line 2. Construction of Line 1 commenced in
                                                                Feb. 2012. The line is not directly and
                                                                significantly related to the Bank-assisted
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                project, and is not necessary to achieve its
                                                                objectives as defined in the PDO. Therefore, no
                                                                linkage project has been identified.

                                                                A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will
                                                                be prepared to cover any project site that is not
                                                                determined at the time of preparation.

                                                                If the land was acquired prior to project
                                                                identification with an intention that it be used
                                                                for the construction of rail Line 2 a review will
                                                                be undertaken to confirm that the substantive
                                                                aspects of OP4.12 have been met with (e.g.,
                                                                replacement for loss of assets, restoration of
                                                                livelihood to pre-project conditions). The
                                                                review will determine if measures are needed to
                                                                address any gaps found by the review;
                                                                In all other cases (i.e., the land was acquired
                                                                prior to project identification but for reasons
                                                                                                                                 other than construction of Line 2), the review
                                                                                                                                 would be carried out with reference to national
                                                                                                                                 laws and regulations, and will confirm that there
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 are no legacy issues or unresolved disputes.
                                                                                                                                 Capacity building for safeguards will be
                                                                                                                                 undertaken during project preparation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                                                                 policy.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project is not located in any international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways as defined under the policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not located in any known
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas as defined under the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 18-Dec-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Environmental Safeguards: EA and ESMP will be undertaken, with first draft available by Oct 15,
                                      2012, draft final report to be completed by pre- appraisal and final report for public disclosure
                                      prior to appraisal. The first consultation took place on the basis of the domestic EA.

                                      Social Safeguards: A resettlement plan (RAP) and RP Framework will be developed, with first
                                      draft available by Oct 15, 2012, draft final report to be completed by pre- appraisal, and final
                                      report for public disclosure, prior to appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Gerald Paul Ollivier

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA) Date: 25-Oct-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Binyam Reja (SM)                      Date: 19-Oct-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
