                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC821

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Africa                          Project ID:     P131426
                            Project Name:      South Sudan- Eastern Africa Regional Transport , Trade and Development
                                               Facilitation Program (Phase One) (P131426)
                            Task Team          Tesfamichael Nahusenay Mi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       16-Sep-2013                        Estimated       30-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTTR                               Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (60%), Public administration-
                                               Transportation (20%), General industry and trade sector (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Trade facilitation and market access (70%), Regional integration (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    365.00                    Total Bank Financing:        83.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:              107.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          25.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 83.00
                              Bilateral Agencies (unidentified)                                          150.00
                              Total                                                                      258.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           14.     The proposed Program Development Objective (PDO) of the South Sudan – Eastern Africa
                           Regional Transport, Trade and Development Facilitation Program is to enhance regional connectivity
                           and integration of South Sudan with its Eastern Africa neighboring countries. This will be achieved
                           through increasing transport efficiency, facilitating trade and development, connecting Juba with
                         fiber optics, and linking South Sudan to an alternative sea port, Djibouti.

                         15.      The proposed program helps the eastern part of South Sudan and the north western part of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Kenya to boost export oriented agricultural development by facilitating increased agricultural
                         production along the Juba-Eldoret corridor, endowed with abundant natural resources, through
                         improved transport, trade facilitation ICT access, as well as development of export processing zones.
                         The proposed program contributes to the overarching goal of facilitating and lowering the cost of
                         intra-regional trade to support regional cooperation and integration of economies in the sub-region.
                         The program helps South Sudan compete in the regional and global market. The program will also
                         contribute to the reduction of transport cost that will help lower the cost of economic development,
                         service delivery to the poor, and doing business in the program influence area.

                         16.     The program will be implemented in a series of three projects (SOP). phase one of the
                         program - is defined herein after as the “ first project?. The proposed Project Development
                         Objective- Phase 1- is to enhance connectivity between South Sudan and Kenya, as well as Mombasa
                         Port, whilst facilitating trade and development along the Juba-Nadapal-Eldoret corridor.

                         17.      The second project will focus on the improvement of the road infrastructure not covered
                         under the first project and support priority trade and development facilitation along the Juba-
                         Nadapal-Eldoret corridor. The third project will focus on enhanced support to trade facilitation
                         measures along the priority corridors linking South Sudan to Mombasa and Djibouti ports through
                         Ethiopia, and other countries of the East and Southern Africa. The third project will also include
                         completing the rehabilitation of the remaining sections of the road infrastructure not covered under
                         the previous phases on the Kenyan side. All the three projects support the overarching program
                         objective.
                         C. Project Description
                         1. The project has different components to be implemented in three phases. The components of the
                         first phase of the program will include :
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Component 1: Upgrading of priority road infrastructure (US$440 million): This component is split
                         into three sub-components.

                         a)        Sub-component 1: Upgrading of priority road segments in South Sudan (US$114 million) -
                         upgrading of part of the Nadapal - Juba road, about 100 km, starting from Juba (Nasitu) to Torit.
                         Part or the entire remainder 240 km, which requires about US$300 million, could be implemented in
                         tranches depending on the level of funding to be leveraged from other development partners.
                         Investment from other donors will be confirmed before appraisal. To synchronize implementation
                         with the flow of regional and national IDA contributions a quick -start package of US$50 million, a
                         sub-set of sub-component1, consisting of (a) upgrading of 40 km of road; (b) road repair of about 70
                         km up to Torit; and (c) support to preparatory activities and initial capacity strengthening, could be
                         considered during preparation.

                         b)       Sub component 2: spot improvement (US$26 million) of the remainder section up to
                         Nadapal and the Kapoeta (240 km from Juba)-Boma (Ethiopia and South Sudan border) link to
                         establish basic access, under Output and Performance Based Contract (OPRC).

                         c)      Sub-component 3: Upgrading of priority road segments in Kenya (US$300 million) - support
                         to upgrading of about 280 km of the Eldoret – Nadapal road, between Eldoret and Marich Pass.
                         Upgrading of about 90 km of road starting from Eldoret is suggested as a quick- start package. The
                         remainder 315 km, estimated to cost US$340 million, the section between Nadapal and the junction
                         to Lamu port (Marich Pass) is anticipated to be financed by other development partners. Alike sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component 1, this component will finance costs related to updating the bidding documents to make
                         them compatible with the proposed tranching and OPRC arrangement, supervision, social and
                         environmental studies, and audit.

                         3. Component 2: Regional Trade and Transport Facilitation (US$65 million- about US$12 million
                         from the World Bank and US$53 from EU and other development partners): This component
                         supports promotion of sound transport and trade facilitation measures increasing efficiency of the
                         performance of corridors. This includes:

                         a)       Studies on key regional corridors with the objective of identifying bottlenecks and preparing
                         prioritized regional corridors development and trade facilitation program for the sub-region,
                         including road transport reform review and port efficiency;

                         b)      harmonization of legal frameworks and customs procedures, as well as modernizing South
                         Sudan’s Customs Services to help South Sudan be member of regional communities and instill
                         efficiency in customs services;

                         c)      support the establishment of one stop border post(OSBP) ;

                         d)      promoting the establishment of social infrastructures and social services delivery, including
                         HIV/AIDS prevention, and establishment of rest stops; as well as enhancing Road Safety along the
                         corridor; and

                         e)      corridor performance monitoring.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Component 3: Support to Institutional Development, preparation of follow-on operation, and
                         Program Implementation (US$10 million of which US$3 million from the World Bank and US$7
                         from EU and other development partners): This component helps to:

                         a)    enhance good governance in the transport sector through strengthening fiduciary capacity of
                         MRB of South Sudan; and preparation of sectoral governance and anti-corruption strategy;

                         b)       undertake feasibility study, design and bidding document preparation and environmental and
                         social impact assessment for the Lobira –Kitgum roads while AfDB will be carrying out such
                         services for the Kapoeta to Boma road;

                         c)      support to project coordination and management for the implementing entities in South
                         Sudan; and

                         d)     support to project coordination and management for components to be implemented by
                         Kenya.

                         5.      The preliminary scope of the second phase includes :

                         6.      Component 1: Upgrading of road infrastructure (Investment requirement to be determined
                         depending on the resources to be leveraged for the first phase- up to US$670 million): This includes:

                         a)      Upgrading of the remainder section between Torit and Nadapal road from the first phase.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The level of intervention will be updated depending on the resources to be leveraged for the first
                         phase. Tentative amount indicated in Paragraph 16 (a).

                         b)      Any remainder sections of the Eldoret - Nadapal road not financed under the first phase.
                         Funding requirement depends on the investment to be leveraged for the first phase. Tentative amount
                         indicated in Paragraph 16 (c).

                         c)     Spot improvement of Kapoeta to Boma (US$30) to establish basic all season access. The
                         upgrading of the Kapoeta to Boma and Lobira (70 km away from Torit) to Kitgum (Uganda) are
                         proposed to be implemented by other development partners and national programs.

                         7. Component 2: Regional Trade and Transport Facilitation (US$40 million)- Support to the
                         implementation of the recommendations of trade and transportation facilitation studies conducted on
                         the key regional corridors under the first phase and building on the interventions initiated in the first
                         phase. This component will also support implementation of transport and trade facilitation measures
                         along the Djibouti corridors and the regional links between South Sudan and the neighboring
                         countries, including the access to Uganda via Kitgum.

                         8.       Component 3: Support to Program Implementation and preparation of follow-on operations
                         (US$5 million), including studies to sustain the trade facilitation measures and the social
                         infrastructure.

                         9.        Phase 3, primarily focuses on continuing with the support to transport and trade facilitation
                         measures to ensure sustainability of the intervention implemented in the prior phases (about US$30
                         million).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         10. Financing: The proposed project cost for the first phase is about US$515 million of which US
                         $455 million would be the contribution from the Bank. The lending instrument that has been
                         proposed to support the program is an Adaptable Program Lending (APL). The APL instrument
                         allows the Bank to provide support in a flexible manner - when individual development partners are
                         ready to engage in the proposed program. The APL will be structured to allow individual countries
                         to participate in parallel. The anticipated lending for the first phase will include: (a) an International
                         Development Agency (IDA) Grant of US$50 million and an IDA Regional Credit of US$100 million
                         to the Republic of South Sudan; and (b) an IDA Regional Grant of US$5 million, for multi-national
                         studies and interventions, IDA Credit of US$100 million, and IDA Regional Credit of US$200
                         million to the Republic of Kenya. The possibility of sequencing the use on national and regional IDA
                         resources would be considered during preparation, depending on the timing of the RI funds
                         commitment. The engagement of other donors to take up the US$60 million which will be confirmed
                         during the donor’s consultative meeting scheduled for January 29, 2013.

                         11. During preparation further discussions will be made with the Government of Kenya and South
                         Sudan (tentatively committed to allocate about US$25 million) on their contribution to the upgrading
                         works. The financing for the second phase will involve the support of the World Bank, other
                         development partners and the participating countries. For the second phase, the World Bank may
                         focus on supporting part of the implementation of sub-component 1, as well as component 2 and 3.
                         The two governments have requested the Bank to consider establishing a syndicate of funding,
                         involving all partners, and this will be assessed during preparation and the consultations with
                         potential financiers.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         12. The Provisional Scale of the Program is estimated at about US$1.26 billion, including the funds
                         required to upgrade entire section of Juba- Nadapal-Eldoret road. In addition, other development
                         partners, including AfDB and national programs are expected to raise about US$300 million required
                         for the upgrading of the Kapoeta-Boma and Lobira-Kitgum roads. Overall financing estimate will be
                         confirmed during further project preparation.

                         13. The proposed program fully meets the eligibility criteria for funding under the IDA-16 regional
                         envelope as approved by the World Bank Board of Directors for the following reasons: (a) it covers a
                         post conflict South Sudan and a contiguous economically inter-dependent country Kenya(b)
                         enhances connectivity among Ethiopia, Uganda and South Sudan ; (c) the expected transit efficiency
                         gains cannot be fully achieved without the direct and integrated involvement of the countries sharing
                         the Corridor; (d) the expected benefits can only be achieved through the simultaneous
                         implementation of an integrated set of infrastructure and trade facilitation measures in the countries
                         along the Corridors; and (e) the program enhances competition among transport corridors in the sub-
                         region.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         1.      The environmental assessment category for this project is proposed to be Category B. Bank
                         safeguard policies triggered by this project, include: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Physical
                         Cultural Resources (4.11), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12).

                         2.       The Juba - Nadapal- Eldoret road traverses the south –eastern part of South Sudan and north-
                         western part of Kenya. The section in South Sudan, the Nadapal to Juba Road is an interstate road
                         that links the Central Equatoria and Eastern Equatoria states. There are numerous villages alongside
                         the road, with a varying population. The total length of the road from Nadapal to Juba (Nesitu
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Junction) is approximately 340 km of unpaved road, which provides transport connectivity between
                         Juba and the district headquarters, towns and villages of Juba, Torit, Budi and Kapoeta Counties in
                         Central and Eastern Equatoria states. The road passes through major townships and trading centers i.
                         e. Nadapal, Narus, Kapoeta, Lobira, Torit, Liriya, Ngangal and Nesitu Junction which marks the end
                         point. The road is also a regional and international corridor linking the hinterland of South Sudan
                         with markets in Kenya and international markets through the port of Mombasa.

                         3.       The topography of the project area can be described as undulating at Nadapal and the hills
                         surrounding Mineral Springs. The next section is mainly flat plain. From Longario, there are high
                         volcanic outcrops up to Liriya and Luluba. From Torit to Ngalagala, the road crosses numerous
                         streams and rivers and follows a gently sloping ridge through the subsequent section to Juba. The
                         altitudes vary from an elevation of 741 m at the border with Kenya to 800 m at Mineral Springs, 620
                         m at Torit and with gentle variations in slope down to an elevation of 460 m near Juba.

                         4.       The proposed road segments within Kenya boundary, Eldoret- Nadapal, to be upgraded
                         under the proposed program is about 595 km and is on the main road corridor linking Tanzania,
                         Kenya and South Sudan. It runs in South-North direction on the Western part of Kenya. The southern
                         part is densely populated and with high agricultural potential, large towns such as Eldoret and Kitale.
                         The northern part, bordering South Sudan is largely sparsely populated and less developed, but
                         believed to have some mineral potential, including oil. There are extensive exploration activities for
                         oil going on and there are early indications of oil deposits. The section from Eldoret to Lokichogio is
                         paved, while the Lokichogio-Nadapal section is unpaved. The improvement anticipated will be
                         carried out within the existing right of way. The Eldoret and the junction to Lamu port (Marich Pass)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         road section (280 km) is expected to be financed by the World Bank, in the first phase of the
                         program. The section between Marich Pass to Nadapal, in Kenya, is expected to be upgraded by the
                         support of other development partners. A meeting with potential financiers is scheduled for end of
                         January 2013, at which a determination of the financing plan will be discussed and hopefully agreed.

                         5.      The project involves widening the road within the existing right-of-way. New quarry sites
                         have to be identified and developed to extract material for the road construction. The road upgrading
                         work may require cutting some trees. Some spots of swampy areas may exist alongside the road, in
                         particular this problem gets pronounced during the rainy season, as along some parts of the road
                         standing water creates ponds and marshlands. It may also require expropriation of some farm land
                         and stepping back of some road side businesses.

                         6.       As part of the road detailed design stage an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                         (ESIA) study and resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the road section in South Sudan (Juba-
                         Nadapal) was completed, in May 2010 and December 2010, respectively. The Bank has reviewed the
                         ESIA report and provided comments. The Ministry of Roads of South Sudan is updating the reports
                         with the support of a TA. The updated report will be submitted to the Bank for review. The road
                         project involves widening and raising the level of the road, within the existing right-of-way. No
                         significant adverse environmental and social impacts were foreseen that would hinder the proposed
                         upgrading of the road to bitumen standard.

                         7.       The total number of project affected household is 180 and they will lose only a small portion
                         of the total land holdings they own and/or cultivate. The estimated number of people who live in the
                         affected families is 1218. In addition, a total of 154 small businesses along the road project will be
                         adversely affected and they accounted for more than 30% of household incomes. The income losses
                         that will be directly attributable to loss of land especially on business plot is expected to be high and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         consequently adequately mitigation measures have been provided for in the RAP. All affected
                         immovable assets have been inventoried. Accordingly, the project requires the acquisition of 375
                         hectares, mostly open land within the right-of-way. Because of the linear nature of the project, this
                         small amount of land is spread within one County (Juba) of Central Equatoria State and 5 Counties
                         of Eastern Equatorial States. These Counties include Torit, Ikotos, Budi, Kapoeta East and Kapoeta
                         North. In addition, about 517 land segments with different land use characteristics (predominantly
                         farm lands) will be partially affected. The valuation report contains detailed land use, names, location
                         and addresses of affected landowners

                         8.       The construction may also increase incidence of malaria and other water borne diseases due
                         to the water ponds in the borrow sites around the construction area. The list provided in the South
                         Sudan ESIA identifies the number of people, structures/properties that may be affected during road
                         construction. However the final number of project affected people and businesses will be drawn after
                         the final design and alignment of the road is provided and the social survey is updated. Based on the
                         final social survey the client will update the Resettlement Action Plan and Environmental and Social
                         Management Plan (ESMP).

                         9.       The project, when completed, is expected to have favorable impacts in the long term as it
                         will facilitate economic and social development thereby promoting improvement in the living
                         standards. However, during the implementation and construction phase, there are potential adverse
                         impacts associated with the project. The client has prepared both a draft ESIA and a draft RAP for
                         South Sudan section of the road. These two documents will be further updated as the design of the
                         road is finalized. Based on the ESIA and the draft RAP the project may have the following adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                         effects: loss of homes, land, income and access to common property and services, increased road
                         hazards, influx of population during construction phase. Also during the construction phase the
                         presence of labor may potentially increase incidence of HIV AIDs and malaria.


                         10.      The proposed project is not anticipated to harm any sites that are historically or
                         environmentally sensitive. The most important negative environmental and social impacts along the
                         entire road length (340 km) are likely to be soil erosion during earthworks and construction of
                         structures, dust pollution, removal of light vegetation, disposal of solid wastes, impact on
                         occupational safety to construction workers and the nearby community, and negatively affecting 180
                         households and their property. The road upgrading may require relocating (moving back the
                         properties within the existing open land) about 180 households and small road side businesses, and
                         expropriation of some farm land. The ESIA indicated that some unexploded landmines on either side
                         of the existing road may exist, and this could potentially pose security and safety issues., The ESIA
                         indicated that due to the presence of unexploded landmines on either side of the existing road, the
                         option of constructing new road along the existing one is excluded, and this could also be a potential
                         high security and safety issue during construction. Thus, the Government will ensure the clearance of
                         landmines along the entire proposed road section where the landmine impact is expected. The ESIA
                         also confirmed the indicated potential impacts could be easily mitigated through the sound
                         implementation mitigation measures recommended under the ESIA study report. In addition to this
                         the proposed project has prepared a standalone Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
                         to ensure avoiding or minimizing environmentally-friendly implementation of the proposed road
                         project.

                         11.      Kenya is currently undertaking feasibility study and design for upgrading the Eldoret to
                         Nadapal segment. The ESIA for the Nadapal to Eldoret part is in progress. However, as the road
Public Disclosure Copy




                         traverses thinly populated and less vegetated area, no significant negative environmental and social
                         impact is expected. KeNHA will provide the ESIA, RAP and ESMP for the Eldoret-Nadapal Road
                         by April 2013, prior to project Appraisal, for the Bank’s review and clearance. The bid documents
                         will also encapsulate the implementation of the ESMP.

                         12.      The findings of the Socio Economic Impact assessment concluded that the impact of
                         upgrading of the Nadapal – Juba road will have a positive impact on the socio-economic
                         environment of the entire South Sudan. The social management measures proposed generally is
                         straight forward. The majority of the measures relate directly to sound operating practices both
                         during the construction phase and subsequently over the operational life of the road. Provided that
                         the road is upgraded with due attention to the mitigation and management measures outlined, the
                         proposed project is likely to have a positive impact on the socio-economic environment of the project
                         area.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         1.       The first Phase of the program will mainly involve South Sudan and Kenya, and the
                         implementation will be coordinated by a joint inter-ministerial committee representing MRB of
                         South Sudan and the Ministry of Roads of Kenya (MORK). The two ministries will form national
                         inter-ministerial/agency committees, comprising institutions involved in transit transport
                         management. This arrangement will be replicated to the other corridors during the second phase of
                         the program. The joint inter-ministerial committee will engage with the Intergovernmental Authority
                         for Development (IGAD), EAC and NCTTCA on trade facilitation matters and inter-country
                         coordination. The second phase may involve more countries and at sub-regional level, IGAD with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the support of EAC is proposed to be the focal body for the overall coordination, as all stakeholder
                         countries, including Djibouti are members of IGAD.

                         2.       The proposed project will be implemented by the Project Management Team (PMT) under
                         the Ministry of Roads and Bridges (MRB), which was responsible for the implementation of the
                         transport projects supported by the Multi Donor Trust Fund for South Sudan (MTDF-SS). While the
                         PMT is familiar with Bank’s safeguards policies and implementation procedures, the capacity of the
                         PMT to manage the safeguards however has been severely lacking and needs to be further
                         strengthened to shoulder the additional tasks. Adequate Technical Assistance would be essential if
                         MRB is committed to managing the social and environmental impacts of road construction,
                         especially when the state Ministry of Transport and Roads of the Eastern Equatorial State would be
                         involved in project planning and monitoring that has absolutely no experience in managing
                         construction projects. In the long term, this will help in knowledge transfer and support the
                         strengthening of the capacity of the State. The South Sudan Roads Authority (SSRA) is under
                         establishment and the responsibilities of implementing this project would be transferred to SSRA
                         when it will be fully operational and becomes capable of managing major projects.

                         3.       The Ministry of Environment (MOE) in South Sudan is expected to provide overall
                         guidance on the finalization and approval of Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA).
                         However, MOE and the line ministries are not staffed with environmental and social specialists, nor
                         do they have clear policies and procedures in place to support and advise the line ministries in how to
                         manage the adverse environmental and social impacts. To address this challenge, the Bank is
                         supporting the Government to prepare a National Environmental and Social Screening and
                         Assessment Framework (NESSAF), which will in the future guide the management of the
                         environmental and social impacts for all development investments in all sectors. Under the
                         circumstances, MRB will update the ESIA, Resettlement Action Plan and ESMP for Bank’s review
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and clearance. The bidding documents clauses will reflect the ESMP obliging contractors to
                         implement the proposed mitigation measures.

                         4.       MRB has established an Environment and Social Management Unit (ESMU), which is part
                         of the PMT, however; the ESMU has only one environmental expert. Under the previous South
                         Sudan Road Maintenance Project (SSRMP) short term environmental and social specialists were
                         engaged, but their services ended as that project closed in June 2012. The proposed project has a
                         provision for environmental and social specialists and this facility is expected to be used during the
                         transition period until additional specialists under SS-EARTTFP are fielded. The key responsibilities
                         of the ESMU include: (a) Updating the ESIA prepared for the proposed road; (b) orientation and
                         training of the PMT staff (both at MRB and in the State offices); (c) leading/providing over-sight on
                         the implementation of the RAP and ESMPs; (d) review of monitoring reports submitted by the
                         contractors ESMP implementation; (e) conducting regular visits to project sites to monitor the
                         implementation of ESMP; and (f) providing guidance and inputs to the PMT and contractor on
                         environment and social management aspects.

                         5.       The proposed project that will be implemented in the Kenya side, the Kenya National
                         Highways Authority (KeNHA) is responsible on the implementation of the proposed projects. The
                         for the Kenya side will be responsible
                           6. The Kenya National Highways Authority (KeNHA) will be responsible for the implementation of
                           the road upgrading in Kenya and the trade facilitation component. MORK will engage all
                           participating countries, including Djibouti and the sub regional communities during the trade
Public Disclosure Copy




                           facilitation study by organizing consultative workshops, including Djibouti and the sub regional
                           communities during the trade facilitation study by organizing consultative workshops.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Gibwa A. Kajubi (AFTCS)
                           Yasmin Tayyab (AFTCS)
                           Svetlana Khvostova (AFTSG)
                           Bedilu Amare Reta (AFTG1)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes            Road rehabilitation works entail a number of
                           BP 4.01                                           site-specific impacts. Potential impacts include
                                                                             noise by machines and dust during construction
                                                                             and rehabilitation works. Such Road
                                                                             rehabilitation works will generate a potential
                                                                             environmental impacts including cutting of
                                                                             vegetation, soil erosion, sedimentation of body
                                                                             waters, temporary realignments of stream
                                                                             channels, solid wastes, etc. Therefore, the
                                                                             environmental policy triggered OP/BP 4.01
                                                                             Environmental Assessment. The ESIA will be
                                                                             prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed before
                                                                             appraisal; it will describe potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             environmental impacts of the proposed Road
                                                                             projects. Besides, an environmental
                                                                             performance review will be prepared to (i)
                                                                             assess how current environmental management
                                                                             tools (Environmental Manuals) are
                                                                             implemented; (ii) and define mitigation or
                                                                             action plans needed to implement by the
                                                                             proposed project.

                                                                             An Environmental and Social Impact
                                                                             Assessment and an environmental and social
                                                                             management plan will be an instrument to
                                                                             minimize/avoid the anticipated impacts and
                                                                             helps to make sure that all the activities under
                                                                             this road project are environmental friendly.
                                                                             A draft ESIA for South Sudan has been
                                                                             prepared in May 2010 and RAP in December
                                                                             2010. An updated report will be prepared by
                                                                             end of January 2013. ESIA for Kenya will be
                                                                 developed prior to project appraisal in June
                                                                 2013.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   This draft ESIA study concludes that there will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 be no major ecological impact that will
                                                                 negatively affected by the proposed project.
                                                                 However, some spots of swampy (wetland)
                                                                 areas may exist alongside the proposed road
                                                                 sections may have ecological value, such as
                                                                 habitat to some important fauna (birds, insects,
                                                                 and aquatic animal species) or flora. Therefore,
                                                                 the impact of the proposed operation on Natural
                                                                 Habitats would be assessed further during
                                                                 preparation and this aspect would be updated.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The road improvement will follow the existing
                                                                 alignment with some widening, which is not
                                                                 expected to impact on forest resources, although
                                                                 the project may involve cutting some trees.
                                                                 However, the impact of the specific operation
                                                                 on forests would be assessed during project
                                                                 appraisal phase and this aspect would be
                                                                 updated
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The proposed road project does not involve
                                                                 activities that require pesticide use. Neither
                                                                 direct purchase of pesticides nor financing
                                                                 activities that use pesticides will be supported
                                                                 by the project. Therefore this policy is not
                                                                 triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Some road works may be located in the area of
                         BP 4.11                                 influence of some sites. The ESIAs screening
                                                                 tool will include the identification of chance
                                                                 finds. Existence of physical/cultural resources
                                                                 shall be confirmed and Physical/Cultural
                                                                 management plan and “Chance Find?
                                                                 procedures will be included in the contract
                                                                 documents. South Sudan is a newly emerging
                                                                 nation and its cultural heritage resources are not
                                                                 yet known. The project will adopt the Chance
                                                                 Finds procedures of the ESSAF. In Kenya, the
                                                                 project will work with County authorities and
                                                                 National Museums of Kenya in case of such
                                                                 finds during civil works.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   In South Sudan,the population along the roads is
                                                                 comprised of native ethnic groups; some of
                                                                 whom may have been displaced during the civil
                                                                 war and resettled. Almost all these ethnic
                                                                 groups meet the OP 4.10 criteria; the mitigation
                                                                                                                                 plan in the RAP will assure that the socio-
                                                                                                                                 economic activities are responsive to the socio-
                                                                                                                                 cultural norms of the ethnic groups as per the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 guidelines in the ESSAF.
                                                                                                                                 In Kenya, the implementing agency will
                                                                                                                                 conduct a social assessment to evaluate the
                                                                                                                                 project’s potential positive and adverse effects
                                                                                                                                 on the Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups,
                                                                                                                                 and to examine project alternatives where
                                                                                                                                 adverse effects may be significant. It is possible
                                                                                                                                 that the vast majority of people on the Kenya
                                                                                                                                 side of the project also meet the criteria for OP
                                                                                                                                 4.10.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           In South Sudan, the project road crosses six
                                 4.12                                                                                            counties (Juba, Torit, Kapoeta North, Kapoeta
                                                                                                                                 South, Budi and Ikotos) with a total population
                                                                                                                                 of 838,555. The Counties are inhabited by
                                                                                                                                 Toposa, Buya, Langi, Lotuka, Lukoya and Bari
                                                                                                                                 communities. The area is largely dominated by
                                                                                                                                 the pastoral communities – Toposa, Buya and
                                                                                                                                 Lotuka with few small scale subsistence farmers
                                                                                                                                 growing mainly sorghum and small businesses
                                                                                                                                 operating along the main road.
                                                                                                                                 In Kenya, the road crosses 4 counties (Uasin
                                                                                                                                 Gishu, Trans Nzoia, West Pokot and Turkana).
                                                                                                                                 The proposed activities will be implemented
                                                                                                                                 within the existing road reserve. The extent of
                                                                                                                                 the necessary compensation and/or resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 will be determined as part of the RAP
                                                                                                                                 preparation for this section of the road.
                                                                                                                                 The construction may lead to permanent or
                                                                                                                                 temporary displacement, loss of assets and
                                                                                                                                 services and restriction of access to sources of
                                                                                                                                 livelihood. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has
                                                                                                                                 been prepared for South Sudan in June 2010 and
                                                                                                                                 is being updated. For Kenya a RAP will be
                                                                                                                                 developed. Both RAPs will be consulted upon
                                                                                                                                 and disclosed before appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            N/A

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2013



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             ESIA and RAP for the full 340 km of the Nadapal to Juba road was completed in May 2010 and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             December 2010, respectively, The Ministry of Roads and Bridges with the support of TA is
                             updating the reports and the reports will be delivered to the Bank for review by end January 2013.
                             The updated documents will be disclose in April 2013. The ESIA and RAP for the Nadapal to
                             Eldoret part is in progress. The appraisal stage ISDS will be prepared based on the findings and
                             recommendation of the studies.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Tesfamichael Nahusenay Mi

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name:                                                    Date:
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (SM)                          Date: 27-Aug-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
