                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA3858
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Dec-2012, 08-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:    P126813
                            Project Name:      Ma'anshan Cihu River Basin Improvement Project (P126813)
                            Task Team          Meskerem Brhane
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          21-Jan-2013                        Estimated   04-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       210.00                  Total Bank Financing:       100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   110.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      100.00
                              Total                                                                                      210.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the Project is to improve drainage and flood protection capacity in urban areas of
                           Ma’anshan Municipality.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project is based on the Municipal Urban Development Master Plan and the Cihu River
                           Basin Ecological Environmental Integrated Rehabilitation Program which identified the types of

                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                         investment required for the planning period up to 2020. The Basin is divided into three key areas.
                         The Municipal Government is currently implementing river rehabilitation in the middle reaches of
                         Cihu River, and has requested the World Bank to finance works in the lower and upper reaches. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         government is currently financing works in the 6.3 km area of the middle reaches. These works are
                         ongoing and include strengthening of embankments, upgrading the existing storm drainage network
                         where these have been dilapidated and intercepting storm water flowing into tributaries and canals
                         for treatment. The project consists of the following four components.

                         Component 1: Cihu River Rehabilitation and Drainage Improvement (US$ 71.55 million): This
                         component is intended to reduce the risk of urban flooding and restore the 1 in 20 year flood
                         protection, through improved storm water collection and removal along the upper and lower reaches
                         of the Cihu River. Approximately 13 km of the river channel will be rehabilitated. To optimize the
                         design of these systems, computer modeling will be done in order to determine the hydrological
                         routing of the basin. This component includes the following sub-components:

                         (a)   Upstream rehabilitation of Cihu River (6.8 km): Works will include slope protection,
                         embankment strengthening, ecological rehabilitation, greening and service roads.

                         (b)      Downstream rehabilitation of Cihu River (6.2 km): Works will include dredging, slope
                         protection, embankment strengthening, flood control structures, service roads, ecological
                         rehabilitation, and greening.

                         (c)     Rehabilitation of five Storm water pumping stations: The works include upgrading five
                         pumping stations to increase the pumping capacity to 34.1 m3/sec adequate to efficiently discharge
                         peak storm flows.

                         Component 2: Rehabilitation of Tributaries and Drainage Canals (US$ 44.79 million). This
                         component is intended restore the natural storm drainage function of nearly 34 km of tributaries and
                         canals feeding into the Cihu River by rehabilitating embankments, dredging and removing blockages.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         It will be designed to ensure that tributaries and canals can handle storm events of one in 10 years.
                         This component includes the following subcomponents. This component includes the following
                         subcomponents

                         (a)    Tributary and drainage canal rehabilitation in urban areas located in Huashan district.
                         (b)    Tributary and drainage canal rehabilitation in Hitech Zone focusing on the Jiandan River and
                         Lijianwan River
                         (c)    Upgrading of Hubo and Yaochang ponds for use as storm retention basins.

                         Component 3: Environmental Management and Monitoring (US$ 1.44 million). The aquatic health of
                         the Cihu watershed and the ability to restore hydrologic conditions that will accommodate storm
                         flows and other drainage are constrained by water quality impairment related to contamination from
                         domestic, industrial and mining facilities. This component will support the MMG by developing
                         useful tools for monitoring water quality within the Cihu River watershed and for preventing /
                         mitigating impacts from mine land use that contribute to soil erosion and siltation. The data from this
                         program will also be useful in addressing one or more environmental safeguards. Component 3
                         includes two distinct activities:

                         (a)     Design and Implementation of a Water Quality Monitoring Program - design and implement
                         a watershed scale water quality monitoring program for evaluating water quality improvement

                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                         expected from implementation of components 1 and 2 and other ongoing restoration activities being
                         conducted by the City of Ma’anshan. Data from the monitoring program will enhance decision
                         making related to water resource management. A key use of data from this program will be to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         monitor and demonstrate improvement in water quality resulting from newly installed wastewater
                         collection networks. This is directly related to a key sustainability covenant. In addition, technical
                         and scientific capacity will be enhanced at the Ma’anshan EPB and WRB. The monitoring program
                         will include monitoring water quality at selected locations in the Cihu River, tributaries, canals, and
                         shallow groundwater. This sub-component also includes the selection, training and use of a water
                         quality evaluation model, and procurement of automatic and manual monitoring equipment and
                         applicable software; and

                         (b)      Development of an Environmental Protection Reference Document: Develop and publish an
                         environmental protection reference document that will provide useful information on: prevention and
                         mitigation of future contamination of water from mining activities and ecological/ land restoration of
                         mined lands. Appropriate topics to be included in the Reference document include: (i) types of
                         mineral resources that are mined in China and mining methods, (ii) applicable laws and regulations,
                         (iii) environmental and ecological impacts associated with mining, (iv) management and mitigation
                         measures for minimizing environmental impact and (v) long-term environmental monitoring. The
                         document will be widely disseminated among key stakeholders. Training on environmental
                         characterization and remediation of mine sites will also be provided. The USEPA will be contacted
                         to inquire if this training can be provided. The training may be provided by a private vendor.

                         Component 4: Capacity Building and Project Implementation Support (US$ 1.6 million). The
                         component will support: (i) project management, design reviews, and monitoring and evaluation; (ii)
                         incremental operating costs; (iii) external safeguards monitoring; (iv) training and study tours and (v)
                         equipment and vehicles. An Operations and Maintenance plan for the assets developed under the
                         project will also be prepared.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in Ma’anshan Municipality, one of China’s top 20 fastest growing cities,
                         located in the Yangtze Delta in Anhui Province in Eastern China and comprising three urban districts
                         and three rural counties. It has a population of 2.3 million, 68% of which is urbanized, and a per
                         capita GDP of US$ 9,300. The city was established in 1956, as home to Ma’anshan Iron and Steel
                         Company (Ma Steel), but is now diversifying its economy to automotive, textile, chemical and hi-
                         tech industries. Considered the gateway to Anhui province, it has a good transport network -
                         expressways, rails, an impending high-speed train, and a deep water port -- that has supported its
                         current economic growth.

                         The city has developed along the 26 km long Cihu River, a river discharging to the Yangtze River.
                         The Cihu River has a 126.64 km2 catchment area and a maximum flow in wet season of about
                         80-100 m3/second. The Cihu River Basin broadly includes three functional areas of the city: the
                         lower reaches (6.8 km) near the Yangtze River containing the older heavy, especially steel,
                         industries; the middle reaches (6.3 km) in the newer urban areas; and the upper reaches (6.2 km) that
                         are in the rural and mining areas. Water pollution, soil erosion and siltation are contributing to the
                         environmental degradation of the Cihu River Basin, impairing its function as an important means for
                         urban flood discharge and source of water supply for agriculture and industry. The rehabilitation of
                         the middle stretch of Cihu river (about 6 km) is under way funded by the government. Bank



                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         financing will be for the rehabilitation of the channels and tributaries of Cihu river (about 34 km in
                         total) scattered across the Cihu River Basin.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Chongwu Sun (EASCS)
                         Zhefu Liu (EASCS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes                Through implementation of the proposed
                         BP 4.01                                               activities under Components 1 and 2,
                                                                               environmental improvement of the project areas
                                                                               is expected to be achieved, thus bringing
                                                                               environmental benefits overall. However, the
                                                                               project includes multiple types of construction
                                                                               activities in built up urban areas that will merit
                                                                               careful environmental planning and
                                                                               implementation. The Environmental Protection
                                                                               Reference Document that is being prepared under
                                                                               Component 3.2 will incorporate the Bank’s
                                                                               safeguards requirements.

                                                                               General Environmental Issues: There may
                                                                               potentially be some short term adverse
                                                                               environmental impacts during project
                                                                               construction stage of the project. These potential
                                                                               impacts are anticipated to be of limited extent and
                                                                               duration, and readily managed with accepted
                                                                               measures of good engineering codes of practice
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               (ECOP). The project requires some sediment
                                                                               dredging, impacts of which can be well controlled
                                                                               by good site management, sound transportation
                                                                               requirements, adequate disposal and usage of
                                                                               dredged sediments and standard measures or
                                                                               ECOP.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No                The project is mainly located in the urban built
                                                                               up area. There are no natural habitats found in the
                                                                               proposed project areas.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No                The project will not involve any forestry
                                                                               activity.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09              No                The project will not involve any pesticides.

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No                Based on information provided, there are no
                         BP 4.11                                               physical cultural relics found in project areas.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No                No minority communities are found in the
                                                                               proposed project area and therefore, OP 4.10 will
                                                                               not be triggered. The citizens in the project area
                                                                               are from the Han population which constitute the


                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                                                                                majority of the Chinese population and as such
                                                                                are not part of the 56 ethnic minorities that have
                                                                                officially been recognized by the government.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                Given the criteria of the Bank’s IP definition, no
                                                                                indigenous people are present in the project area.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes               There are collective land to be required by the
                            4.12                                                project.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No                The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                policy. No action is required under this policy.
                            Projects on International        No                  The project will not involve any international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The project will not involve any disputed areas.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Environmental Assessment
                              The Bank policy OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment is triggered and the project has been
                              classified as Category B. An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) was carried out for the
                              proposed project in accordance with China’s national policy and regulations. Based on the EIAs,
                              an environmental management plan (EMP) was prepared to summarize the key environmental
                              impacts, to determine the mitigation measures and environmental monitoring program and
                              necessary institutional arrangement as well as capacity building development. The documents
Public Disclosure Copy




                              have been prepared on the basis of Chinese legal and policy framework for environmental
                              protection, master plans and environmental plans as well as applicable Bank safeguard policies
                              and Bank group’s Environment, Health and Safety Guidelines.

                             Through preparation of safeguard documentation, there was no any potential large scale,
                             significant and/or irreversible environmental impacts to be found. From proposed components, the
                             following benefits are expected: improvement in the Cihu River’s water environment and flood
                             control management, and improved wastewater collection and drainage systems in Ma’anshan
                             Municipality.

                             Disposal of the dredged sediments was identified as a key environmental issue. Total amount
                             estimated dredged sediments from Cihu River and its tributaries is about 170,000 m3. Since the
                             disposal of the sediments itself will cause environmental impacts, it will require careful
                             consideration, design and mitigation as well as adequate management. The impacts include the
                             disturbance to communities in proximity of the sediment stockpiling sites, impact of supernatant
                             on the river, soil erosion of the sediment stockpile, impact on communities along the
                             transportation route. Furthermore, there are some common environmental impacts during
                             construction of other proposed activities, e.g., dust, noise, traffic interruption etc. Water quality
                             and sediments test was conducted as part of the EA process. The samples from three sites were
                             collected and tested according to related national standards and protocols. The data of the test were


                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                           within applicable standards and no hazardous materials were found.

                           In the PCN stage ISDS, safeguard policies of OP4.11 Physical Cultural Resources were indicated
Public Disclosure Copy




                           as TBD. No significant cultural relics were found in the proposed project areas. Therefore, it is
                           confirmed that OP 4.11will not be triggered. In case any relics are found during construction,
                           "Chance-Find" procedure and relevant clauses described in the EMP (in the Generic
                           Environmental Codes of Practice) should be included in the contracts.

                           Social safeguards
                           The Bank Policy OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement is triggered. The project has significant social
                           benefits, as it supports Cihu river embankment, flood control and better living environment for the
                           citizens. The public consultation and participation process undertaken during preparation enables
                           the project to combine the public concerns into the project preparation to minimize the project's
                           negative impacts and mitigate the negative impacts on land acquisition.

                           The project will affect 34 agricultural production teams in 10 administrative villages in 3 Districts,
                           1 township and 1 residential committee in Ma'anshan city. The project will require the permanent
                           acquisition of 119.2 hectares of land, including 83.6 hectares of collective land and 35.6 hectares
                           of state owned lands. The land acquisition will affect 552 households equivalent to a total
                           population of 1714. There are no structures to be demolished and no displaced families to be
                           relocated.

                           The RAP prepared by the project entity provides details regarding resettlement policy principles
                           and regulations to be followed, compensation rates and budget, mitigation measures to restore
                           incomes where necessary and institutional and monitoring arrangements. The Project entity under
                           Ma'anshan Municipal Reform and Development Committee will be in charge of the project
                           management and resettlement implementation. A resettlement monitoring institute, independent
                           from the project entity and Ma'anshan Municipal Development and Reform Committee, will be
                           contracted to serve as the independent monitoring agency of the resettlement program. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project will be monitored and the living standards of the project-affected people will be evaluated
                           over the course of project implementation. The monitoring results will be regularly reported twice
                           a year and, if needed, remedial actions will be devised.

                           As required by the decisions of the PCN safeguards review meeting, the task team also conducted
                           a due diligence review of the locally funded project in the midstream areas of the Cihu river that is
                           linked to the Bank financed project components. The due diligence review confirmed Chinese land
                           law, Anhui provincial land administrative management regulation and local regulations have been
                           complied with. The due diligence review was also disclosed to the project affected households.
                           The living conditions of the people relocated as a result of these investments have been restored to
                           conditions prior to their resettlement in compliance with substantive aspects of Bank involuntary
                           resettlement policies. Since some of the displaced families preferred to be transferred temporarily,
                           the independent monitoring agency will supervise the resettlement activities in compliance with
                           the substantive aspects of Bank social safeguards policies.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The proposed project will improve Cihu River’s water environment and flood control
                           management, and increase/improve wastewater collection and drainage systems in Ma’anshan
                           Municipality.


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            Environmental: Alternative study was considered during the project feasibility study and EIA
Public Disclosure Copy




                           preparation for more technical details, e.g., technical options, and with and without project option
                           analysis. Comprehensive comparisons were analyzed with consideration of technical, economic,
                           as well as environmental and social factors.

                           Social safeguards: The resettlement negative impacts were surveyed and analyzed. That
                           information was discussed by both the institute in charge of the feasibility study and the institute
                           for guiding the RAP. Negative impacts to land acquisition were minimized and housing
                           demolitions were avoided. As a result, there are no structures to be demolished and no displaced
                           families to be relocated.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            Environmental: The EA report, prepared by the client and their EA consultants, thoroughly
                           addressed the potential environmental and social impacts envisaged for the project, and developed
                           adequate measures in the EMP to avoid, minimize, mitigate and compensate the potential adverse
                           impacts. The preparation of EA documents followed the relevant national laws/regulations and
                           guidelines, as well as Bank’s safeguards policies and environmental health and safety (EHS)
                           guidelines.

                           A stand-alone EMP has been prepared based on the findings of the EIA report. The EMP
                           summarized the key environmental impacts and detailed the environmental management and
                           supervision organizations and responsibilities, mitigation measures, training plan, monitoring plan,
                           and budget estimates of EMP implementation. It includes sets of Environmental Codes of Practice
                           (ECOPs) for contractors, which will be incorporated into bidding documents and contracts to
                           ensure effective implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Hydraulic method will be used to dredge the lower reach of the Cihu River generating about
                           77,000 m3 of sediments; while the cofferdam method will be used for dredging the tributaries
                           generating about 95,000 m3 of sediments. The dredged sediments from the lower reaches of the
                           river will be stockpiled in settling tanks in four sites to settle out the Suspended Solids (SS). The
                           separated effluent will be monitored to ensure it meets Chinese and World Bank policy on effluent
                           standards and will be discharged into the Cihu River. All dredged sediments will be transported
                           from the Cihu River by tankers to Xinagshan Sanitary Landfill where they will be further dried
                           and mixed with natural soil for use as cover soil in the landfill.

                           Social safeguards: The PMO contracted an experienced institute to guide the social safeguards
                           documentation and set up resettlement implementation offices in the districts that are part of the
                           project, under the guidance of the municipal PMO. The relevant agencies to be involved in project
                           implementation also participated in the project preparation. Staff from the PMO and agencies are
                           now familiar with Bank requirements, especially social safeguards.

                           The analytical work was undertaken to minimize the project's negative impacts and to develop the
                           mitigation measures in accordance with Bank requirements. Public consultations were undertaken
                           by the consulting institute and the project entity to address the importance of the safeguards
                           policy. The project preparation process was well-done: the Bank requirement on social safeguards
                           were disseminated widely and the RAP incorporated people's concerns; the preparation process


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                           also provided on-the-job training to relevant agencies at the district, township, residential
                           committee and village levels.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           An experienced monitoring institute, independent of the PMO and the project agencies, will be
                           contracted to monitor the resettlement activities. The monitoring report will be reviewed by the
                           Bank twice a year as requested.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Environmental: Two rounds of public consultations were carried out during the EA process. The
                           technique used for the public consultations included surveys using public opinion questionnaires,
                           focus group discussions, public meetings with key stakeholders and interviews with some project
                           affected persons. The issues raised during these consultations have been incorporated in the EIA
                           and EMP. Furthermore, feedback over the concerns and issues collected in public consultation
                           have been provided to the concerned groups and documented in the EA. The EIA and EMP
                           documents and other project related documents have been disclosed locally through various means
                           (e.g., websites, newspapers, etc.), as required by national and Bank's policies. The EIA and EMP
                           have been disclosed through Bank’s InfoShop on November 22, 2012.

                           Social safeguards: The project stakeholders are the local communities and the people in the city.
                           The people affected by land acquisition believe that the project will give them opportunities to
                           have better living environment and develop their businesses.
                           During the project preparation process and the stages of the project design, public consultations
                           were undertaken and will continue during implementation. The project information was
                           disseminated to the displaced families for refining the project design. The stand-alone RAP was
                           disclosed in the website of the municipal PMO on October 30, 2012 and has been sent to Infoshop
                           on November 22, 2012.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02-Nov-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-Nov-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            13-Oct-2012
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      31-Oct-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-Nov-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            30-Oct-2012
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.


                                                                       Page 8 of 9
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Meskerem Brhane
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                          Date: 08-May-2013




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
