                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC989

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Jul-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Pakistan                         Project ID:       P131850
                            Project Name:      Enhanced Nutrition for Mothers and Children (P131850)
                            Task Team          Luc Laviolette
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          14-Dec-2012                      Estimated         21-Mar-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASHN                            Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector:         Health (90%), Other social services (10%)
                            Theme:          Nutrition and food security (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            13.71
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   55.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              AUSTRALIA Australian Agency for International
                                                                                                             34.85
                              Development
                              Total                                                                         103.56
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the project is to assist Pakistan in improving the coverage of effective
                           nutrition interventions delivered through the health sector, with a focus on the poor and on
                           marginalized groups, in order to improve the nutritional statusof children under two years old and
                           that of pregnant and lactating women.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project will have three components, one for each of the provinces of Balochistan, KP and Sindh.
                           The program will be evidence-based and will focus on: (i) scaling-up those interventions that are
                           proven to work at scale in an environment such as Pakistan, and (ii) supporting operations research
                         for interventions which we know work at small scale but for which delivery models at large scale
                         need to be developed in the Pakistan environment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         While the provincial nutrition programs are expected to have some differences that reflect the
                         specificity of each provinces, the following sub-components are envisaged in each province: a)
                         Addressing general malnutrition in women and children; b) Addressing micronutrient malnutrition;
                         c) Communication for development; and d) Strengthening institutional capacity in the health sector
                         and for multi-sectoral coordination.

                         Sub-component 1: Addressing general malnutrition in women and children. This sub-component
                         will address general malnutrition in pregnant and lactating women and children less than two years
                         of age. Targeting children from conception to 24 months is the recommended age group for
                         providing nutrition inputs/interventions and the age at which nutrition interventions are most
                         effective for the physical and intellectual development of children. This sub-component will include:
                         (i) a set of infant and young child feeding (IYCF) interventions implemented in a phased results-
                         based manner at community level that will target a few key behaviors to improve nutritional
                         outcomes and use of micronutrient powders to improve the quality of complementary food; (ii)
                         Community Management of Acute Malnutrition (CMAM) with phased expansion in the same
                         geographical areas as IYCF which as per international guidelines will be primarily community-
                         based, with complications referred to referral facilities. It will support the use of prepared/packaged
                         foods to treat children with severe acute malnutrition at community level and explore the feasibility
                         of producing a similar product in Pakistan. This activity will treat children under five of age, as per
                         the national protocol. (iii) support scale-up of key maternal nutrition interventions (de-worming and
                         weekly iron folic acid (IFA) supplementation for women of child-bearing age and improving the
                         nutrition quality of ante-natal visits and provision of daily IFA supplementation during pregnancy);
                         and (iv) in order to reach the population not covered by the LHW program and in urban areas, the
                         project will contract with NGOs to promote appropriate infant and young child feeding practices
                         (including micronutrient powders) and CMAM, with an in-built independent rigorous impact
                         evaluation with a view to outlining policy options for expansion.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 2: Addressing micronutrient malnutrition. This sub-component will support
                         micronutrient interventions which will be expanded and sustained across Pakistan. As development
                         partners are actively supporting the scale-up of micronutrient interventions (except zinc
                         supplementation), the project will complement these investments on building the capacity of the
                         government to carry out its stewardship role including: (i) improving the quality of monitoring data
                         for vitamin A supplementation through annual coverage assessment surveys which will help target
                         program improvement efforts; (ii) for salt iodization and wheat flour fortification – as the production
                         side is being be supported by partners (Micronutrient Initiative, WFP), the project will focus on
                         enabling the development of legislation, building enforcement capacity and mechanisms, and
                         building consumer demand for fortified foods; and (iii) zinc supplementation for treatment of
                         diarrhea: scaling-up efforts to expand use of zinc supplementation with oral rehydration solution
                         (ORS) in management of diarrhea in children through public sector channels only.

                         Sub-component 3: Communication for Development: Through this sub-component, the project will
                         have a significant focus on behavior change for demand creation of the services outlined above and
                         for generating political and societal support for addressing malnutrition. Along with communication
                         activities focused at ultimate beneficiaries the sub-component will entail advocacy interventions
                         targeted at key stakeholders, policy makers and other players to garner relevant allocation of
                         resources, oversight and support for the project. The first step in implementing this sub-component
                           will be to carry out formative research to inform the development of a strategy and of the tools and
                           media mix for the behavior chance communication.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Sub-component 4: Strengthening institutional capacity in the health sector and for multi-sectoral
                           coordina tion. The existing institutional capacity for nutrition within the health sector at the
                           provincial and district levels is inadequate. The Nutrition Units at provincial levels are weak in their
                           ability to plan programs (as evident in project preparation which has taken longer than expected), to
                           use evidence for decision making and to advocate and provide technical assistance outside the health
                           sector for nutrition interventions. The project will support strengthening and building capacity to
                           provide leadership for nutrition programs in the health sector with a focus on strengthening nutrition
                           units/positions at provincial and at the district level. The project will support organizational
                           strengthening including supporting technical and management staff including staff training; provision
                           of technical assistance for effective implementation including long and short-term nutrition experts,
                           internal capacity as well as firm(s) for monitoring and evaluation including undertaking periodic
                           surveys and program evaluations; and strengthening procurement and financial management
                           capacities. In addition, the project will support operational research to test new interventions/
                           approaches for infant and young child feeding (e.g. models of social marketing of micronutrient
                           powders and soap) and maternal nutrition (e.g. models for working with religious and other leaders
                           to address early marriage and pregnancy and birth spacing).

                           Alternatives considered: The team considered developing a multi-sectoral nutrition project. It was,
                           however, decided that this would be too complex and risky in the current political and security
                           environment in Pakistan. Instead, the project will support the scaling-up of the most well-proven
                           nutrition interventions that are delivered though the health sector while also developing the capacity
                           of the Ministry and provincial Departments of Health (DOH) to engage with other sectors to make
                           the case for them to also focus on nutrition as part of their core business. The project will also build
                           the capacity of the multi-sectoral coordination mechanisms which the provinces have recently put in
                           place but which are not yet functional. This support may include the formation of working
                           secretariats at provincial levels to under take functions across sectors, such as coordination,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           communication and monitoring/evaluation. The team also considered developing a Program for
                           Results approach but decided to proceed with a SIL because there is no well developed program from
                           which the Bank can finance a "slice"; this project aims to build such a program.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the             safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Sindh, Balochistan, and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Provinces of Pakistan

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Ruma Tavorath (SASDI)
                           Samina Mussarat Islam (SASDS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No
                                 BP 4.01
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 03-Dec-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Not applicable
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Luc Laviolette

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                                                                                              Date: 15-Aug-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Julie McLaughlin (SM)                                                                                                Date: 24-Aug-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
