                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA3100
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Senegal                           Project ID:    P133333
                            Project Name:      Senegal Quality and Equity of Basic Education (P133333)
                            Task Team          Atou Seck
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          01-Apr-2013                       Estimated   13-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTEW                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:           Primary education (60%), Secondary education (20%), Tertiary education (20%)
                            Theme:            Education for all (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       217.90               Total Bank Financing:        20.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                             Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           148.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   20.00
                              CANADA Canadian International Development Agency
                                                                                                             3.00
                              (CIDA)
                              Education for All - Fast Track Initiative                                     46.90
                              Total                                                                        217.90
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to improve learning outcomes for early grades, increase access
                           to the science and mathematics tracks of secondary schools, and to improve equity in access to basic
                           education.
                            3. Project Description

                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         The project supports the first phase (2012-2016) of the Senegal ten-year education program
                         (2012-2022). It will address the need to move from an input- based system (books, classes, desks,
                         blackboards) to a results-oriented management system which will focus on processes and improve
Public Disclosure Copy




                         learning outcomes, school performance and equity in terms of access for poor children in
                         underserved regions. Thus, the project will :(i) introduce accountability mechanisms to improve the
                         level of learning outcomes in terms of reading and mathematics in early grades of primary education,
                         (ii) improve the quality of education in junior, secondary education but also (iii) improving the equity
                         in access to education with a focus on children out of schools by ensuring that they receive a good
                         quality of education.


                         Component 1: Quality improvement of basic education

                         Subcomponent 1.1: Using performance-based contracts to improve accountability for the quality of
                         services delivered at district level
                         This subcomponent is built on existing initiatives and will finance PBCs between all 14 Regional
                         education authorities (IAs) and the 56 District education authorities (IEF) to improve the quality of
                         education and school performance through teacher training, learning material incentives or
                         remediation courses. IAs will sign the contracts, monitor the achievement of results, and report on
                         the overall progress at regional level. Resources for each IA will be replenished based on the results
                         achieved as measured by specific the Disbursement-Linked indicators. The performance-based
                         contracts will have the following arrangements: (i) each IEF will prepare a detailed action plan and
                         budget covering outputs and outcomes to be achieved in a four-year period. The agreements would
                         be multi-year and contain: (a) funding commitments for the first year by budgeting proposed
                         activities and objectives; (b) funding projections for subsequent years of the agreement; (c) agreed
                         targets; and (d) indicators to monitor progress. Adjustments will be made yearly based on the
                         achievement of targets; (ii) IAs representing the Government would negotiate with each IEF and will
                         provide financial support to each plan; and (iii) a focus on building the capacity of IEFs to prepare
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and implement their plans and to IAs to negotiate and supervise.. World Bank procedures will be
                         used for procurement and financial management. The PBC will be a contract between the IA and IEF
                         in the given region. In this contract, the IA, representing the Government agrees to pay a pre-
                         determined amount of money. In return, the IEF will commit to improve the performance of the
                         education sector at the district-level and the IA will provide the resources to finance the IEF action
                         plan to improve results.

                         Subcomponent 1.2: Improving quality through improved school based management
                         This subcomponent support two mains activities: (i) local communities’ participation and oversight
                         through School-Management Committees (SMCs) which will be support school activity, monitor the
                         quality of service delivery, participate in the management of the transferred funds and report on the
                         quality of service delivery and; (ii) funds to support the implementation of quality improvement
                         agreements between IEFs and schools. The grants to schools will include bonuses for schools that
                         achieve more than 80% of the targeted learning outcomes

                         Subcomponent 1.3: Implement national program to develop sciences and math teaching and learning
                         at middle schools level
                         This sub-component intends to improve the quality of middle schools with a focus on sciences and
                         mathematics though the:
                         (i)     reproduction and distribution of 33,000 teaching guides and training of all middle schools


                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         teachers to use them.
                         (ii)    technical assistance to (i) amend to revise the decree n°77 –1102 of December 9, 1977
                         organizing the Inspection Générale de l’Education Nationale (IGEN) (ii) implementation of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         revised curriculum for middle schools in order to improve mathematics and sciences place in formal
                         middle schools program,
                         (iii)   Grants to middle schools to implement the reformed program,
                         (iv)    and renovation of the 8 existing Blocs Scientifiques et Technologiques (BST) and the
                         construction and equipment of 20 additional ones .

                         Sub-component 1.4: Improving pre-service teacher training
                         This sub-component aims to improve the qualification of teachers entering into the education system
                         at the primary and junior secondary levels. This will support the Government program to decentralize
                         the training of teachers at primary and middle school level. The project will finance:

                         (i)      Consultants and workshops to design a new training program for CRFPEs aligned with the
                         curriculum used in classes with a focus on pedagogic practices and referential to use these practices
                         in classes.
                         (ii)     Construction and equipment of 4 new CRFPEs. For a total need of 14 CRFPE, JICA has
                         already financed the one in Dakar and intends to finance one additional. USAID will finance eight
                         such centers.

                         Component 2: Equity in access and retention

                         Subcomponent 2.1: Construction and rehabilitation of schools in areas lagging behind and in
                         underserved areas.
                         The project will finance the extension of the primary education network with the construction of 200
                         new primary schools: 144 in the 5 regions lagging behind (Kaffrine, Diourbel, Louga, Tambacounda,
                         Matam) and the remaining 56 in specific underserved pockets in other regions that have a high
                         proportion of out-of-school children. In addition, the project will finance with the Government
Public Disclosure Copy




                         resources the following replacement of schools in shelters: (i) 1861 primary schools replace existing
                         ones in shelters, (iii) 259 junior secondary schools existing ones in shelters; and (iii) 22 high schools
                         in rural areas to replace existing. To build this ambitious construction program, the Government
                         intends to use a Public Private partnership modality meaning with IFC support. The private sector
                         will be contracted to design and build the infrastructures according to the Government requirement.
                         The facilities will be operated by the private sector and the education will use them during a defined
                         period by paying fees. At the end of the period, the infrastructure will be transferred to the
                         Government.

                         Subcomponent 2.2: Grants for results to selected Koranic schools based on an agreement
                         The project will support 100 interested and motivated Koranic schools by providing resources to
                         finance the rehabilitation of the infrastructure, additional French teachers’ fees, learning material and
                         incentives for the headmaster. In return, the schools will commit to adjusting the curriculum and
                         achieving learning results as measured by indicators measuring the level of proficiency in reading
                         and mathematics. A call for interest will be published during project preparation and contracts will be
                         prepared, assessed and agreed between the IDEN and the schools. USAID has already developed a
                         similar strategy that will be reinforced and scaled up.

                         Component 3: Project management and capacity building
                         Subcomponent 3.1: Project Implementation and Management

                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                         This subcomponent will support the implementation of the project. It will finance equipment, staff
                         training, and preparation of monitoring reports and technical assistance to the DPRE, the DAGE, and
                         the Directorate of fundamental education, the IAs, the INEADE, and the ARDs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 3.2: Development of a Monitoring and Evaluation system (IDA)
                         Adequate implementation of this sub-component is critical for the project, notably to have consistent
                         data to monitor indicators at central and regional levels and to easily follow the execution of the
                         performance-based contracts for each IEFs. This sub-component will help build a monitoring and
                         evaluation system both at the sector level and at IAs and IEF levels. At central level, the project will
                         also support: data collection and analysis, technical assistance, studies, computers, servers, software
                         and informatics infrastructure as well as training for the central level. The IA level will be supported
                         through the education capacity development Trust Fund.

                         Subcomponent 3.3: Strengthening the deconcentration of the education sector
                         This component is fully financed by the CIDA Trust fund of $US3 million and aims at supporting
                         decentralization efforts in the education sector. The following activities will be undertaken: a) the
                         new Decree redefining the mandates of academic inspectorates (IAs) and departmental inspectorates
                         (IDENs) will be implemented, b) job descriptions and profiles for IAs and IEFs will be finalized, and
                         the qualifications of current staff responsible for IAs and IDENs will be evaluated; c) a training and
                         equipment plan will be developed, as well as a communications plan; d) staff championing change
                         will be identified and trained; e) employees will be reorganized/redeployed, assigned, or recruited; f)
                         equipment will be procured; and g) training activities will be conducted. Activities that will be
                         selected are those that help to bring changes in professional and management practices. Activities do
                         not include infrastructure work, operating costs, and costs arising directly from government
                         activities.
                         This sub-component is flexible in identifying and supporting specific capacity-building activities
                         needed to help strengthen IAs and IDENs as these entities are heterogeneous. The Ministry will
                         identify activities annually and submit them for review by the fund’s financial partners through the
                         Steering Committee
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         This project will target primary and junior secondary schools countrywide. The construction sites are
                         not yet known; therefore no specific physical characteristic relevant to safeguard analysis is known.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Demba Balde (AFTCS)
                         Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               The project is a category B and triggers the
                          BP 4.01                                              environment assessment policy due to
                                                                               constructions and/or rehabilitation of schools.
                                                                               Consistent with Category B projects, the negative
                                                                               social and environmental impacts of these small
                                                                               scale civil works can be mitigated and are
                                                                               expected to be low to moderate, and site
                                                                               specific... The project will have positive impacts



                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                                                                            on human development by improving the learning
                                                                            conditions through the financing of replacement
                                                                            shelters and the construction of latrines. Since the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            location of the intervention sites are not known,
                                                                            an Environmental and Social Management
                                                                            Framework (ESMF) was prepared. The ESMF
                                                                            was consulted upon and disclosed in-country and
                                                                            at the infoshop prior to appraisal.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No             The project does not involve forestry or forest
                                                                            management.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No             The project will not involve the use of pesticides
                                                                            or pest management schemes.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes            The OP 4.11 is triggered due to project
                            BP 4.11                                         construction activities. During project preparation
                                                                            the location of subprojects has not been finalized.
                                                                            The ESMF includes screening to identify
                                                                            subprojects that may adversely affect physical
                                                                            cultural resources. The ESMF also includes
                                                                            "chance find" procedures to guide the treatment
                                                                            of physical cultural resources discovered during
                                                                            project implementation and operation. If a
                                                                            subproject will be identified to be in the vicinity
                                                                            of a recognized cultural heritage site, a Cultural
                                                                            Resources Management Plan will be prepared
                                                                            consistent with the Senegal national legislation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            and institutional capabilities for management of
                                                                            physical cultural resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No             There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                            area.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes            This policy is triggered because there might be
                            4.12                                            loss of land or restriction of access. Therefore, a
                                                                            Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was
                                                                            prepared, consulted upon and disclosed in-
                                                                            country and at the infoshop prior to appraisal.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No             N/A

                            Projects on International        No               N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No               N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues



                                                                    Page 5 of 8
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                           Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                             The project is classified category B due to the nature and small-size of the eligible activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Three Bank safeguard policies are triggered: OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment; OP 4.11 on
                           Physical Cultural Resources; and OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. A Resettlement Policy
                           Framework (RPF) and an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), including
                           a sub-project environmental screening and a chance find procedures, have been developed,
                           consulted upon, and disclosed in country. In event land acquisition or loss of assets occurs at the
                           sub-project level, it will be subject to the prior preparation and full execution of a Resettlement
                           Action Plan (RAP). The construction and exploitation of classrooms and ancillary infrastructures
                           (latrines, water points, etc.) are foreseen to induce the following negative impacts: (i) degradation
                           of vegetation at the construction and the borrow pit sites; (ii) nuisances due to the mishandling of
                           wastes; (iii) occupational safety and risks during construction; (iv) hygiene related disease due to
                           the mismanagement of latrines; (v) acute intoxication if inappropriate materials were inadvertently
                           used in constructing the classrooms. To prevent and overcome these risks, the ESMF provides a
                           screening mechanism along with capacity building activities for the stakeholders who will be
                           directly involved in project implementation.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             N/A.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             N/A.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The relevant environmental and social management instruments (the ESMF and the RPF) have
                           been prepared, widely consulted upon and disclosed both in-country and at the Infoshop of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Bank. Publication was made in country on March 19, 2013, and at the Infoshop on March 21,
                           2013.

                           Both instruments set forth guidelines and mechanism for preventing and handling any adverse
                           risks or impacts during the preparation and the execution of the activities. Especially, the ESMF
                           details a screening mechanism comprising the steps to go through, the roles and responsibilities
                           and the necessary clearances/approval to help mitigate potential negative environmental and social
                           impacts during the implementation of the whole project. In this sense, the screening will be
                           executed by environmental and social safeguard focal points in the Regional Development Agency
                           (ARD); the process will result in the environmental classification of the subprojects in category A,
                           B and C, but category A subprojects will not be eligible to financing. Eligible schools construction
                           activities will be subject to either simple Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA),
                           stand-alone Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or simple mitigation measures,
                           and processed according to the national regulations under the control of the ‘’Direction de
                           l’Environnement et des Etablissements Classés’’ (DEEC). In particular, the existing certified
                           prototype of classrooms/schools, as approved and utilized for the closed IDA funded project
                           (P089254) and the ongoing GPE-FTI project (P116783) in the country, will be considered to
                           prevent any use of inappropriate construction materials. Further, it is expected that the classrooms
                           will be constructed on public land, but the RPF provides a clear procedure to be followed if any
                           land acquisition issue arises. In such a case, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared,


                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                           consulted upon, disclosed and fully executed prior the commencement of the concerned activity.

                           Regarding the capacity of the client, it is noteworthy to mention the sound institutional and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           regulatory framework of Senegal on the environmental assessment side. The DEEC, the public
                           entity in charge of the enforcement of the EIA procedure, is quite familiar with the Bank safeguard
                           policies requirements for having been involved with several projects in the past. Further, the
                           Regional Development Agencies (ARD), in charge of the implementation of the project activities,
                           have implemented Bank funded project and have safeguard specialists within their teams;
                           nevertheless, some will need support to carry out the safeguards due diligence during the project
                           implementation phase. Therefore, a safeguard implementation focal point will be designated/
                           appointed in each of the 14 participating ARD, and will receive training on both environmental
                           assessment and environmental monitoring and evaluation. To this end, and to support other
                           relevant mitigation measures, and safeguards supervision, a total amount of $US140,000 is
                           earmarked in the project budget.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             During the preparation of the safeguard instruments, consultations have been organized in Kolda,
                           Tambacounda, Kaffrine, Fatick, Diourbel, Thiès, Louga, St-Louis and Matam. Stakeholders in the
                           education sector such as teacher unions, student parent associations, local government
                           representatives as well as NGOs and civil society organizations participated and raised their
                           concerns which were related to: the potential impacts and risks of the project; land expropriation;
                           social measures; employment of local people during construction; arrangements for the disabled
                           students; etc. Recommendations from stakeholders were reflected in the final safeguard
                           instruments, prior to disclosure. During the implementation, and at any time case arises, the above-
                           mentioned stakeholders (student parents association, local authorities, and teacher unions) will
                           participate in the decision making process.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-Mar-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Senegal                                                          19-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      17-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-Mar-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Senegal                                                          19-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.


                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Atou Seck
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                       Date: 02-Apr-2013
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (SM)                         Date: 30-Mar-2013




                                                                        Page 8 of 8
