                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC604
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-May-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Brazil                                  Project ID:                       P127723
                              Project Name:                   Sao Paolo Transport, Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management (P127723)
                              Task Team Leader:               Eric R. Lancelot
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 05-Oct-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:             20-Dec-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  LCSTR                                   Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (93%), General public administration sector (5%), Flood protection
                                                              (2%)
                              Theme:                          Infrastructure services for private sector development (70%), Regional integration (15%), Climate change (5%),
                                                              Other environment and natural resources management (5%), Land administration and management (5%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                 214.00
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                    300.00
                                   MIGA Guarantee                                                                                                           200.00
                                   Financing Gap                                                                                                               0.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                    714.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The Project Development Objective is to foster enhanced efficiency in transport through improvement of key segments of the State’s road and
Public Disclosure Copy




                              waterway transport network, while increasing resilience to climate risk through strengthening environmental and disaster risk management
                              systems.

                              The objective is to be achieved through: (i) improvements to the transport network by rehabilitating and upgrading selected road corridors,
                              including duplications, and constructing bridges to enhance waterway navigability, in the aim of strengthening regional integration and fostering
                              multimodality; (ii) improvement of sustainable environmental and territorial management within the State with a focus on biodiversity conservation
                              and natural resources management in support to green and inclusive growth, and; (iii) improvement of disaster risk management and
                              strengthening of the resilience of the transport sector (and related activities) to climate change.

                              C. Project Description

                              The Project is a US$714 million operation which would be financed by a US$300 million Bank loan and US$214 million counterpart funds. A
                              complementary US$200 million loan through private financing with a MIGA guarantee is being explored.

                              The Project includes the following three components: (i) improving transport and logistics efficiency (approximate value US$663 million); (ii)
                              Strengthening territorial planning and management, natural resources management and biodiversity conservation (approximate value US$35
                              million); and, (iii) increasing State’s resilience to climate risk (approximate value US$16 million).

                              Component 1: Improving transport and logistics efficiency
                              a)         Rehabilitation and Upgrading of the road network – restoring and upgrading the State paved network to improve connectivity, reduce
                              logistics costs, and improve road transport safety through a set of activities including rehabilitation, construction of third lane, duplication, slope
                              protection and improvement of intersections, as well as the reconstruction of two bridges with higher clearance on the river Tiete Parana to
                              enhance waterway navigability. A pilot of Performance Based contracts for rehabilitation and road maintenance (CREMA) might be included;
                              b)         Institutional strengthening – improving the State planning and technical capacity towards more integrated and sustainable transport and
                              logistics and improved road safety.

                              Component 2: Strengthening territorial planning and management, natural resources management and biodiversity conservation:
                              a)        Sustainable territorial planning and management – improving the Zoneamento Ecologico Economico, ZEE towards a territorial planning
                              and environmental management tool with improved policies and procedures, methodologies, and information/knowledge.
                              b)        Environmental monitoring systems – supporting improved effectiveness of environmental monitoring systems on biodiversity, enhanced
                              incentives and mechanisms for conservation, and modernized and expanded environmental quality monitoring network. Pilot projects to support
                              regulating rural owners in forest conservation may be included.
                           c)        Environmental licensing – supporting improved natural resource management and streamlined environmental licenses processes.
                           Creation of a ‘Situation Room’ to share and consolidate technical information from various institutions to support environmental management may
                           be included.

                           Component 3: Increasing State’s resilience to climate risk with a particular focus on the transport sector:
                           a)         Disaster risk management policy and capacity– supporting upgrading and implementation of the State’s disaster risk management
                           program (Programa Estadual de Prevenção de Desastres Naturais e de Redução de Riscos Geológicos - PDN). Based on a disaster risk
Public Disclosure Copy




                           management framework (risk identification, mitigation, preparedness, financing), the support will be done through identification of hazard,
                           vulnerabilities and risk; economic quantification of the disasters occurring in the State; improved policies and procedures to better respond to
                           disasters; development of an early warning system; methodologies and information/knowledge in harmony with activities generated under
                           Component 2; development of diagnostic and management tools for comprehensive resettlement of population of non-mitigable high-risk areas;
                           incorporation of climate risk management into territorial planning, incorporating climate risk management into State’s public investments; and risk
                           financing strategies. In addition to overall policy and capacity strengthening, the transport sector will take a particular focus and a stand-alone
                           subcomponent will be developed in this context.
                           Disaster risk management in transport sector – assist in mainstreaming climate risk management in the State’s Transport Masterplan (Plano
                           Diretor de Desenvolvimento dos Transportes - PDDT) through the incorporation of a climate risk variable as a chapter of the new PDDT
                           2010-2030. Development of risk evaluation of the network and assessing the vulnerabilities of the transport system; development of a study of the
                           economic losses caused by a probable disaster event in the network; development of an integrated disaster response plan for the transport sector;
                           development of climate change scenarios and application to probabilistic risk models in the transport sector; strengthening technical specifications
                           of road design by integrating climate change impact resiliency; developing maintenance practices that improve the resiliency of road infrastructure.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           For Component 1 the Project will finance the rehabilitation and upgrading of a set of state paved roads and the construction of two bridges within
                           the State of Sao Paulo. While the exact location of the road works is unknown at this stage, they will mostly take place in the rights of way (ROW)
                           and in sites associated with the road projects: The ROW consists of the paved strip and the entire area reserved for the construction, operation,
                           and maintenance of the roadside. The sites associated with road projects include deposits; borrow sites, materials treatment areas, quarries,
                           access roads, and facilities provided for project workers. The bridge construction will be in close proximity to the existing brides (in order to
                           maintain use of the existing bridge during the construction period). The two bridges will be on the SP-191 road in the DR-13 Bauru district, one
                           over the Tietê River and the other Piracicaba River. Given their physical location, that no new roads will be constructed, and that the roads serve
                           areas already developed economically, it is not expected that the implementation of civil works would require involuntary resettlements or have
                           negative impacts on existing environmentally protected areas or indigenous populations. However, small land acquisitions might be necessary in
                           order to proceed with localized road realignment, elimination of accident-prone points, and widening of bridges. These interventions will be located
                           in the central/north portion of the state, where there are isolated patches of natural vegetation and land use is predominantly focused on
                           agriculture.

                           For Component 2 and Component 3 technical assistance activities have yet to be fully determined, though the general focus will be on supporting
                           activities that will improve environmental management and resilience to climate risk in the overall State of Sao Paulo. Particular activities may be
                           relevant for specific geographical areas, such as regarding forest conservation in pilot areas or action plans for resettlement of those in risk prone
                           areas, presumably in coastal regions.

                           Given the nature of the works under Component 1, and the institutional strengthening activities under Component 2 and 3, the Project envisions
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the following instruments to be prepared: an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment to identify and assess the potential social and
                           environmental impacts of the entire Project. for those activities that could potentially have an impact, but for which the activities are not fully
                           defined or identified, a framework will be prepared (for example, an environmental and social management framework for works that have yet to be
                           defined, or a resettlement framework for the institutional strengthening activities). Such framework will provide details on mitigation measures,
                           offsetting adverse impacts, budgeting information, etc.), and guidance on preparing plans, should the need arise during the course of project
                           appraisal or supervision. For activities or interventions that have been identified, and which have been determined to cause an impact, a plan will
                           be prepared (Environmental Management Plan, etc.).

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           The State has a long history in implementing Bank financed projects and is experienced with Bank safeguard policies through the implementation
                           of two other projects: State Highways Management Project Sao Paulo (P006410-closed) and the Sao Paulo Feeder Roads & Additional Financing
                           (P106663-active) as well as an IADB Sao Paulo State Highway Rehabilitation Project (BR-L1033). The ongoing project is focused on municipal
                           road rehabilitation yet includes a technical assistance for modernizing the State’s environmental management systems. The implementation of the
                           proposed Project would be undertaken through the same implementing agency as in the ongoing loan, centralized in the Road Agency (DER-SP)
                           which will be in charge of all safeguards aspects for all components under the Project, including for the other beneficiaries/participating entities as
                           well as centralizing, coordinating and monitoring all Project activities, including the environmental and climate change components. Each
                           participating entity would report to DER-SP information on, among others, resettlement planning. The Bank considers the DER-SP’s institutional
                           capacity for safeguard policies as adequate. The Bank team will assess the capacity of the State in the context of the proposed loan as the Project
                           is further defined.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Jason Jacques Paiement (LCSSO)
                           Marcio Cerqueira Batitucci (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                               Triggered?        Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01   Yes     Component 1 of the proposed project supports small-scale investments in
                                                                     already existing road infrastructure: expansions of capacity (duplication and
                                                                     additional lanes), the construction of shoulders, slope protection and intersection
                                                                     improvements as security features, and improvements (new asphalt layers) to
                                                                     reestablish the use of the roads. Construction of two new bridges in replacement
                                                                     of existing ones is also proposed. Environmental impacts resulting from civil
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     works on existing road sections are expected to be relatively minor, and mostly
                                                                     related to civil works’ execution. The Borrower has demonstrated to have
                                                                     adequate capacity and procedures for handling environmental mitigation
                                                                     measures (as demonstrated during the implementation of the ongoing Bank
                                                                     project). Possible negative impacts from these investments are expected to be
                                                                     small, localized and reversible. Because of these project’s characteristics, a
                                                                     category B is proposed.
                                                                     Component 2 & 3 activities are yet to be fully defined.
                                                                     According to the Environmental Assessment mandatory safeguard policy, all
                                                                     projects are subject to environmental screening. The borrower will carry out an
                                                                     Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), which will contain the
                                                                     information applicable to all interventions financed under the three components.
                                                                     Where the ESIA outlines activities that have yet to be fully defined, but which
                                                                     potentially may carry an impact, an Environmental and Social Management
                                                                     Framework (ESMF) for that particular activity will be prepared. The ESMF will
                                                                     outline a set of guidelines, procedures and criteria to be used to ensure that the
                                                                     proposed activities will not cause any potential large scale, significant and/or
                                                                     irreversible negative environmental and social impacts. Interventions with the
                                                                     same context (i.e. similarity in works, actors, etc.) can be grouped under the
                                                                     same ESMF. For interventions under Component 1, the ESMF will also consider
                                                                     if project interventions are expected to result in indirect and/or induced impacts
                                                                     resulting from increased road capacity.
                                                                     Where an ESIA already identified the specific activities and recognizes the
                                                                     impact, then there would be a need for management actions and the borrower
                                                                     must develop an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), within which an
                                                                     implementation schedule will be set, responsibilities assigned, compliance costs
                                                                     estimated, and sources of funding specified.
                                                                     The Terms of Reference (ToR) for the ESIA are also required and must be
                                                                     submitted to the Bank for approval before the hiring process.
                                                                     Principles of OP 4.01 with regards to proper consultation will be applied as part
                                                                     of project preparation and the ESIA, and EMPs will be reviewed by the Bank
                                                                     and publicly disseminated prior to appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           Yes     The activities of Component 1 are not expected to affect Permanent
                                                                     Preservation Areas (APP) and areas with remnants of native vegetation,
                                                                     although activities under other project components should nevertheless lead to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     positive impacts on natural habitats, through the direct protection, inspection and
                                                                     rehabilitation of these areas, following legal provisions. Thus, OP 4.04 is
                                                                     triggered and all planning activities that may affect natural habitats must follow
                                                                     World Bank policies, identifying monitoring and management activities to prevent
                                                                     or mitigate any possible negative impact.
                                                                     Spring and river margin areas are classified as APP and legally protected by
                                                                     Brazilian Legislation (Federal Law 4771/65). The construction of two new
                                                                     bridges, extending navigability and increasing movement of larger ships on the
                                                                     Tiete and Piracicaba rivers, will be assessed within the ESIA in terms of this
                                                                     policy.
                                                                     Despite the expected positive impacts, the ESIA and EMP, if those instruments
                                                                     are required following ESIA evaluation, should include clear guidance regarding
                                                                     direct and indirect impacts on natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                    TBD     It is not likely that Project implementation will have negative impacts on forest
                                                                     resources or on the rights of people to depend on forest resources. The activities
                                                                     of Component 1 are not located in areas with significant forest remnants and the
                                                                     Project does not intend to use forest resources for industrialized purposes.
                                                                     Component 2 will possibly contribute to conserve and/or restore an areacalled
                                                                     Legal Reserve (Reserva Legal – RL), under private holdings, which is required
                                                                     by law. It is expected that this activity will bring positive impacts and does not
                                                                     trigger the policy. The ESIA will evaluate the Project interventions in the context
                                                                     of this policy nonetheless.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09               TBD     The Project would not finance any chemical compounds that would trigger OP
                                                                     4.09. The Project Operational Manual and Catalogue for contractors will
                                                                     explicitly prohibit use of pesticides/herbicides for works and services financed by
                                                                     the Project. But there is a possibility of future pesticide application during
                                                                     subsequent road maintenance outside of the Project timeline, and the Project
                                                                     would encourage the adoption of economically and environmentally sustainable
                                                                     ntegrated Pest Management (IPM) in relation to the roads associated with this
                                                                                                                        project.
                                                                                                                        The ESIA will evaluate the Project interventions in the context of this policy and,
                                                                                                                        should the need arise, will prepare a Pest Management Plan (PMP)
                                Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                             Yes                    Project implementation is not expected to cause any negative impact on known
                                                                                                                        physical cultural resources (PCR). However, it may include historical sites and/or
                                                                                                                        archeological findings. Therefore, OP 4.11 is triggered. Impacts and procedures
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        for "chance findings" from investments under Component 1 will be assessed
                                                                                                                        within the ESIA, and a Physical Cultural Resources Management Framework
                                                                                                                        that includes measures for avoiding or mitigating any adverse impacts on
                                                                                                                        physical cultural resources, provisions for managing chance finds, any
                                                                                                                        necessary measures for strengthening institutional capacity, and a monitoring
                                                                                                                        system to track the progress of these activities.. Such provisions will include
                                                                                                                        compliance with the guidelines defined by the National Institute for Historical and
                                                                                                                        Cultural Heritage (IPHAN) regarding historical sites and/or archeological
                                                                                                                        findings.
                                Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                      TBD                    Upon preliminary plotting of the investments under component 1, no civil works
                                                                                                                        are expected to be located within 10 kilometers of any lands occupied or claimed
                                                                                                                        by Indigenous Peoples. However, as the scope of the proposed activities under
                                                                                                                        Components 2 and 3 are yet to be defined, it is unknown at this stage if
                                                                                                                        Indigenous Peoples will be impacted by the Project. The ESIA will evaluate the
                                                                                                                        Project interventions in the context of this policy and should the findings indicate
                                                                                                                        any impact or potential impacts on Indigenous Peoples, the policy will be
                                                                                                                        triggered and appropriate instruments (an Indigenous Peoples Plan and/or an
                                                                                                                        Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework) will be prepared as part of the ESIA
                                                                                                                        obligations. The team will evaluate with the Client during project preparation if
                                                                                                                        positive benefits of project activities can be extended to Indigenous communities.
                                Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                Yes                   Component 1 of the proposed project supports small-scale investments in
                                                                                                                        roads infrastructure. Some activities (such as duplication, additional lanes, the
                                                                                                                        construction of shoulders and bridges) may need land acquisition and,
                                                                                                                        consequently, could potentially result in involuntary resettlement. As the specific
                                                                                                                        works to be financed under this component are already identified, Resettlement
                                                                                                                        Plans will be prepared in the event that such impacts prove necessary.
                                                                                                                        As activities for Components 2 and 3 are still relatively undefined, but could
                                                                                                                        potentially result in restrictions on access to natural resources in legally
                                                                                                                        protected areas or the need for some people living in disaster prone areas to be
                                                                                                                        resettled, the World Bank project team will assist the DER-SP to prepare a
                                                                                                                        Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) including Process Framework (PF) with
                                                                                                                        policy guidance and procedures required to mitigate any such impacts as
                                                                                                                        needed.
                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No                     Not applicable. The Project will not finance the construction of a new dam, rely
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        on the performance of an existing dam or a dam under construction, nor require
                                                                                                                        increases in the capacity of an existing dam, nor changes in the characteristics
                                                                                                                        of the impounded materials of the dam.
                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          No                    Not applicable. None of the Project activities are located in any international
                                7.50                                                                                    waterways and there are no other riparians impacted by the Project. The new
                                                                                                                        bridges proposed will be constructed in Brazilian rivers.
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No                    Not applicable, because the activities financed by the Project are not located in
                                                                                                                        disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    The Borrower is expected to begin preparation of the TOR for the ESIA shortly after project concept stage and specific studies should be
                                    prepared by September 2012.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: Eric R. Lancelot
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                           Date: 20-May-2012
                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Gylfi Palsson (SM)                                                                              Date: 16-May-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
