                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA194
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Jan-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Pakistan                                Project ID:                       P125999
                              Project Name:                   Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Productivity Improvement Program Project Phase-I (P125999)
                              Task Team Leader:               Masood Ahmad
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 06-Feb-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:             29-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  SASDA                                   Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Irrigation and drainage (70%), Agricultural extension and research (30%)
                              Theme:                          Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Water resource management (40%), Other environment and natural
                                                              resources management (20%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                          0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                               250.00
                                   LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                                                                       173.50
                                   Total                                                                                                                     423.50
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The project's main objectives are to improve water productivity. Improved water productivity will translate into greater agricultural output per unit
                              of water used, and will be achieved through improved physical delivery efficiency, irrigation practices, crop diversification and effective application
                              of inputs. The project#s objectives would contribute to increased agricultural production, employment and incomes, higher living standards and
Public Disclosure Copy




                              positive environmental outcomes.

                              3. Project Description

                              The project is likely to consist of the following components:

                              Component A: Installation of High Efficient Irrigation Systems (US$234 million). This component would aim to improve irrigation efficiency through
                              (i) improving water use through drip irrigation systems and the field level; and (ii) to reduce waterlogging and improve water efficiency through
                              laser-land leveling. These two objectives would be met through two subcomponents. The first would focus on the installation of drip or bubbler/
                              sprinkler irrigation systems at the field level for high value horticulture and floriculture crops. Experience with these systems has shown that high
                              efficiency irrigation systems typically reduce input costs by 20-35%, increase yields by 20-100%, lower irrigation labor up to 30%, diversify
                              cropping patterns and save up to 75% water. The irrigation systems would likely be installed by a service provider on a shared cost basis. The
                              second sub-component would provide laser land leveling, which has been shown to save up to 30% irrigation water, and result in uniform seed
                              germination, and increases fertilizer use efficiency resulting in enhanced crop yields (up to 20%). The equipment is expected to be provided by
                              service providers to farmers who could complete the land leveling, where applicable.

                              Component B: Ungarding of Community Irrigation System (US$160 Million). The component would consist of three subcomponents. The first sub-
                              component would improve around 6,500 watercourses in canal commanded areas where farmer organizations have been established, and where
                              the management of the minor canal level has been transferred. Watercourses would be improved by improving the existing technology of brick
                              lining, or by introducing concrete lining, where preferred. The second subcomponent would improve around 4,000 watercourses that were partially
                              improved under previous programs. The costs of improvement would be shared with the farmers. The third sub-component would improve
                              watercourses in rainfed areas that have localized irrigation schemes. An estimated 4,000 watercourses would be covered under the project in
                              Barani areas.

                              Component C: Improved Agriculture Technology/Practices and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$ 9 million). This component would consist of two
                              subcomponents. The first sub-component would include research and extension services, training, demonstration and assistance, and the
                              establishment of information centers to promote technologies and practices introduced under other components. The second sub-component
                              would finance a monitoring and evaluation system to track progress of the project and to provide a continuous feedback loop to improve project
                              performance.

                              Component D: Project Management, supervision, technical assistance, training and Strategic Studies (US$20.5 million). This component would
                              cover the costs associated with project management and supervision of the project#s activities, and for financing strategic studies and pilot
                              projects that would be identified during the project implementation. In addition, this component will finance training of project staff, especially
                                                                                                                                                                           Page 1 of 4
                               training of trainers in topics such as crop diversification, shift to horticulture, vegetable and floriculture crops, operation and maintenance of the
                               irrigation systems, and units installed under the project, etc.

                               4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                               The project will be in the Punjab province of Pakistan. Punjab is considered to be food basket of the country and produces more than 70 percent of
                               wheat, which is the main staple food of Pakistanis. Agriculture in Punjab has been affected grossly with waterlogging and salinity and government
                               has implemented number of waterlogging and salinity control projects over the past years. Central and southern Punjab, where rainfall is more
Public Disclosure Copy




                               sporadic and agriculture is irrigation dependent, are also the cotton basket of the country. Central and southern Punjab are also world#s leading
                               producers of Kinoo (a variety of citrus) and mangoes. The proposed project interventions would result in improving irrigation efficiencies and
                               enhancing water productivity.

                               5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                               Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
                               Javaid Afzal (SASDI)

                               6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                     Yes        No      Explanation
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                  ✖                 Environmental Impact Assessment has been prepared. . The key potentially
                                                                                                      negative environmental and social impacts of the proposed interventions under
                                                                                                      the project include changes in land use pattern particularly where barren/fallow
                                                                                                      land is brought under cultivation, contamination of soil and water caused by
                                                                                                      excessive use of chemical inputs, salt build up in crop root zone, loss of
                                                                                                      natural vegetation and trees for water course improvement, loss of crops
                                                                                                      caused by water course improvement works, and reduced ground water
                                                                                                      recharge caused by water course lining. These potential impacts are
                                                                                                      temporary and reversible in nature and can be mitigated with the help of
                                                                                                      appropriate mitigation measures, such as avoiding interventions in the
                                                                                                      environmental hot spots and wildlife protected areas when expanding the
                                                                                                      cultivation fields, awareness raising and capacity building of farmers for
                                                                                                      judicious use of chemical inputs, occasional flood irrigation in fields using high
                                                                                                      efficiency irrigation systems to avoid salt build-up in soil, tree plantation to
                                                                                                      compensate any tree cutting, avoiding cropped area while carrying out the
                                                                                                      water course improvement and other construction works during the project,
                                                                                                      and limiting the extent of water course lining in the sweet groundwater zone to
                                                                                                      minimize negative impacts on groundwater recharge.
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                     ✖
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                                              ✖
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                                         ✖
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                          ✖
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                   ✖
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                             ✖
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                       ✖
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP            ✖                 An exemption to notification was obtained.
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                           ✖

                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  The project has prepared an Environmental and Social Assessment report, which suggests that the proposed project does not pose any long
                                  term or irreversible adverse environmental impacts. The key potentially negative environmental and social impacts of the proposed
                                  interventions under the project include changes in land use pattern particularly where barren/fallow land is brought under cultivation,
                                  contamination of soil and water caused by excessive use of chemical inputs, salt build up in crop root zone, loss of natural vegetation and trees
                                  for water course improvement and reduced ground water recharge caused by water course lining. These potential impacts are temporary and
                                  reversible in nature and can be mitigated with the help of appropriate mitigation measures, such as avoiding interventions in the environmental
                                  hot spots and wildlife protected areas when expanding the cultivation fields, awareness raising and capacity building of farmers for judicious use
                                  of chemical inputs, occasional flood irrigation in fields using high efficiency irrigation systems to avoid salt build-up in soil, tree plantation to
                                  compensate any tree cutting, avoiding cropped area while carrying out the water course improvement and other construction works during the
                                  project, and limiting the extent of water course lining in the sweet groundwater zone to minimize negative impacts on groundwater recharge.
                                  Land acquisition will not be required for the project rehabilitation works, which will be undertaken within their existing boundaries. There are no
                                  indigenous communities in the project areas as defined under World Bank OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                  Agriculture, rural and irrigation development are keys sectors in the province, which are under Government’s priority development agenda with
                                  the aim to improve agricultural productivity, irrigation efficiency and livelihood of the people. Therefore the long term impacts are towards
                                  contributing reduction in poverty in conjunction with environmental protection.
                                                                                                                                                                              Page 2 of 4
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                           The ESA reports elaborates on various project alternatives including, no project option, alternative irrigation methods, alternative land-leveling
                           methods, alternative methods of on-farm water conservation and alternative methods of implementation.

                           Analysis of the above-referred alternatives conclude that the high efficiency irrigation methods result in the reduced need of farm inputs such as
                           fertilizers, pesticides, fungicides, and herbicides. The controlled irrigation generally results in reduced vulnerability of the crops to the pest
                           attacks and reduced proliferation of weeds, in turn resulting in reduced need of pesticides and herbicides. In addition, fertigation (i.e.,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           application of fertilizers or other soil additives through the irrigation system) is possible for the high efficiency irrigation systems, such as drip
                           and sprinkler, resulting in enhanced effectiveness of the fertilizers and hence their reduced quantities needed. Similarly, for these high
                           efficiency irrigation systems, chemigation (i.e., application of pesticides, fungicides, and herbicides through the irrigation system) is possible,
                           resulting in enhanced effectiveness of these chemicals and hence their reduced quantities needed. The overall result of the high efficiency
                           irrigation system is therefore a much reduced usage of chemical inputs.

                           The above mentioned helps in reducing usage of chemical inputs and therefore affects the environment and communities in a positive manner.
                           With the adoption of high efficiency irrigation methods, contamination of soil and water and the associated negative impacts on communities
                           and natural flora/fauna is likely to be reduced.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                           The ESA, based on its detailed assessment, contains an Environment And Social Management Plan (EASP) for any possible environmental
                           and social impacts under the project. The ESA report presents a well structured organogram for the implementation arrangements of EMP. The
                           Director General Agriculture (Water Management) – DGA (WM) – will be overall responsible for environmental and social performance of the
                           project in accordance with the national and WB requirements.
                           The DGA (WM) will appoint a dedicated environmental/social development specialist or designate an appropriate officer of the Directorate
                           General to be the Environmental and Social Coordinator (ESC) for the proposed project at the provincial level. The ESC will ensure the
                           effective implementation of ESMP throughout the project implementation. S/he will also maintain liaison and coordination with the WMOs at the
                           district level, who will be designated as the district environmental and social coordinators (DESCs) in their respective districts. The DESCs will
                           in turn supervise and coordinate with the WUAs and farmers for the actual implementation of the environmental and social guidelines
                           (discussed in the next section) and other ESMP requirements during the project implementation.
                           The Project Implementation and Supervision Consultant (PISC) will be responsible for the implementation of ESMP while M&E Consultants will
                           be responsible for the third party monitoring. Production and maintenance of all the documentation outlined in ESMP will be the responsibility of
                           the PISC.
                           The client has quite exhaustive engagement with the WB in the past and therefore understands fully the planning and operational levels
                           environmental safeguards requirements. Per se, it does not have any environmental management unit present within its operational hierarchy,
                           however it presents and implement project level operational arrangements.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders consulted at various levels included: (i) People directly affected by the Project and Project beneficiaries (ie, farmers, WUA
                           members, other villagers), (ii) Sales and service companies, (iii) Officials from the Agriculture Department and Officials from agriculture
                           research institutes, (iv) Environment Protection Agency of Punjab, (v) Academia, (vi) Donors, and (vii) NGOs, international organizations, and
                           other interest groups.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           These consultations with the project stakeholders were carried out while conducting the present ESA. Meetings and consultations were held
                           with a range of key informants as well as government and civil society stakeholders at different levels. These discussions were held with
                           project affected people, project beneficiaries and other local communities in Attock, Rawalpindi, Chakwal, Lahore, Okara, Sahiwal, Multan,
                           Bhakkar, and Layyah districts. An attempt was made to consult stakeholders from all of the distinct regions of the province with respect to the
                           cultivation and water availability – Potwar, Central Punjab, Sothern Punjab, and Thal desert. The consultations also helped better understand
                           local knowledge with respect to the various sets of issues and concerns, and integrate these into the project design and EMP.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                               Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                  28-Dec-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                              24-Jan-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                               25-Jan-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                   Yes [     ]       No [    ]        NA [    ]

                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways


                                                                                                                                                                     Page 3 of 4
                              Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                         Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Signed and submitted by:                                                Name                                                 Date
                            Task Team Leader:                    Sanjay Srivastava                                                        24-Jan-2012
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                                                  24-Jan-2012
                            Comments:      Approved
                            Sector Manager:                      Simeon Kacou Ehui (SM)                                                   25-Jan-2012
                            Comments:     Cleared
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 4
