                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC1708

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Samoa                            Project ID:      P143408
                            Project Name:      Samoa Aviation Investment Project (P143408)
                            Task Team          Christopher R. Bennett
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          09-Sep-2013                      Estimated        14-Aug-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASNS                            Lending          Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Aviation (85%), Public administration- Transportation (15%)
                            Theme(s):          Regional integration (80%), Administrative and civil service reform (10%),
                                               Natural disaster management (5%), Climate change (5%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     31.20                     Total Bank Financing:         14.20
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            4.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  14.20
                              AUSTRALIA Australian Agency for International
                                                                                                             3.00
                              Development
                              EC European Investment Bank                                                   10.00
                              Total                                                                         31.20
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to improve operational safety and oversight of international and
                           domestic air transport infrastructure. The PDO is aligned with the regional program objectives.
                         C. Project Description
                         The project represents a subsequent phase of the PAIP, an on-going ‘horizontal’ Adaptable Program
                         Loan with an overarching objective of improving regional aviation safety and security. First phase
Public Disclosure Copy




                         participants include Kiribati, Tonga and Tuvalu. The project represents a set of physical aerodrome
                         improvements and institutional strengthening activities that are consistent with the framework
                         outlined in the regional program.

                         Component A: International Airport Infrastructure Investments (approx. US$20.6 million base cost).
                         The component will invest in aviation infrastructure to meet and maintain ICAO safety and security
                         standards. Potential investments include runway and apron rehabilitation, and energy efficient LED
                         airfield lighting upgrades. It will also contribute to regional safety and security through the
                         introduction of improved regional navigation and communication technologies and enhancements for
                         air traffic control. The focus will be on improving safety and security as well as operating efficiency.

                         Component B: Strengthening Policy and Regulatory Capacity, and Training (approx. US$1 million
                         base cost). This component will finance technical assistance to Samoa’s CAD to strengthen its
                         capacity to provide effective safety and security oversight. Investments may include setting up an
                         electronic data collection system and targeted technical assistance aimed at addressing ICAO audit
                         findings. Training activities will also be financed. Funding under PAIP from the Government of
                         Australia will also be made available for ongoing safety and security oversight services and general
                         support provided by PASO. This component may assist the GoS in developing their overall policy
                         for the sector, particularly with regard utilization of existing aerodromes, SAA’s community service
                         obligations, and air transport impacts and interrelations with other key sectors such tourism, maritime
                         and road transport, disaster and medical emergency response.

                         Component C: Strengthening airport operations and management capacity (approx. US$1 million
                         base cost). This component would help strengthen SAA through training in priority areas and the
                         development of an integrated MIS system. Technical assistance may also be provided in areas such
Public Disclosure Copy




                         as development of non-aeronautical revenues.

                         Component D: Project Support (approx. US$2 million base cost). Incremental operating costs
                         incurred by the Samoa project, support provided by the PAIP Technical and Fiduciary Services Unit
                         (TFSU), project management consultant service costs, and project financial audits would be financed
                         under the project.

                         An initial assessment of the urgent investment requirements at the Faleolo, Asau and Maota airports
                         and is on the order of US31.2 million. To meet these needs, project financing will require a
                         combination of resources, including both IDA grant and credit resources, as well as parallel financing
                         from other partners, including Australian Agency of International Development (AUSAid) and the
                         European Investment Bank (EIB). Both donors have indicated they are prepared to consider
                         supporting the proposed project.

                         The EIB is financing technical assistance to prepare: (i) a National Aviation Strategy – which will
                         help Government form their aviation policy and; (ii) an SAA Strategy and Business Plan which will
                         work up the SAA business plan within the context of the strategy/policy under (i). These activities
                         will provide detailed guidance to implementing specific activities on the proposed project.

                         The PAIP is a regional project and the regional IDA funds will provide supplemental resources for
                           the financing of investments, the costs for which are otherwise beyond the resources available from
                           Samoa’s national IDA allocation. The primary justification for utilizing Regional IDA resources is
                           the recognition that the cross country benefits of regional connectivity can only accrue after the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           investments in improved airport infrastructure m eet uniform operational requirements, thereby
                           enabling air service providers to assess intra-regional passenger and air freight opportunities. IDA’s
                           ability to mobilize these funds simultaneously to participating countries facilitates the
                           synchronization of the infrastructure investments, which will effectively elevate ICAO compliance
                           ratings across the region, in addition to ensuring needed provision of critical airfield assets and
                           apparatus. Further, the operability of the air traffic monitoring and communications equipment under
                           the program is dependent on an integrated system-wide roll out that will bring visibility to air traffic
                           traversing the region.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The current scope of the project is limited to the existing physical footprint of Faleolo Airport, which
                           is situated on, and surrounded by a buffer of Government-owned land, and to laying of cable at
                           Maoto and Asau airfields on Savai’i to provide airfield lighting. No new land or asset acquisition is
                           envisaged. Project impacts will be minimal, and will be largely confined to the transport and
                           construction impacts of runway and apron re-surfacing at Faleolo.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The borrower has good institutional capacity for implementing safeguard policies, as evidenced by
                           their performance on previous World Bank financed projects. General maintenance and small works
                           in past projects have been undertaken following the National Codes of Environment Practice.

                           An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Operations Manual have been
                           prepared for the regional program. This, along with Samoa’s National Code of Environmental
                           Practice, will be adapted for the project. The Samoa Airport Authority (SAA) will prepare a
                           Preliminary Environmental Assessment Report for submission to the Planning and Urban
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Management Agency (PUMA) in the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MNRE),
                           which is to advise on any conditions pertaining to Development Consent, and on Government of
                           Samoa consultation and documentation requirements. SAA convenes quarterly a Facilitation
                           Committee comprising tenants, government stakeholders and airlines, which address any issues
                           arising from airport operation. The project will be discussed through this forum, and other ad hoc
                           consultations will be announced in the media as required.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Beverly Ann McLean (EASNS)
                           Penelope Ruth Ferguson (EASWE)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Project impacts will be minimal, and will be
                           BP 4.01                                               largely confined to the transport and
                                                                                 construction impacts of runway and apron re-
                                                                                 surfacing at Faleolo airport. As the project area
                                                                                 is an existing aerodrome, there is no direct
                                                                                 impact on Natural Habitats, though increased
                                                                                                                                 noise frequency may result if additional air
                                                                                                                                 traffic materializes in the future. Environmental
                                                                                                                                 Category B is justified as potential impacts are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 site-specific, and can be mitigated through the
                                                                                                                                 use of an Environmental Management Plan
                                                                                                                                 during construction (consistent with the ESMF
                                                                                                                                 and national code of practice).
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            All impacts will be in already disturbed
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         environments. Any chance finds will be
                                                                                                                                 handled under procedures in the Environmental
                                                                                                                                 Management Plan consistent with the provisos
                                                                                                                                 of the PAIP ESMF.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     Yes                           The project is for the benefit of the Indigenous
                                                                                                                                 People who are the overwhelming majority in
                                                                                                                                 their own country. There will be no new impacts
                                                                                                                                 on indigenous culture, language, customs or
                                                                                                                                 institutions. Elements of IP planning will be
                                                                                                                                 embedded in the project design.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The investment activities are limited to the
                                 4.12                                                                                            existing physical footprint of Faleolo Airport,
                                                                                                                                 which is situated on, and surrounded by a buffer
                                                                                                                                 of Government-owned land, and to laying of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 cable at Maoto and Asau airfields on Savai’i to
                                                                                                                                 provide airfield lighting. No new land or asset
                                                                                                                                 acquisition is envisaged. Consistent with the
                                                                                                                                 program's Environmental and Social
                                                                                                                                 Management Framework (ESMF), a Social
                                                                                                                                 Assessment which includes culturally
                                                                                                                                 appropriate mitigation measures will be
                                                                                                                                 prepared, commensurate with potential issues,
                                                                                                                                 and informed by free and open public
                                                                                                                                 consultations.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-Aug-2013



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             The TFSU has previously developed safeguard tools applicable to all PAIP participants, including
Public Disclosure Copy




                             an Environmental and Social Management Framework and Operations Manual, whose provisos
                             will be included in the documentation of each project partner. Following response from PUMA on
                             the Preliminary Environmental Assessment Report, A draft Environmental Management Plan
                             consistent with the PAIP ESMF, and incorporating any GoS conditions to the Development
                             Consent will be produced during project preparation.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Christopher R. Bennett

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name:                                                  Date:
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Michel Kerf (SM)                                 Date: 25-Feb-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
