                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC280

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Africa                           Project ID:       P126974
                            Project Name:       Africa Higher Education Centers of Excellence Project (P126974)
                            Task Team           Andreas Blom
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           28-Oct-2013                      Estimated         19-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTEW                            Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Tertiary education (50%), Agricultural extension and research (15%), Health
                                                (15%), Oil and gas (10%), Other Mining and Extractive In dustries (10%)
                            Theme(s):           Education for the knowledge economy (70%), Technology diffusion (20%),
                                                Health system performance (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    158.30                      Total Bank Financing:         158.30
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                               0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                    158.30
                              Total                                                                          158.30
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the capacity of selected universities and their
                           partner institutions to deliver high quality training and applied research at the regional level within
                           areas of Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM), Health and Agriculture that are
                           of particular relevance to Africa’s development.
                         The higher order objective is to meet the labor market demands for skills within specific areas where
                         there are skill shortages affecting development outcomes and economic growth. Further, the project
                         will, on a demand basis, invest in well performing universities that can start building a foundation for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Africa to increase knowledge and technology absorption, and build knowledge-based competitive
                         advantages.
                         C. Project Description
                         The project consists of two components; the first is to build capacity in competitively selected
                         institutions to produce in-demand high skilled labor and applied research. The second will facilitate
                         the regional impact through talent and labor mobility and support of M&E and project coordination
                         activities.

                         Component 1: Producing in-demand specialized high skilled labor through regional specialization

                         Component 1 will support selected institutions to become Africa Centers of Excellence in STEM,
                         Health and Agricultural Sciences within areas that are pertinent to developing graduates and
                         knowledge solutions to enhance African development.

                         An estimated 5-10 higher education institutions will be selected through an open, transparent and
                         merit-based selection process to become an African Center of Excellence (ACE). The selection
                         process will entail three steps, namely; (a) Preparation of a long-list of potential ACE candidates
                         (higher education institutions) based on criteria of potential for excellence. This draft list will be
                         shared broadly for consultation; (b) call for proposals to those institutions on the long list, and (c)
                         evaluation of proposals by independent African and international experts , and (d) submission of
                         institutional proposals of a short-list of institutions.

                         To identify initial beneficiary institutions, a panel of African sectoral regional organization leaders
                         met with the Bank team in December 2011. There was agreement on a set of criteria, which will still
                         was further refined at another stakeholder consultation meeting in March 2012, as the basis for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         identification of an ACE- "long list". Institutions on the long list will have to demonstrate in their
                         EOI that they meet the requirements, mainly referring to quality, financial sustainability, regionality
                         and government commitment. Once selected, the institutions will received support in the form of two
                         sub-components:

                         Institutions will Sub-component 1: Building training and research capacity .This will be achieved by
                         implementation of an institutional plan designed by the institution and reviewed by external experts.
                         The plan will consist of an institutional specific mix of the following elements: (i) developing and
                         offering new specialized short-term programs for nearly or just graduated professionals to prepare
                         them for a job or for further professional development, possibly through e-learning; (ii) developing
                         new or strengthening existing education programs, in particular post-graduate programs; (iii)
                         increasing quality and relevance of existing teaching through revision of curricula based upon
                         industry advice; (iv) enhancing the research capacity of institutions to produce more applied research
                         within the focus areas of the ACE for innovation and R&D; (v) collaborate with partner institutions
                         located in other African countries or in the host country to strengthen their faculty qualifications,
                         offer access to specialized courses and learning equipment, collaborate on curriculum and other
                         education aspects; (vi) developing partnerships and outreach with the private sector and related
                         communities to ensure linkages with relevant regional labor market and communities; (vii)
                         international education and research collaboration; (viii) inte rnational benchmarking and
                         accreditation; (ix) improving management, governance, and leadership, and (x) improving equity and
                           reducing gender gaps, increasing admission of talented regional students and faculty.

                           This component will finance the following inputs: (i) shorter-term training of faculty and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           administrators, (ii) upgrading of qualifications of faculty (masters and PhD training); (iii) provision
                           of learning resources and research equipment, (iv) linkages with private sector to ensure relevance of
                           curricula and work-place learning, (v) minor rehabilitation for extension of existing facilities (the
                           need for construction will be reviewed during the preparation phase; however, no land acquisition
                           will be undertaken), (vi) workshops, operating costs, conferences, and travel, and (vii) consultant
                           services.


                           Component 2: Facilitating Regional Impact

                           Sub-component 2.1 Talent and faculty Mobility. This sub-component will facilitate talent mobility
                           and labor through scholarships and support to visiting students from partnership institutions (and vice
                           versa) to gain exposure to different learning environments whilst simultaneously building capacity in
                           the visiting institutions.

                           Sub-component 2.2 M&E and project management will aim to provide reasonable timely, sufficient,
                           precise, and reliable information to assess and improve the performance of the selected institutions
                           and the project. Further, there will be a strong focus on implementation support for project
                           management, information sharing, and fiduciary capacity building. It will also finance financial and
                           possibly technical audits.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The Project will be located in multiple Sub-Saharan African countries at few institutional sites of
                           higher learning in the disciplines of STEM, Agriculture, and Health sciences. These centers will be
                           selected as Africa Centers of Excellence with a small number of partner institutions. There will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           some rehabilitation and extensions of the selected institutions. The need for new construction will be
                           assessed as part of the project preparations. In general the project will seek to avoid new construction
                           as the project aims to focus on quality enhancements of the Centers of Excellence, where majority of
                           the funding will be on "softer items" i.e. faculty and curriculum development, scholarships and
                           learning resources being some of these quality enhancement activities. A clear covenant on limiting
                           the civil works allowed under the project will be established. There will be no new land acquisition
                           for the Centers of Excellence; the project will select existing institutions.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The institutional capacity of each of the aspiring Africa Centers of Excellence, relative to the
                           applicable safeguards, will be assessed during the pre-appraisal period.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Hocine Chalal (AFTN1)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Environmental and social impacts of
                           BP 4.01                                               rehabilitating academic/research institutions are
                                                                 expected to be moderate. ESMPs will be
                                                                 prepared for each candidate institution to
                                                                 manage environmental and social impacts.One
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 or two ESMPs will be prepared, consulted upon,
                                                                 and disclosed before appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    The project will include rehabilitation and
                                                                 minor construction within existing university/
                                                                 institution campus grounds,and thus natural
                                                                 habitats will not be affected by project activities.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project will not involve forestry activities.

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project activities will not involve the use of
                                                                 pesticides. This policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Physical cultural resources could be affected if a
                         BP 4.11                                 supported university is located near such
                                                                 resources or have physical cultural resources on
                                                                 their campus. Once the selection of the
                                                                 supported universities has been finalized, the
                                                                 specific location of campuses will be known and
                                                                 the potential impact on physical cultural
                                                                 resources will be assessed concretely. The
                                                                 screening for the sub projects will include
                                                                 “chance finds? and cultural resource
                                                                 management procedures. Triggering of this
                                                                 policy will be reviewed at the time of the
                                                                 Quality Enhancement Review and again at the
                                                                 Decision meeting.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   It is possible some of the supported universities
                                                                 are in areas inhabited by Indigenous Peoples.
                                                                 Once the selection of the supported universities
                                                                 has been finalized, as such, the specific location
                                                                 of campuses will be known and the potential
                                                                 impact on indigenous communities can be
                                                                 assessed. Indigenous Peoples Plans may be
                                                                 prepared as and when necessary during project
                                                                 implementation. The project screening process
                                                                 will indicate that the any projects that may
                                                                 negatively affect indigenous communities will
                                                                 not be financed by the ACE project.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No    Project activities are only expected to include
                         4.12                                    minor civil works since the project focuses on
                                                                 quality improvements and not on expanding
                                                                 capacity to more students. All civil works will
                                                                 take place on existing campus grounds. Sub-
                                                                 projects involving land acquisitions leading to
                                                                 involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of
                                                                                                                                 access to resources or livelihoods will not be
                                                                                                                                 financed by allowed for this project.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 04-Apr-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The candidate institutions interested to benefit from this program will be asked to prepare an
                                      Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). Such ESMP will be submitted together with
                                      the proposal for strengthening an institution. The ESMP will describe the construction/
                                      rehabilitation component of the proposal with the likely environmental and social impacts and will
                                      propose relevant mitigation measures and monitoring procedures. Guidelines for conducting
                                      environmental and social screening and Terms of Reference for preparing such ESMPs will be
                                      available to each participating institution . These ToR for ESMPs will include the screening
                                      process and provide a list of mitigation measures to facilitate environmental and social safeguards
                                      management for the ACE grants implementation. The Guidelines (in English and French) will be
                                      publicly disclosed before project appraisal as well as one or two ESMPs, which have been
                                      consulted upon. Before approval of each proposal, the ACE applying for the grant will prepare an
                                      ESMP (including consultations with the project stakeholders), which will be reviewed and
                                      approved by the Regional Coordination Secretariat . The ESMP then will be publicly disclosed in
                                      country and in the World Bank InfoShop. The Regional Coordination Secretariat will also be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      responsible for ensuring proper oversight of the adherence to of selected institutions to safeguards
                                      requirements set forth in the project level ESMPs.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Andreas Blom

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 09-May-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (SM)                                                                                            Date: 03-Oct-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
