                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA284
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Nov-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Brazil                                  Project ID:                       P121167
                              Project Name:                   Ceara Rural Sustainable Development and Competitiveness (P121167)
                              Task Team Leader:               Maria de Fatima de Sousa
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 23-Nov-2011                                   Estimated Board Date:             23-Feb-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  LCSAR                                   Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), Water supply (25%), Irrigation and drainage (15%), Crops
                                                              (10%), Information technology (10%)
                              Theme:                          Rural markets (35%), Rural services and infrastructure (25%), Trade facilitation and market access (15%), Micro,
                                                              Small and Medium En terprise support (15%), Rural policies and institutions (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                   50.00
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                     100.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                     150.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              Project Development objective: The proposed project would support the inclusive and sustainable growth objectives of the State#s strategic and
                              investment plans for rural areas, by (i) improving the sustainability of rural production, including irrigation, and rural income generation; and (ii)
                              contributing to the State#s efforts to ensure universal access to water services.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              3. Project Description

                              The Loan for this project phase is confirmed at US$100 million, with total project cost of US$150 million and duration of four years. The project
                              would be financed by a Specific Investment Loan (US$100 million) combined with counterpart financing from the State of Ceara (US$50 million).
                              The proposed three project components would support the inclusive growth and sustainable development themes expressed by the State of
                              Ceara, chiefly through facilitating and strengthening competitive and innovative productive clusters and activities, and contributing to the State#s
                              efforts to achieve universal access to basic rural infrastructure, primarily potable water and basic sanitation services.
                              The selection of targeted beneficiaries and areas would be based on explicit inclusion and exclusion factors, namely: (a) previous productive
                              experience and market demand (anchor enterprises) allied to potential improved competitiveness of selected beneficiaries / areas # clusters
                              assessment; (b) water scarcity vis-vis water resources availability (Pacto das uas Strategic Plan and Cintur das uas Program, both focusing on
                              improving and attempting to ensure universal access to potable water services), as well as integrating with basic sanitation services; and, (c)
                              environmental and economic sustainability. Additionally, the aggregation of Municipalities/producers and spatial continuity will be considered as
                              well as economic dynamism, water availability and complementarity with other policies, programs and projects (including other Bank-supported
                              projects), with transparent eligibility and prioritization criteria.
                              Furthermore, the project will address one of the main sources of gender and generational power imbalances that still prevail in rural Northeast
                              society due to its patriarchal culture, namely: the time poverty of women and youth resulting from their socially ascribed role as water fetchers for
                              households. Lessons learned from previous Bank operations in the rural Northeast show that women tend to be very active in community based
                              organizations and, unsurprisingly, to give priority to investments in potable water supply infrastructures when their voices are heard. Evidence from
                              a recent Bank supported exploratory study on gender and generational issues in the rural Northeast suggest that investments made in potable
                              water supply infrastructures # especially when combined with productive investments # reduce time poverty, open new study and labor
                              opportunities for women and youth, contribute to income generation, and promote changes in gender and generational perspectives. The new
                              operation will monitor and assess changes in patterns of time use allocation and the inclusion of women and youth in Rural Financial Services.
                              Component 1: Economic Inclusion (US$70.0 million, of which US$45.5 million IBRD financing) would support actions aimed at strengthening and
                              consolidating productive chains. Actions will be directed towards productive insertion in markets or increased participation of small farmers and
                              small non-agriculture rural producers in the chains of higher added value, contributing to make these producers competitive, and economically,
                              socially and environmentally sustainable. Specifically, this component will support: (i) preparation of business plans and implementation of
                              proposals selected through public bids; (ii) introduction of improved irrigation technologies; and (iii) environmental conservation and rehabilitation
                              investments for piloting the payment for environmental services (PES) in the rural landscape.
                              Proposals will be selected in each project area through public bids directed at the priorities identified through the studies on target production
                              clusters (e.g., irrigated fruit production, goats and sheep, fish aquaculture, and honey, among other clusters to be identified during project
                              implementation) carried out during project preparation, as well as studies on the participation of family agriculture in the production chains, and
                              according to the State#s Territorial Development Plans.

                                                                                                                                                                          Page 1 of 8
                         Component 2: Water Services (US$50.0 million, of which US$32.5 million IBRD financing) would support the State#s efforts to universalize
                         access to potable water and basic sanitation services in rural areas. Specifically, Component 2 will support: (i) extension of potable water and
                         basic sanitation services: extend the potable water supply and basic sanitation infrastructure services in rural Ceara; (ii) scaling-up of innovative
                         management models for decentralized potable water and basic sanitation administration and service delivery; and (iii) introduction of pilot practices
                         for efficient water reuse and for environmental rehabilitation or conservation activities aiming at protecting water bodies.
                         Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Project Management (US$23.2 million, of which US$17.4 million IBRD financing) would support a set
                         of activities to strengthen beneficiary organizational structures and public functions that are critical to ensure the competitiveness and sustainability
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of project investments. Specifically, Component 3 would finance: (i) the technical and administrative management of the proposed project,
                         including equipment and consultants, and safeguards management plans; (ii) updates to SDA#s Management Information System for use in
                         project monitoring; (iii) the development and implementation of a training program for project beneficiaries; (iv) technical assistance to rural
                         producers; and (v) the development and implementation of a communication plan to disseminate information on the project.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The area for the proposed project will be implemented in all 13 territories statewide. However the planning unit will be defined and investments will
                         focus in predefined areas combining two main requirements: (i) water resources availability and (ii) linkage with productive clusters and markets #
                         private and public.
                         Additionally other key factors will be studied to contribute to an appropriate selection of investment areas, such as: (i) rhythm of economic growth
                         in the last decade; (ii) population density in 2010; (iii) loss of rural and urban population in the last decade; (iv) areas susceptible to desertification
                         process; (v) spatial distribution of priority clusters; (vi) synergies with other relevant programs; and also (vii) preliminary assessment of potential
                         outcomes of proposed interventions. These studies will be prepared by the borrower with the World Bank support.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Judith M. Lisansky (LCSSO)
                         Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSSO)
                         Clarisse Torrens Borges Dall Acqua (LCSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                     Yes         No      Explanation
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                   ✖                 One of the assumptions of the project is the adoption of environmental
                                                                                                 assessment as a crosscutting theme for all the others, focused on the practice
                                                                                                 of proper environmental management and explicit attention to biodiversity,
                                                                                                 climate change and environmental services.
                                                                                                 Based on the assessment of potential impacts under the proposed project, a
                                                                                                 Category B designation is proposed. As the exact type and nature of
                                                                                                 subprojects to finance small-scale community potable water and basic
                                                                                                 sanitation infrastructure (Component 2) and business plans of agricultural and
                                                                                                 not-agricultural production chains (Component 1) would not be known ex ante
                                                                                                 (i.e., prior to project appraisal), the Borrower would prepare an Environmental
                                                                                                 and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF would draw on
                                                                                                 lessons from previous operations implemented by SDA and also other projects
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 as PRODHAM, PROAGUA, PROGERIRH and FECOP implemented by Ceara
                                                                                                 State, with good practices of soil conservation and recovery of degraded
                                                                                                 areas. The ESMF would include an independent social assessment was
                                                                                                 conducted by the client addressing (a) the most vulnerable groups of the state
                                                                                                 rural population, (b) the issues related to the main challenges and
                                                                                                 opportunities faced by family farmers to access the market and be
                                                                                                 competitively inserted on the most profitable productive chains that will be
                                                                                                 supported by the Bank operation # goat breeding, beekeeping and fish farming
                                                                                                 # and (c) a special case study of the livelihood conditions of rural families who
                                                                                                 have been previously resettled by the construction of dams and are eligible for
                                                                                                 the project#s sub-component on irrigation.
                                                                                                 The ESMF will focus on project-specific aspects, such as institutional
                                                                                                 arrangements and capacity, regulatory framework, environmental screening
                                                                                                 procedures and criteria and licensing. The ESMF will also provide guidance
                                                                                                 on: (i) identifying the potential impacts associated with the typology of
                                                                                                 subproject investments; (ii) minimizing potential impacts for productive and
                                                                                                 infrastructure projects; (iii) specifying procedures to be used in assessing
                                                                                                 environmental and social impacts during the subproject design stage; and (iv)
                                                                                                 addressing identified impacts during the subproject implementation. The
                                                                                                 ESMF will provide baseline scenarios of agricultural production and other
                                                                                                 productive chains of interest as well as an in-depth analysis of water resources
                                                                                                 in the region, to properly select and prioritize investments. The ESMF would
                                                                                                 also present a budget and implementation schedule, both of which would be
                                                                                                 integrated into the overall project operation plan.
                                                                                                 The Borrower prepared a draft Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                                 Framework (ESMF) for the project drawing on lessons from previous
                                                                                                 operations implemented by SDA and after a widely consulted upon document
                                                                                                 prior to being finalized. A final draft ESMF was submitted to the Bank, and will
                                                                                                 be disseminated in the Infoshop and on the Borrower#s web site (www.sda.ce.
                                                                                                 gov.br) prior to project appraisal,
                                                                                                 Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
                                                                                                 One of the assumptions of the project is the adoption of environmental

                                                                                                                                                                         Page 2 of 8
                         6. Safeguard Policies Triggered   Yes   No   Explanation
                                                                      assessment as a crosscutting theme for all the others, focused on the practice
                                                                      of proper environmental management and explicit attention to biodiversity,
                                                                      climate change and environmental services.
                                                                      Based on the assessment of potential impacts under the proposed project, a
                                                                      Category B designation is proposed. As the exact type and nature of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      subprojects to finance small-scale community potable water and basic
                                                                      sanitation infrastructure (Component 2) and business plans of agricultural and
                                                                      not-agricultural production chains (Component 1) would not be known ex ante
                                                                      (i.e., prior to project appraisal), the Borrower would prepare an Environmental
                                                                      and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF would draw on
                                                                      lessons from previous operations implemented by SDA and also other projects
                                                                      as PRODHAM, PROAGUA, PROGERIRH and FECOP implemented by Ceara
                                                                      State, with good practices of soil conservation and recovery of degraded
                                                                      areas. The ESMF would include an independent social assessment was
                                                                      conducted by the client addressing (a) the most vulnerable groups of the state
                                                                      rural population, (b) the issues related to the main challenges and
                                                                      opportunities faced by family farmers to access the market and be
                                                                      competitively inserted on the most profitable productive chains that will be
                                                                      supported by the Bank operation # goat breeding, beekeeping and fish farming
                                                                      # and (c) a special case study of the liv elihood conditions of rural families who
                                                                      have been previously resettled by the construction of dams and are eligible for
                                                                      the project#s sub-component on irrigation.
                                                                      The ESMF will focus on project-specific aspects, such as institutional
                                                                      arrangements and capacity, regulatory framework, environmental screening
                                                                      procedures and criteria and licensing. The ESMF will also provide guidance
                                                                      on: (i) identifying the potential impacts associated with the typology of
                                                                      subproject investments; (ii) minimizing potential impacts for productive and
                                                                      infrastructure projects; (iii) specifying procedures to be used in assessing
                                                                      environmental and social impacts during the subproject design stage; and (iv)
                                                                      addressing identified impacts during the subproject implementation. The
                                                                      ESMF will provide baseline scenarios of agricultural production and other
                                                                      productive chains of interest as well as an in-depth analysis of water resources
                                                                      in the region, to properly select and prioritize investments. The ESMF would
                                                                      also present a budget and implementation schedule, both of which would be
                                                                      integrated into the overall project operation plan.
                                                                      The Borrower prepared a draft Environmental and Social Management
                                                                      Framework (ESMF) for the project drawing on lessons from previous
                                                                      operations implemented by SDA and after a widely consulted upon document
                                                                      prior to being finalized. A final draft ESMF was submitted to the Bank, and
                                                                      will be disseminated in the Infoshop and on the Borrower#s web site (www.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      sda.ce.gov.br) prior to project appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       ✖          While activities are not planned for Areas of Permanent Preservation (APP)
                                                                      and Legal Reserves (RL), activities under the project components should
                                                                      nonetheless lead to positive impacts on natural habitats, through the direct
                                                                      protection and rehabilitation of these areas, following the provisions of the
                                                                      Brazilian Forest Code. Despite the expected positive impacts, the ESMF
                                                                      should include clear guidance regarding direct and indirect impacts on natural
                                                                      habitats.
                                                                      OP 4.04 is triggered and all planning activities that may affect natural habitats
                                                                      must follow World Bank policies, identifying monitoring and management
                                                                      activities to prevent or mitigate any possible negative impact.
                                                                      The project has provisions to regenerate and reforest water-producing
                                                                      systems (mainly riparian vegetation), benefiting also local biodiversity
                                                                      preservation and restoration. Special attention should be given to areas where
                                                                      desertification process was already identified by the State (IPECE, 2010).
                                                                      These amount to 30,000 km2 representing 23% of the Caatinga biome of
                                                                      Ceara.
                                                                      Subprojects resulting in any significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                      natural habitats .
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                ✖          It is not expected that project implementation will have negative impacts on
                                                                      forest resources. Subprojects with the potential for conversion or degradation
                                                                      of natural forest or other natural habitats that are likely to have significant
                                                                      adverse environmental impacts which are sensitive, diverse or unprecedented
                                                                      are ineligible.
                                                                      The project also excludes activities that require commercial forest harvesting,
                                                                      wood extraction or firewood use in the production chain. Activities resulting in
                                                                      deforestation and loss of native vegetation cover will not be allowed.
                                                                      The project would contribute to conserve and restore natural vegetation,
                                                                      generating positive impacts through the maintenance and/or recovery of
                                                                      natural vegetation on rural private land holdings on steep slopes, along water
                                                                      courses (up to a certain distance from the riparian margin) or in the vicinity of

                                                                                                                                            Page 3 of 8
                                                                      springs. Additionally, the project would contribute to conserve and/or restore a
                                                                      set-aside area called Legal Reserve (Reserva Legal # RL) in these private
                                                                      holdings.
                                                                      As already mentioned, the subproject selection procedures would be
                                                                      consistent with the Brazilian Forest Code. Typical activities should support
                                                                      mainly conservation and restoration activities, and should be planned and
                                                                      executed in such a way to minimize or prevent negative impacts on forest
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                  ✖   Pest Management (OP 4.09)
                                                                      The project would not finance any pesticides or other chemical amendments
                                                                      that would trigger OP 4.09. Nevertheless, minor amounts of pesticides would
                                                                      probably continue to be used in the short term by a small portion of targeted
                                                                      small-scale farms. The project would encourage and support technical
                                                                      assistance for the adoption of organic agriculture and of proven, economically-
                                                                      and environmentally-sustainable Integrated Pest Management (IPM).
                                                                      The need to use pesticides or herbicides should be indicated in each
                                                                      subproject, as well as the IPM measures to be adopted. When the use of
                                                                      pesticides or herbicides is justified, an analysis of potential negative impacts
                                                                      resulting from the use of these chemicals and the risks associated with the
                                                                      inappropriate handling or storing of their containers should be conducted. The
                                                                      projects should also include measures to reduce those risks, in compliance
                                                                      with the Law 7802/89.
                                                                      A Pest Management Plan (PMP) is under preparation and will be incorporated
                                                                      into the ESMF and the Project Operational Manual. The PMP would make use
                                                                      of the World Health Organization#s Recommended Classification of Pesticides
                                                                      by Hazard and Guidelines to Classification (Geneva; WHO 1994-95). The
                                                                      PMP would also exclude finance under the proposed project for formulated
                                                                      products that fall into WHO classes IA and IB, or formulation of products in
                                                                      Class II, if: (i) the country lacks restrictions on their distribution and use; or (ii)
                                                                      they are likely to be used by, or be accessible to, lay personnel, farmers, or
                                                                      others without training, equipment, and facilities to handle, store, and apply
                                                                      these products properly.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   ✖   Project implementation would not cause any negative impact on known
                                                                      physical cultural resources (PCR). Proposed subprojects with expected direct
                                                                      and negative impact on known archeological, paleontological, historical or
                                                                      other culturally significant sites will not be eligible.
                                                                      Brazil has a well-developed legislative and normative framework, which is
                                                                      under Federal oversight by the National Institute for Protection of Historical
                                                                      and Archeological Sites (IPHAN). Ceara also has the State Agency, Regional
                                                                      IPHAN (4a Superintendcia Estadual do IPHAN) and Secretaria da Cultura,
                                                                      tasked with the identification, restoration and protection of PCR in the State.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      The #chance findings# procedures would be included in the Project
                                                                      Operational Manual for guidance during project implementation, particularly in
                                                                      regions with PCR sites already mapped by Regional IPHAN. SDA may engage
                                                                      Secretaria da Cultura or other entities with the proven experience to implement
                                                                      #chance findings# procedures.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            ✖   There are about 22,000 indigenous peoples recognized or claiming recognition
                                                                      in the State of Ceara. They comprise 12 ethnic groups (Anac Canind Gavi,
                                                                      Jenipapo-Kanind Kalaba, Kanind Kariri, Pitaguari, Potiguara, Tabajara,
                                                                      Tapeba, and Trememb. Data from 2006 (PNAD/IBGE) show that 59% of the
                                                                      indigenous population lived below the poverty line at that time. On average,
                                                                      indigenous people earned the smallest monthly per capita income equivalent
                                                                      to less than 24% of the minimum wage. Currently, the State#s indigenous
                                                                      population is scattered across 81 communities located within 18 municipalities,
                                                                      although 80% of them are concentrated in five municipalities: Caucaia, Crate,
                                                                      Itarema, Maracanaand Monsenhor Tabosa. Most of the Indigenous Lands in
                                                                      Ceara have not yet been fully regularized. Insuficient and/or unsecure land
                                                                      tenure, precarious access to public services and fragile institutional
                                                                      organization, low productivity # due to insuficient technical assistance and
                                                                      rudimentary technologies and natural resources management # and water
                                                                      scarcity have been identified as major constraints on indigenous peoples#
                                                                      livelihoods.
                                                                      As site-specific project investments cannot be defined at the preparation
                                                                      stage, the client is preparing an Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework. The
                                                                      client has carried out a social assessment and engaged in a process of free,
                                                                      prior and informed consultations with indigenous peoples. A draft IPPF # which
                                                                      documents the consultation process, incorporates indigenous inputs and
                                                                      recommendations, and proposes adequate mechanisms for answering
                                                                      indigenous peoples# demands and enhancing their access to project benefits
                                                                      # has been submitted to the Bank and is under revision by the client according
                                                                      to comments and recommendations made by the Bank. The IPPF was formally
                                                                      submitted to the Bank in October 27, 2011 and will be publicly disseminated in

                                                                                                                                                Page 4 of 8
                                                                                                      the Infoshop and on the Borrower#s web site (www.sda.ce.gov.br), prior to
                                                                                                      project appraisal.
                                                                                                      Preliminary emphasis on capacity building and institutional strengthening
                                                                                                      activities under Component 3 will contribute to engage indigenous peoples and
                                                                                                      increase their access to project benefits and other public services. Component
                                                                                                      1 activities # available for those groups who have access to land # will
                                                                                                      contribute to overcome production bottlenecks. Finally, Component 2 activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                      will contribute to overcome potable water scarcity.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                 ✖                  It is expected that the project will not cause physical resettlement or economic
                                                                                                      displacement. Nonetheless, some investments in productive infrastructures to
                                                                                                      strengthen productive chains, water supply systems and natural disaster risk
                                                                                                      management may require land acquisition and, potentially, might cause
                                                                                                      adverse effects of physical and economic displacement, although small in
                                                                                                      scope and locally confined. As site-specific project investments cannot be
                                                                                                      defined at the preparation stage, the client is preparing a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                      Framework for the project. A first draft RPF was consulted and submitted to
                                                                                                      the Bank for review and is being revised according to comments and
                                                                                                      recommendations made by the Bank. The RFP was formally submitted to the
                                                                                                      Bank in October 27, 2011 and will be publicly disseminated in the Infoshop
                                                                                                      and on the Borrower#s web site (www.sda.ce.gov.br), prior to project
                                                                                                      appraisal.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                           ✖                  It is not expected that the investments in potable water supply and irrigation
                                                                                                      projects will depend on the storage capacity and operation of existing dams.
                                                                                                      Considering: (i) the high provision of water resources infrastructure installed in
                                                                                                      the state over the past years, including the World Bank financing, and (ii) the
                                                                                                      current standard of excellence in water resources management, with good
                                                                                                      practices already incorporated into the SRH and COGERH routine procedures;
                                                                                                      the OP 4.37 # Safety of Dams was triggered as a precautionary measure, not
                                                                                                      to limit any possibility of using existing water sources. However, no new dam
                                                                                                      construction will be financed by this operation.
                                                                                                      The borrower is preparing a conceptual framework of procedures to be
                                                                                                      adopted during the implementation phase of the project. The borrower should
                                                                                                      arrange for one or more independent dam specialists to: (a) inspect and
                                                                                                      evaluate the safety status of the existing dam, its appurtenances, and its
                                                                                                      performance history; (b) review and evaluate the owner#s operation and
                                                                                                      maintenance procedures; and (c) provide a written report of findings and
                                                                                                      recommendations for any remedial work or safety-related measures necessary
                                                                                                      to upgrade the existing dam to an acceptable standard of safety. Previous
                                                                                                      assessments of dam safety or recommendations of improvements needed in
                                                                                                      existing dam may also be accepted by the Bank, if the borrower provides
                                                                                                      evidence that (a) an effective dam safety program is already in operation, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                      (b) full-level inspections and dam safety assessments of the existing dam,
                                                                                                      which are satisfactory to the Bank, have already been conducted and
                                                                                                      documented.
                               Projects on International Waters OP/BP 7.50                    ✖
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                          ✖

                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                 The project does not entail any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative impacts.
                                 The proposed project interventions will be small-scale, oriented demand-driven investments (i.e., subprojects). These subproject would not
                                 cause significant adverse environmental impacts, related mainly to infrastructure development (i.e., potable water, basic sanitation and rural
                                 roads), new agricultural practices (i.e., product diversification, conservation agriculture, promotion of value added products, and product
                                 certification) and non-agricultural activities such as small-scale processing units. Potential adverse impacts will be limited, site-specific, largely
                                 reversible, and readily and reliably mitigated through known methods. The productive subproject selection will be consistent with: (i) the
                                 national, state and local legislation concerning Brazilian Forest Code, natural habitats and protected areas (Law 4771/65; SNUC # Law
                                 9985/00, Decree 4340/02 and Decree 5758/06); and (ii) World Bank safeguards policies.
                                 Negative impacts are mostly expected to result from small-scale construction activities under Component 1. The types of interventions
                                 preliminarily identified include: (i) developing and implementing business plans for productive chains of organized smallholder producers,
                                 initially targeting, but not limited to, small ruminants, beekeeping and fish culture, (ii) innovative chains and non-agricultural productive activities,
                                 as agro-ecology and environmental services (subcomponents 1.1 and 1.3), (iii) works for distributing potable water and basic sanitation to
                                 aggregated rural communities or individual systems for scattered areas (tanks), (iv) works to improve the infrastructure for small-scale irrigation
                                 along existing sources of water (subcomponents 1.2), and (v) environmental management strengthening program, addressing good practices
                                 for construction and operational procedures, including actions of land and environmental regularization, licensing and certification of projects;
                                 and establishing a strategic network for risk and natural disasters management, focused on severe droughts and floods; and, also training
                                 requirements to guarantee management capacity (Component 3). The proposed investment in potable water supply and irrigation will occur
                                 only in areas with adequate water availability and capacity to meet the future demand.
                                 Although these impacts are expected to be small, transitory and of short duration, the ESMF will specify guidelines and procedures to be
                                                                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 8
                           followed by the construction contractors, covering aspects such as location of construction camps, clearance of vegetation, noise, traffic control,
                           safety signaling, disposal of construction debris and waste material to be incorporated in the bidding documents for civil works. Compliance with
                           the practices outlined in the Project Operational Manual would be a contractual obligation of the contractors. Regarding small ruminants and
                           irrigation activities under Component 1, some typology of potential impacts will arise from the suite of potential subproject activities, related to
                           desertification process and vulnerability of semi-arid climate change, exploitation of native vegetation, use of rudimentary management
                           practices, increasing demand of firewood for tannery or even the potential degradation of surface and groundwater by entrainment of soil
                           caused by poorly dimensioned irrigation, potential increase in salinity and improper disposal of packaging of chemicals, with demands for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           appropriate mitigation measures.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                           No significant indirect or long-term or cumulative impacts are foreseen under the project. The sub-projects will be subjected to a rigorous
                           screening process # according to criteria and procedures defined in the ESMF, the Involuntary Resettlement Framework and the Indigenous
                           Peoples Policy Framework # to ensure that unintended negative environmental and social impacts are avoided or minimized.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                           N/A. No significant adverse impacts are foreseen for the project as designed.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                           The project implementation procedures will adopt strict environmental screens to ensure that approved subprojects demonstrate low potential
                           for negative impact. The ESMF would assess the most common types of intervention expected, in order to propose mitigation measures a priori.

                           To minimize expected adverse impacts on environmental and social conditions, there is a negative list with types of project activities that will not
                           be supported by the loan, including: (i) productive activities that require commercial forest harvesting, wood extraction or firewood use in the
                           production chain; (ii) interventions that include purchase of equipment for use in tropical forests; (iii) interventions that include the use of
                           chemicals in categories IA and IB defined by WHO; (iv) interventions that promote degradation of critical natural habitats, deforestation or loss
                           of native vegetation; (v) interventions in the productive chains located in areas under the process of desertification without the adoption of
                           appropriate management plans; (iv) interventions in areas of high risk of natural disasters; (vi) interventions in areas of dispute and /or petition
                           for recognition as indigenous lands; and (vii) interventions in water supply and irrigation that rely on existing dams 15 meters or more in height.
                           Besides negative types listed above, the State has presented the already approved and confirmed types below, according to public
                           consultation, even more restrictive, including among others: (i) interventions in productive chains in areas of desertification without the adoption
                           of agro-ecological management plans appropriate to the Caatinga; and (ii) activities located in areas susceptible to desertification and loss of
                           population, without planned mitigating actions and agro-ecological management of coexistence with the semiarid.

                           The project plans to establish a technical committee (as under the previous RPRP) with the specific purpose of evaluating subprojects#
                           environmental eligibility, and monitoring implementation compliance with Bank safeguards policy throughout the subproject cycle. The terms of
                           reference for these studies was submitted to Bank review and discussed with the borrower during the mission of May 9 to 13, 2011.

                           SDA has capacity on safeguards management given their experience on the S JosI and II projects and other projects implemented by others
                           government units. Regarding climate changes, IPECE (Instituto de Pesquisas e Estudos Estraticos) # the state agency which is responsible for
                           studies, researches, evaluations; socioeconomic and geographic information of the state, as well acting as a knowledge management institution
                           # and FUNCEME will work closely with SDA in strategic studies to support alternative scenarios for production and natural resources use, as
Public Disclosure Copy




                           well as climate vulnerability and adaptation. Additionally, the State Government - through the GEF Mata Branca Project # is already working in
                           one of the most vulnerable areas (Sert dos Inhamuns) using a Strategic Environmental Assessment approach.
                           The specific measures taken by the Borrower to address each of the safeguard issues are described in the following.

                           OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. The activities most likely to cause indirect environmental impacts are related to interventions with small
                           magnitude impacts. These impacts are most likely to be minimal, site-specific, reversible adverse environmental impacts and can be readily and
                           adequately mitigated. In consequence, the project is classified as Category B. A satisfactory Environmental and Social Management
                           Framework (ESMF) was prepared and a final ESMF will be submitted by the Borrower for Bank#s assessment and approve as a mandatory
                           safeguard policy, prior to project appraisal. The ESMF lays out the principles and procedures for assessing all sub-projects# potential
                           environmental and/or social impacts. It has sub-projects screening and eligibility criteria to make sure that no sub-project with high potential
                           impacts can be eligible. The ESMF defines mitigation, supervision, monitoring and evaluation procedures applicable to all types of sub-projects
                           described above, to ensure the effective and timely implementation of environmental and social safeguards during the project#s
                           implementation. Site-specific assessments will be conducted and impact mitigation plans drawn up, as needed, during subproject preparation
                           which complies with the overall project safeguard framework.
                           OP 4.04 Natural Habitats. The Natural Habitats safeguard was triggered on a precautionary basis and must be applied if impacts on natural
                           habitats are identified, or anticipated, during project preparation, or if they arise during the Project implementation. The environmental part of
                           the conceptual framework (ESMF) addresses the Natural Habitats safeguard requirements, screens out all subprojects resulting in any
                           significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats, and includes provisions to regenerate and reforest water-producing systems
                           (mainly riparian vegetation), benefiting also local biodiversity preservation and restoration # special attention should be given to areas where
                           desertification process was already identified by the State.
                           OP 4.36 Forests. The Forests safeguard was also triggered. The ESMF addresses the Forests safeguard requirements to be considered in all
                           subprojects that may have indirect environmental implications and has classified as ineligible all subprojects with the potential for conversion or
                           degradation of natural forest or other natural habitats that are likely to have significant adverse environmental impacts which are sensitive,
                           diverse or unprecedented. The subproject selection procedures would be consistent with the Brazilian Forest Code. Typical activities should
                           support mainly conservation and restoration activities, and should be planned and executed in such a way to minimize or prevent negative
                           impacts on forest areas.
                           OP 4.09 Pest Management: The project would not finance any pesticides or other chemical amendments that would trigger OP 4.09.
                           Nevertheless, minor amounts of pesticides would probably continue to be used in the short term by a small portion of targeted small-scale
                           farms. The project would encourage and support technical assistance for the adoption of organic agriculture and of proven, economically- and
                           environmentally-sustainable Integrated Pest Management (IPM) practices. The need to use pesticides or herbicides should be indicated in each
                           proposed investment, as well as the IPM measures to be adopted. When the use of pesticides or herbicides is justified, an analysis of potential
                           negative impacts resulting from the use of these chemicals and the risks associated with the inappropriate handling or storing of their containers
                           should be conducted. The proposals should also include measures to reduce those risks, in compliance with Law 7802/89. A Pest Management
                                                                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 8
                           Plan (PMP) is under preparation and will be incorporated into the ESMF and the Project Operational Manual.
                           OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples. Indigenous peoples are eligible for all activities supported by the Project. The Indigenous Peoples safeguard was
                           triggered and the borrower is preparing an Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (IPPF) through a participatory methodology that includes free,
                           prior and informed consultations with indigenous peoples. The final IPPF will incorporate indigenous peoples# inputs and recommendations and
                           document their broad support to project activities. Project investments in indigenous communities will adopt a demand-driven approach and
                           based on indigenous peoples requests and consent.
                           OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources. Brazil and Ceara have a well-developed legislative and normative framework for protection of historical
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and archeological sites. Nevertheless, the Physical Cultural Resources safeguard has been incorporated in a precautionary basis into the
                           environmental screening section of the ESMF and the #chance findings# procedures would be included in the Project Operational Manual for
                           guidance during project implementation, particularly in regions with PCR sites already mapped by Regional IPHAN. SDA may engage
                           Secretaria da Cultura or other entities with the proven experience to implement #chance findings# procedures.
                           OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. This policy was also triggered as land acquisition may be required for some investments in productive
                           infrastructures to strengthen productive chains, water supply systems and natural disaster risk management may require land acquisition and,
                           potentially. It is expected that these investments will not cause physical resettlement or economic displacement. In the eventual cases they
                           have such adverse effects, they might be small in scope and locally confined. An Involuntary Resettlement Policy Framework has been
                           prepared by the client and consulted in the scope of the ESMF. This framework defines the principles and guidelines to be followed by the
                           executors of all activities that might eventually require land acquisition, sets clear screening criteria through which involuntary resettlement
                           issues can be identified and monitored by the executing agencies, the client and the Bank throughout project#s implementation, and stimulates
                           the option for free, voluntary, and market-oriented procedures of land acquisitions in the scope of the activities supported by the project.
                           Op 4.37 Safety of Dams. It is not expected that the investments in water supply and irrigation projects will depend on the storage capacity and
                           operation of existing dams. No new dam construction will be financed by this operation. Nonetheless, the OP 4.37 # Safety of Dams was
                           triggered as a precautionary measure, not to limit any possibility of using existing water sources and the borrower is preparing a conceptual
                           framework of procedures to be adopted during the implementation phase of the project. The borrower should arrange for one or more
                           independent dam specialists to: (a) inspect and evaluate the safety status of the existing dam, its appurtenances, and its performance history;
                           (b) review and evaluate the owner#s operation and maintenance procedures; and (c) provide a written report of findings and recommendations
                           for any remedial work or safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the existing dam to an acceptable standard of safety. Previous
                           assessments of dam safety or recommendations of improvements needed in existing dam may also be accepted by the Bank, if the borrower
                           provides evidence that (a) an effective dam safety program is already in operation, and (b) full-level inspections and dam safety assessments of
                           the existing dam, which are satisfactory to the Bank, have already been conducted and documented.

                           Other safeguard policies (OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways and OP 7.60 Projects in Disputed Areas) are not applicable.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                           There will be an array of beneficiary stakeholders. They include family farmers, artisans fishermen, and traditional communities; community
                           associations and producer organizations; small entrepreneurs and rural laborers; rural and urban populations who suffer with the shortage of
                           potable water. These stakeholders have been consulted throughout the preparation stage. Preliminary meetings were in all territories within the
                           state and provided inputs to define project#s objectives and priorities. A set of meetings were later held with representatives of state agencies
                           and civil society organizations to present the project and its safeguard instruments. The inputs gathered from these meetings have been
                           critically incorporated to the project#s ESMF. Furthermore, special meetings with indigenous peoples representatives and organizations as well
                           as with state agencies in charge of indigenous policies have been held in preparation for an specific workshop in which indigenous peoples #
                           representatives from the large majority of indigenous communities and ethnic groups in the state # have been (a) heard on the main constraints
Public Disclosure Copy




                           to their livelihoods, (b) presented to the Project design, (c) debated its objectives, principles and procedures, and, principally, (d) provided inputs
                           to the IPPF. These inputs have been critically incorporated in the IPPF, which documents the consultation process and the broad support from
                           indigenous peoples to the Project.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                              Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                 27-Oct-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                             01-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                              01-Nov-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                              Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                 27-Oct-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                             01-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                              01-Nov-2011
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                              Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                 27-Oct-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                             01-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                              01-Nov-2011
                          Pest Management Plan


                                                                                                                                                                      Page 7 of 8
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    27-Oct-2011
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                01-Nov-2011
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 01-Nov-2011
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
Public Disclosure Copy




                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            It is part of the Environmental Assessment/EMP

                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                              If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                              If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are                   Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                              Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                              Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on               Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                              If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by           Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the             Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                              Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for              Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              certification system?
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements been made                      Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              for public awareness and training?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language             Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for          Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard           Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same               Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Signed and submitted by:                                                  Name                                                        Date
                            Task Team Leader:                     Maria de Fatima de Sousa Amazonas                                                01-Nov-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                       Ethel Sennhauser (SM)                                                            08-Nov-2011
                            Comments:      Cleared




                                                                                                                                                                          Page 8 of 8
