                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC4839

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-May-2013, 13-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Benin                            Project ID:      P132667
                            Project Name:      BJ-Youth Employment (FY14) (P132667)
                            Task Team          John Van Dyck
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          02-Dec-2013                      Estimated        27-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTSW                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Improving labor markets (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        35.00               Total Bank Financing:            35.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                             Financing Gap:                    0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  35.00
                              Total                                                                        35.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the proposed project is to improve the employability of youth in Benin.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project will have three components:

                           Component 1: Improving Employability through Apprenticeships ($15.0 million). This component
                           will support the improvement of the employability of unemployed and underemployed youth to
                         access apprenticeships in skilled trades, and help the Government and private sector trade
                         associations to implement plans to provide nationally recognized certification for skills learned in
                         such apprenticeships.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 1.1: Vouchers for apprenticeships ($12.0 million). Many youth, particularly poor
                         and disadvantaged youth with lower levels of education, have difficulty in paying the significant
                         fees, as well as basic living expenses, that are involved in apprenticeships. In recognition of this,
                         Government is already making funds available through the Continuing Professional Education and
                         Apprenticeship Fund (Fonds de Développement de la Formation Professionnelle Continue et de
                         l’Apprentissage – FODEFCA) to assist apprentices with the payment of fees. Currently, this
                         involves cost-sharing between the Government and the apprentice, typically with the apprentice
                         covering about 10 percent of costs and the Government the remaining 90 percent through the
                         FODEFCA. Of the Government portion, over the past decade, about 60 percent has come from
                         domestic resources, with the remainder coming from donor financing. Given the limited ability of
                         most potential apprentices with low levels of education to pay for the costs of an apprenticeship,
                         more financial support for apprenticeship is required in order to provide access to apprenticeships for
                         this target group.

                         The project will support vouchers to co-finance the cost of apprenticeships, in combination with
                         Government’s own resources and the apprentice’s contribution. Given the preponderance of young
                         women among the underemployed, the sub-component would aim for at least 50 percent of the
                         supported apprentices to be young women.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Support for improving the quality of apprenticeships ($3.0 million). The
                         Certificat de Qualification aux Métiers (CQM) was conceptualized as a way to provide a nationally-
                         recognized certification to youth with lower levels of education after completion of apprenticeship
                         programs. Unlike the Certificat de Qualification Professionnelle (CQP) which targets youth who
                         have at least completed primary school, the CQM is targeted to youth who have not finished primary
                         school. While the CQP program is fully operational, the CQM program is yet to be put into place,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         leaving a void for youth with lower levels of education who are seeking accreditation in a trade.
                         Furthermore, to improve the prospects for employment after apprenticeships, there is a need for life
                         skills training and support for placement of youths in employment or self-employment.

                         The project will (i) support the definition of the core skills for trades with significant economic
                         potential, and the development of a standardized national test for the CQM in each such trade, in
                         collaboration with artisanal trade associations, key Ministries, and local governments; (ii) support the
                         development of a program of life and money skills training to accompany the technical training in the
                         apprenticeships; and (iii) provide support to local governments to assist in the placement of youth
                         completing apprenticeships.

                         Component 2: Support for Self-Employment ($15 million)

                         This component would support the National Employment Agency (Agence Nationale pour l’Emploi
                         – ANPE) to reform and scale up its existing programs to assist youth in entrepreneurship and self-
                         employment. The target group will be predominantly underemployed youth with lower levels of
                         education, especially young women, with a focus on the non-farm informal sector. Until now,
                         ANPE’s support for entrepreneurship and self-employment has been targeted mainly at highly-
                         educated youth with university diplomas, or at least secondary schooling. Even though such youth
                         dispose of high levels of human capital and economic potential, they also only represent a minority
                         of the total population, and a smaller share still of the vulnerable and underemployed. The project
                         will support ANPE’s vision to expand its support for entrepreneurship and self-employment to cover
                         beneficiaries with a broader range of education and income levels, while maintaining its support for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         university graduates.

                         To cover a larger target population, including less educated and poorer youth, the ANPE’s Self-
                         Employment Support Program (Programme d’Appui à l’Emploi Indépendant – PAEI), which aims to
                         train, assist with the development of a business plan, and finance entrepreneurs, will be reformed to
                         create multiple “tracks? that would target youth with different education, skill, and income levels.
                         The existing PAEI program, which finances better educated youth with loans, would remain with
                         some refin ements as the high-level track for youth with higher education levels, and a new basic-
                         level track would target youth with less advanced educational backgrounds. The basic-level track
                         would include life-skills and money management training as well as technical skills, and
                         beneficiaries would receive small grants to jump-start their business activities, rather than the larger
                         loans that would be available under the high-level track. The small grants would be paid in two
                         tranches, with the second tranches conditional on confirmation that the first was used for productive
                         purposes.

                         In the basic track as well as the high-level track, an increased focus would be placed on coaching
                         (“accompagnement?) after the receipt of financing. The ANPE, with the benefit of enhanced
                         information on market demand under component 3, would also help direct beneficiaries toward
                         profitable and/or under-served economic sectors. Finally, to assist with the transition to sustainable
                         work, beneficiaries would be given the option to pair with existing private sector firms to help them
                         establish themselves in a productive and sustainable market niche.

                         The component would finance: (i) the development of the “basic-track? program targeting youth with
                         lower education, skill, and income levels, including design of training modules, program and
                         financing guidelines, and coaching arrangements; and (ii) implementation of the basic track program,
                         including provision of financing for small grants. Given the preponderance of young women among
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the underemployed, the component would aim for at least 50 percent of the supported youth to be
                         women.

                         Component 3: Institutional Capacity Building and Project Management ($5 million).

                         The purpose of this component is to (i) strengthen the capacity of private and public sector
                         institutions to engage in an informed policy dialogue on skills and employment on a regular basis, e.
                         g. through technical capacity strengthening and the creation of a mechanism for consultations and
                         coordination; and (ii) improve the knowledge base on employment and skills. In order to achieve
                         these objectives, the component will fund the following activities:

                         i.       Capacity strengthening activities (e.g. training, study visits, South-South exchanges) for
                         select public and private sector organizations (e.g. private sector associations artisanal associations,
                         and training institutions) for coordination, design, implementation, and monitoring of youth
                         employment activities;
                         ii.      Collection of data on employment in collaboration with the National Institute for Statistics
                         and Economic Analysis (Institut National de Statistique et de l'Analyse Economique – INSAE), in
                         order to address the lack of information faced by youth on market demand and training opportunities
                         for different occupations, and to improve the knowledge base of the Government for carrying out
                         employment programs;
                           iii.    Communications activities to increase awareness of the Project activities amongst youth and
                           other key stakeholders;
                           iv.     Monitoring and evaluation, including technical audits, beneficiary surveys, and an impact
Public Disclosure Copy




                           evaluation of component 2;
                           v.      Selective analytical work on youth, employment and skills, including on how to rationalize
                           public support for youth employment to improve efficiency and coordination;
                           vi.     Financing of the project implementation unit’s coordination and management activities.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Project activities will be nationwide

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           MCMEJF is broadly familiar with safeguards policies as it was responsible for a previous World
                           Bank project; however, the previous project, like this project, will be implemented by a Project
                           Implementation Unit (PIU) whose staff members will be recruited competitively.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
                           Africa Eshogba Olojoba (MNSEE)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                      Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/            Yes          The project will not undertake any activities or
                           BP 4.01                                              works that have negative environmental and
                                                                                social impacts. The project will finance
                                                                                apprenticeships for selected youths who may be
                                                                                working with a master crafts person acquiring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                skills and work experience. This skill
                                                                                acquisition might involve occupational health
                                                                                impacts to both the apprentices and the masters.
                                                                                A manual will have to be produced to outline
                                                                                safe occupational health and safety procedures.
                                                                                Proposals under component 2 will be screened
                                                                                to ensure that proposals with environmental and
                                                                                social impacts are not financed.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04             No           This policy is not triggered

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                      No           This policy is not triggered

                           Pest Management OP 4.09                 No           There will be no pest management, purchase of
                                                                                pesticides and health related concerns
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/         No           This policy is not triggered
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10           No           There are no indigenous peoples in project areas
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The project will not finance any activities that
                                 4.12                                                                                            result in the involuntary acquisition of land or
                                                                                                                                 the involuntary restriction of access to legally
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 designated parks and protected areas as per OP
                                                                                                                                 4.12 para 3. Activities under component 2 will
                                                                                                                                 be screened to ensure that activities that trigger
                                                                                                                                 OP/BP 4.12 are not financed.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This policy is not triggered as the project will
                                                                                                                                 not finance construction and/or rehabilitation of
                                                                                                                                 dams
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             This policy is not triggered as there will not be
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            project activity along international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This policy is not triggered
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Oct-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The safety and occupational impacts manual will be prepared will be prepared between August
                                      and October 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: John Van Dyck

                                 Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Stefano Paternostro (SM)                                                                                             Date: 13-Jun-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
