                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSA442
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Feb-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Ghana                                   Project ID:                     P114264
                              Project Name:                  Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)
                              Task Team Leader:              Christopher Paul Jackson
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 06-Dec-2011                                  Estimated Board Date:           22-Mar-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 AFTAR                                   Lending Instrument:             Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (40%), Crops (20%)
                              Theme:                         Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural markets (30%), Export development and competitiveness (20%),
                                                             Infrastructure services for private sector development (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                    Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                       0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                           100.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                 100.00
                              Environmental Category:        A - Full Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The project development objective (PDO) is: increased access to land, private sector finance, input- and output-markets by smallholder farms from
                              private-public partnerships in commercial agriculture in Accra Plains and SADA zone. PDO level indicators are as follows:

                              1. Yield per hectare (percentage increase) of major crops on both nucleus farms and the associated out-grower schemes benefiting from project
                              support. This will be disaggregated by crop, especially, for rice, soya and maize, and for Accra Plains and SADA zone;
Public Disclosure Copy




                              2. Area (ha) under formal commercial arrangements such as out-grower schemes and contract farming. This will disaggregated between land
                              under nucleus farms and land under out-grower cultivation, and will be disaggregated by Accra Plains and SADA region;

                              3. Formal and/ or semi-formal marketing arrangements for small-holder farms (number) and will indicate the number of new arrangements fostered
                              by the project. For each new arrangement documented, information will be gathered on their location, i.e Accra Plains or SADA, farm size and the
                              nature of the arrangement, i.e. formal contract or semi-formal agreement;

                              4. Gross margins for selected crops (percentage increase) and disaggregated by Accra Plains and SADA zone;

                              5. Direct project beneficiaries (number), of which are female (%) (IDA Core Indicator).

                              3. Project Description

                              The project is being co-fimnanced with USAID ($45 million from USAID and $100 million from IDA.) The project has three components: (i)
                              strengthening investment promotion infrastructure, facilitating secure access to land and project management; (ii) securing PPPsand small-holder
                              linkages in the Accra Plans; and (iii) securing PPPs and small-holder linkages in the SADA region.

                              Component 1: Strengthening Investment Promotion Infrastructure, Facilitating Secure Access to Land and Project Management (US$26.1 million:
                              IDA US$16.1 million; USAID US$10.0 million).
                              This component will ensure that Ghana attracts fit and proper investors – not speculative investors – willing and able to invest in strategic
                              subsectors that contribute most positively to national development gains. It will promote a secure investment climate – particularly with respect to
                              access to land – that clarifies and strengthens the rights and obligations of investors, government and affected communities. This component will
                              also support an improved mechanism for facilitating access to land by reducing the search costs to potential investors through an expansion of a
                              database of land suitable for investors and by building on nascent mechanisms for actively matching potential investors with suitable land owners
                              (i.e. past efforts at constructing a 'land bank'). In the case of land under traditional ownership, due diligence and sensitization of surrounding
                              communities will promote an understanding of the rights and obligations from subsequent lease agreements. A 'model' lease agreement will be
                              developed to form the basis of all subsequent investor agreements, and which includes indicative arrangements for managing leasehold payments
                              and other community development-type funds.

                              Sub-Component 1.1: Investment promotion and investment climate ($2.3m). This component will strengthen the ability of the Government to
                              identify, attract, retain and expand investment in commercial agriculture and agribusiness.

                                                                                                                                                                       Page 1 of 6
                         Sub-Component 1.2: Facilitating access to land and improved land governance ($7.7m). This component will establish a mechanism for matching
                         available land with interested investors.

                         Sub-Component 1.3: Support for out-grower arrangements ($1.8m). This subcomponent will support a MoFA-led effort to develop a framework for
                         out-grower schemes, drawing on the analysis undertaken during project preparation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-Component 1.4: Project management, monitoring and evaluation ($14.3m). This subcomponent would finance the operational costs of the
                         project implementation unit.

                         Component 2: Securing PPPs and Small-holder Linkages in the Accra Plans (US$45.4 million: IDA US$ 45.4 million).
                         This component will conclude a transaction for a PPP in an irrigation investment in the Accra Plains. The entire Accra Plains area extends to
                         around 200,000ha and the ultimate objective of Government – as originally foreseen in by Nkrumah as part of the Akosombo Dam project – is to
                         fully develop the entire area. Such a development has been subject to a number of feasibility studies, the most recent being financed by the
                         Government of Kuwait. This study identified an area of about 160,000ha for initial development. However, irrigation technologies were limited to
                         pump irrigation from the Volta, and the high cost limited the economic and financial viability of the project.

                         Sub-Component 2.1: Technical assistance in support of the PPP Transaction ($1.9m). This component will fund necessary technical assistance
                         and capacity building of the institutions responsible for taking forward the PPP transaction.

                         Sub-Component 2.2: Full Feasibility Study for the PPP and Transaction Advice ($3.0m). This component will finance the full feasibility study for the
                         Accra Plains PPP which will reflect the recommendations of the pre-feasibility study.

                         Component 2.3: Organizing small-holder participation in the PPP ($0.5m). Inclusive agricultural development is critical to this project, and there is a
                         specific need to ensure the Accra Plains development accommodates existing small holder farmers.

                         Sub-Component 2.4: Viability gap funding for the PPP ($40m). This sub-component will provide the necessary subsidy element for the PPP.

                         Component 3: Securing PPPs and Small-holder Linkages in the SADA Region (US$64.3 million: IDA US$29.3 million; USAID US$35.0 million).
                         Although economic opportunities in the north of Ghana are more limited compared to the south, previous analysis has suggested a wide range of
                         potential investments that contribute to economic growth and national development objectives, while simultaneously offering positive financial
                         returns to investors. An influential study undertaken by ODI radically altered the perspective of the north from a lagging region in need perpetual
                         transfers to a potential source of economic growth contribution significantly to the food security of the nation and the wider West Africa sub-region,
                         especially towards the Sahel. This theme was expanded in the Northern Breadbasket Strategy that was commission by AGRA and undertaken by
                         McKinsey & Co. The Breadbasket Strategy identified a number of stylized business opportunities and estimated economic and financial returns
                         based on extensive field work and discussions with existing businesses. A recent Poverty Assessment completed by the World Bank and GoG
                         drew similar conclusions.

                         Sub-Component 3.1: Assisting with financing of establishment costs and facilitating the development of out-grower schemes and contract farming
                         arrangements ($5.9m). First-time investors in out-grower schemes face high upfront establishment costs, especially when establishing more
                         inclusive arrangements.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-Component 3.2: Investing in land development for commercial agriculture ($37.0m). Based on the principles of water harvesting during the
                         rainy season, large tracts of land can be cultivated profitably in the rainy season.

                         Sub-Component 3.3: Rehabilitation and new construction of agricultural storage infrastructure and processing facilities ($20.4m). Many smallholder
                         farmers who produce for the market are limited in taking advantage of seasonal arbitrage opportunities.

                         Sub-Component 3.4: Business development services among agricultural service providers and investing in processing businesses ($1.0m).
                         Agricultural service delivery to farmers is an important element of agricultural value chains.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The project will have national coverage through the policy and enabling environment components as well as geographically-focused interventions
                         in the Accra Plains (11,000 hectares - in Component 2) and the Savannah zone (Component 3). Since the project is demand led, specific sub-
                         project sites will only be identified during implementation.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Jonathan Mills Lindsay (LEGEN)
                         Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
                         Moses Yao Duphey (AFTEN)
                         Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (AFTCS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)




                                                                                                                                                                    Page 2 of 6
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01      Yes   In pursuance of its project development objective the Ghana Commercial
                                                                        Agriculture Project will finance the construction of agriculture related infrastructure,
                                                                        including construction and rehabilitation of irrigation schemes, extension of power
                                                                        lines, etc. The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be small-
                                                                        scale and site specific, typical of Category B projects. However, the actual
                                                                        locations and sizes of subprojects are not yet known in sufficient detail at this time
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        of project preparation. The Government of Ghana has prepared an Environmental
                                                                        and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF provides detailed
                                                                        guidelines and procedures , and was publicly disclosed both in country and at the
                                                                        InfoShop on November 22, 2011.

                                                                        Once the exact sub-project location are defined, the borrower will prepare site
                                                                        specific social and environmental impacts assessment (ESIA) consistent with the
                                                                        ESMF to be disclosed both in-country and at the InfoShop.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              Yes   It is possible that minor, time bound adverse impacts on natural habitants and
                                                                        critical natural habitat may be generated as a result of specific actions during
                                                                        project implementation. To eliminate, minimize and mitigate such potential
                                                                        impacts, the ESMF provides guidance on how such subprojects will be screened to
                                                                        ensure minimal impact on Natural Habitats and Critical Natural Habitats in
                                                                        particular and relevant mitigation measures provided.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                       Yes   It is possible that minor, time bound adverse impacts on forests may be generated
                                                                        as a result of specific actions during project implementation. To eliminate,
                                                                        minimize and mitigate such potential impacts, the ESMF provides guidance on
                                                                        how such subprojects will be screened to ensure minimal impact, and relevant
                                                                        mitigation measures provided.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                  Yes   The project is not expected to directly finance the purchase of pesticides,
                                                                        herbicides, or fertilizers. However, the development of intensive agriculture
                                                                        through project activities may lead to increased use of fertilizers, pesticides or
                                                                        herbicides. The Borrower has prepared a Pest Management Plan (PMP) which has
                                                                        been approved by the Bank. The PMP has been disclosed in-country and at the
                                                                        Bank's InfoShop on November 22, 2011,
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes   The project does not anticipate involving physical and cultural resources, but this
                                                                        might arise with the expansion or creation of large-scale commercial farms. This is
                                                                        likely to be minimal since such farms negotiate lease agreements with traditional
                                                                        landowners (i.e. chiefs) who would presumably exclude such areas. Nevertheless,
                                                                        since the exact physical location of these resources are unknown at this stage, the
                                                                        ESMF includes chance finds procedures for any PCR (e.g., archaeological sites)
                                                                        identified during project implementation.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes   The implementation of this Project is likely to include the need for involuntary land
                                                                        acquisition for public infrastructure and voluntary land leases between investors
                                                                        and landowners where there are customary claims to land. However, the exact
                                                                        location and the areal extend of the land to be acquired are not yet known in
                                                                        sufficient details. The Government of Ghana has prepared a Resettlement Policy
                                                                        Framework (RPF) to address the needs of persons who will be affected by the
                                                                        impacts envisioned under OP 4.12. The RPF establishes and clarifies the
                                                                        resettlement principles, guidelines, valuation and compensation procedures,
                                                                        eligibility criteria, institutional arrangements, and grievance redress mechanisms to
                                                                        be applied to sub projects which will be prepared during the main project
                                                                        implementation. It also summarizes key land tenure issues that will arise during
                                                                        project implementation. Once the exact sub-project location are defined, the
                                                                        borrower will prepare Sub-project specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
                                                                        consistent with the RPF to be disclosed both in-country and at the InfoShop.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                Yes   With respect to dam safety, the Volta River Authority (VRA) the operator of the
                                                                        Kpong hydro-power dam has carried out a dam safety assessment in 2011. MOFA
                                                                        is relying upon the results of the assessment for Component 2. However OP 4.37
                                                                        recommends that VRA should continuously carry out the dam safety assessment
                                                                        since the safety of the Kpong dam influences the performance of GCAP project.
                                                                        The recipient will be required to enter into an agreement with VRA, requiring VRA
                                                                        to carry out periodic inspections of the dam (every two years); and that dam safety
                                                                        and any necessary additional dam safety measures be implemented by VRA.




                                                                                                                                                    Page 3 of 6
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP      Yes              The project also triggers OP/BP 7.50 as some project activities are expected to
                               7.50                                                            involve use of irrigation water from the Volta River. The Volta River flows through
                                                                                               six riparian countries namely Benin, Togo, Ghana, Ivory Coast, Burkina Faso and
                                                                                               Mali. It is the World Bank‘s assessment that the Project will not cause appreciable
                                                                                               harm to the other riparian states and will not be appreciably harmed by the other
                                                                                               riparian entities. The Government has sent out a notification letter to all riparian
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               states on January 10, 2012 setting out the proposed Project activities and their
                                                                                               potential impacts on water use in order to obtain their no objection through the
                                                                                               Volta Basin Authority (VBA), an authority established by treaty among the riparian
                                                                                               countries, empowered to authorize the development of infrastructure and projects
                                                                                               planned by its member-countries that could have significant impacts on the water
                                                                                               resources of the basin. Since the borrower (GoG) has been implementing various
                                                                                               agriculture projects in the past, the feedback is expected to be positive. Responses
                                                                                               have been requested by February 10, 2012, and so far no negative feedback has
                                                                                               been received.
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                   The project is foreseen to have impacts on land ownership, land use, and livelihoods that may require the involuntary acquisition of land for
                                 civil works such as the construction, rehabilitation and maintenance of irrigation canals, extension of power lines, etc. The project will not
                                 finance the state acquisition of land for agricultural purposes. Nevertheless, it may lead to land use changes if community lands are
                                 reorganized to facilitate lease agreements with investors or the reconfiguration and improvement of plots in connection with outgrower
                                 schemes. This may result in the moving of land users which in turn may negatively impact livelihoods and restrict access to resources needed
                                 by households. These shifts may have disproportionate effects on women who may be susceptible to losing access to medicinal plants, water
                                 sources, or face increasing time burdens associated with domestic responsibilities such as fuel collection, etc.

                                 Potential environmental risks could include point and nonpoint pollution of water sources, other issues associated with the use of agricultural
                                 chemicals, and negative environmental impacts associated with the rehabilitation of irrigation or small-scale civil works on water stations and/or
                                 warehouses for food processing or storage: (i) construction, rehabilitation and maintenance of irrigation canals, extension of power lines to
                                 connect commercial farmers and agro-processing facilities; and (ii) agricultural development and commercialization which will lead to increased
                                 production volumes and value added processing and marketing capacity of agribusiness involved in commodity chains and warehousing
                                 facilities. There may be impacts on forests and natural habitats which are adjacent to project areas however these are expected to be minor.

                                 The ESMF has set forth the basic principles to be followed once there is a clear definition of project intervention areas during implementation.
                                 Likewise, the PMP is mainly driven by the fact that intensification of agricultural activities could lead to increased use of pesticides and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 herbicides, that if unmanaged could result in negative impacts, on both the physical and natural environment. Similarly, the RPF provides the
                                 basic principles Borrower and private investors would have to comply with vis-a-vis land use, once there is a clear definition of sub-project
                                 intervention areas. Moreover, sufficient provision is been laid out by the ESMF to ensure appropriate capacity building for all key stakeholders
                                 involved in GCAP activities and intervention zones.

                                 Once the physical locations and design of the GCAP intervention areas are defined, the Borrower will prepare site specific Environmental and
                                 Social Impacts Assessments (ESIAs) and/or Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) as necessary, and submit them to the World Bank for approval.
                                 Like the ESMF and the RPF, the ESIA/RAP will also be publicly disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop prior to the start of the said-activity.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                   Long-term impacts and risks are those associated with potential increases in the use of pesticides for agricultural production, intensification,
                                 and diversification and potential increases in disease vector populations owing to irrigation schemes. However, for the latter, the environmental
                                 and social impacts of such an activity have been and will continue to be among the most critical determinants of the capacity building plan
                                 dedicated to all involved stakeholders. In addition, the GoG is already committed with its decentralized structures to put in place enabling
                                 corresponding mitigation measures in case infection or outspread of diseases are extended any time and in compliance with the national and
                                 international legislation. On crops (rice, maize, etc.) milling processing, appropriate mitigation measures such as protection from dust and use
                                 of residues will be disseminated.

                                 Mitigation measures under the Project will include the application of integrated pest management (IPM) practices and the application and
                                 promotion of pesticide management practices outlined in the guidelines of the International Code of Conduct on the Distribution and Use of
                                 Pesticides; risk management for transgenic crops through the national biosafety framework and international best practice; and the use of
                                 Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) as appropriate for civil works.

                                 With respect to dam safety, the Volta River Authority (VRA) the operator of the Kpong hydro-power dam has carried out a dam safety
                                 assessment in 2011. MOFA is relying upon the results of the assessment for Component 2. However OP 4.37 recommends that VRA should
                                 continuously carry out the dam safety assessment since the safety of the Kpong dam influences the performance of GCAP project. The
                                 recipient will be required to enter into an agreement with VRA, requiring VRA to carry out periodic inspections of the dam (every two years); and
                                 that dam safety and any necessary additional dam safety measures be implemented by VRA.
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                  N/A



                                                                                                                                                                        Page 4 of 6
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and
                             The implement    the measures
                                  activities proposed       described.
                                                      under GCAP  led to the triggering of the following safeguards policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01),
                            Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Pest Management (OP 4.09), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), Dam Safety
                            (OP/BP 4.37), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) and Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). In order to comply with national
                            regulations and World Bank safeguards policies, as well as basic USAID regulations requirements, the Borrower has prepared a Resettlement
                            Policy Framework (RPF) to comply with OP4.12, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) suggested by the triggering of
                            OP/BP 4.01which also addresses issues related to 4.04; 4.11; 4.36 and 4.37; and also a Pest Management Plan (PMP) to fulfill OP 4.09
Public Disclosure Copy




                            requirements.

                           The Borrower's capacity to deal with safeguard issues have been improved based on their combined track record in-country, as well as with the
                           implementation of past World Bank funded projects. EPA and Lands Commission are well knowledgeable of World Bank Safeguards Policies.
                           As part of the Project Preparation, MOFA (GCAP Team) along with other key government agencies involved/likely to be involved in GCAP
                           activities have benefited from an initial safeguards training on November 28 and 29, 2011; and will throughout the project life cycle, benefit from
                           additional and more focused social and environmental safeguards capacity building. Furthermore, the country has performed a good follow up
                           of environmental and social dimensions in the project in association with concerned stakeholders. However, this performance has to be further
                           continued and strengthened through the present Project.

                           The ESMF, RPF and PMP include institutional arrangements, outlining the roles and responsibilities for the various stakeholder groups involved
                           in each participating region at the central and local levels, for screening, reviewing, and approving subprojects, as well as implementing and
                           monitoring mitigation measures for those subprojects. Given the magnitude of project interventions, GCAP will establish its own Social and
                           Environmental Team (SET) composed of one Social Scientist and one Environmental Scientist. The SET will benefit from EPA and the Land
                           Commission's support. In view of the somewhat limited institutional capacity to address Project safeguards adequately within the Ministry of
                           Food and Agriculture (MOFA), the three safeguard instruments include provisions to strengthen the capacity of the various institutions and
                           actors involved; and to promote coordination and synergies among the various sectors in attending to potential social and environmental
                           impacts. Together these safeguards instruments are considered as planning tools and means for harmoniously integrating the Project with its
                           biophysical and social environment to maximize project’s positive effects in the Accra Plains and SADA regions, while mitigating the negative
                           impacts.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                             Unlike other projects that directly support small-holder production, this project is seeking to provide opportunities for the entrepreneurial poor
                           by leveraging private investments in agricultural production and processing from commercial investors – across a spectrum of scale – that
                           provide immediate and identifiable improvements in input and output marketing opportunities for small holders. Nevertheless, for GCAP, key
                           stakeholders include smallholders, local communities, local NGOs, local representatives from the Ministry of Food and Agriculture, EPA, etc.
                           Local NGOs, smallholders and communities in the project area will be involved not only during the preparation of project activities, but
                           throughout the project cycle. To that effect, they will benefit from awareness raising, participatory public consultation, training concerning
                           community's rights and obligations, benefit sharing approach through a well-designed corporate social and environmental responsibility
                           mechanism and grievance redress mechanisms. MOFA will further pursue its’ consultation and communication process during implementation,
                           in particular, consult potential project affected groups and local nongovernmental organizations on the project’s environmental and social
                           aspects, and will take their views into account. MOFA will initiate these consultations as early as possible, and for meaningful consultations, will
                           provide relevant material in a timely manner prior to consultation, in a form and language (s) that are understandable and accessible to the
                           group being consulted.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The ESMF, PMP and RPF were prepared in compliance with national regulations and Bank safeguard policies, as well as USAID regulations.
                           Their preparation followed a broad participatory consultation process with all relevant stakeholder groups. Issues that were raised during the
                           consultation included concerns about land use and compensation (including as regards migrant farmers, valuation, and pastoralists access to
                           land), training on pesticide use, impacts on the environment including water pollution, and benefit sharing. Because public consultation and
                           participation is an iterative process, therefore this participatory approach will be carried along throughout Project implementation, supervision
                           and evaluation. The ESMF and PMP have been disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop on November 22, 2011 while the and RPF was
                           disclose in-country on January 13, 2012 and in InfoShop on January 30, 2012.

                           Prior to disclosure of all safeguards instruments, and as part of the processing of category A project, the borrower undertook extensive public
                           consultation and participation meetings. Hence a series of stakeholder workshop were organized by MOFA, involving Project stakeholder
                           groups in public agencies in the Accra Plains and the SADA regions and representatives of various others government entities including
                           extension services, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), professional organizations, farmer organizations and civil society/NGOs. This
                           approach was used to present the results of the various studies, foster ownership, and garner input from these stakeholders to improve the
                           quality and soundness of the instruments. All these stakeholder workshops were captured into a Public Consultations and Participation report
                           that was disclosed in-country on January 9, 2012.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                            Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                               22-Nov-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                           22-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                            22-Nov-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive            01-Feb-2012
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                            Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                               13-Jan-2012
                                                                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 6
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                13-Jan-2012
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 30-Jan-2012
                             Pest Management Plan
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    22-Nov-2011
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                22-Nov-2011
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 09-Feb-2012
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                              If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                              If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are                   Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                              Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                              Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the             Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                              Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for              Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              certification system?
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements been made                      Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              for public awareness and training?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                              Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                                Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language             Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for          Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard           Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                     Christopher Paul Jackson
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:      Name: Cary Anne Cadman (RSA)                                                     Date: 23-Feb-2012
                            Sector Manager:                       Name Karen Mcconnell Brooks (SM)                                                 Date: 21-Feb-2012




                                                                                                                                                                        Page 6 of 6
