                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA2488
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Sierra Leone                     Project ID:    P120304
                            Project Name:      Sierra Leone Energy Sector Utility Reform Project (P120304)
                            Task Team          Elvira Morella
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          09-Jul-2013                      Estimated   29-Oct-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTG2                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General energy sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          35.00                 Total Bank Financing:       35.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             35.00
                              Total                                                                                   35.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve the operational performance of the National Power
                           Authority.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed Project is centered on supporting a process of management change and reform within
                           the National Power Authority - the single, vertically integrated power utility of Sierra Leone -

                                                                      Page 1 of 9
                         through the establishment of a management contract, which will help transition the utility towards
                         improved technical performance, better service delivery and financial viability. The accompanying
                         lending program is intended to provide more reliable and improved electricity services to the urban
Public Disclosure Copy




                         residents of the greater Freetown area by increasing availability and quality of electricity supply.

                         The Project has three components:

                         Component 1: NPA Capacity Enhancement and Performance Improvement. This component will
                         support the financing of management contract between NPA and an experienced utility Management
                         Contractor (MC). A consulting firm specialized in utility management will be competitively selected
                         as Management Contractor and financed under the project for a period of three years. The selected
                         firm will be appointed by NPA’s Board of Directors and be given fully delegated authority to
                         manage and operate the utility in all aspects of day-to-day performance and investment
                         implementation with key agreed deliverables. The MC will report to NPA Board, which will
                         regularly monitor MC performance and authorize fee (or penalties) for performance.

                         The MC will be responsible for the restructuring of NPA and the re-alignment of its functions, skills
                         and processes. A key deliverable under the management contract will be the execution of business
                         plan for the institution, encompassing: (i) establishment of a new organizational structure for all
                         utility functions (planning, network operations, commercial activities, management of corporate
                         resources), including detailed description of roles of each position in the structure and required skills;
                         (ii) definition of new processes and activities to develop utility functions and supporting tools
                         (management information systems, information-technology applications, etc.); (iii) selection of staff
                         in each and all positions of the organizational structure; (iv) implementation of a comprehensive
                         training plan to support development of new processes and functions.

                         Results to be achieved by the MC in terms of service quality and reform and improvement of utility’s
                         skills and performance will be defined as part of the management contract. The contract will also
                         identify indicators and procedures for assessing the MC’s progress toward achieving the agreed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         results. Overall, it is expected that the MC will strengthen and expand NPA’s capabilities, by: (a)
                         building management strategy and business planning; (b) reorganizing operations and re-aligning
                         skills; (c) supervising project implementation, including on technical, fiduciary, operational and
                         commercial parameters; (d) supervising procurement and monitor costs and financing; (e) serving as
                         a point for tracking progress of investment implementation.

                         Component 2: Improvement of Electricity Supply in Urban Areas. This component will support an
                         extensive investment program targeting the rehabilitation and upgrading of NPA distribution network
                         from 33 kV to the low voltage level as first step to improve quality and reliability of electricity
                         supply in Freetown area. Investments under this component will contribute to increase the level of
                         power than can be evacuated from Bumbuna and the two thermal plants in Freetown, as well as to
                         reduce technical losses by upgrading infrastructure in line with demand requirements, thereby
                         decreasing the frequency and duration of outages at the customer level. Based on the scope of
                         investments, this component is articulated into the following two sub-components:

                         Sub-component 2.A: Primary MV Distribution network reinforcement and extension. Investments
                         under this sub-component will focus on reinforcement, rehabilitation and expansion of the primary
                         MV distribution grid supplying urban areas of Freetown, which is critical to ensuring long term
                         stability, security and quality of supply.



                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         Sub-component 2.B: MV secondary and LV Distribution network reinforcement and extension. This
                         will include matching investments in targeted secondary MV and LV lines that bring power to the
                         customers. Rehabilitation and upgrading of these lines will ensure more reliable and expanded
Public Disclosure Copy




                         electricity supply at the customer level, which remains a top priority to the GoSL.

                         A full condition assessment of Freetown netwo rk will be carried out under the recently approved
                         Energy Access Project financed through the Sierra Leone Infrastructure Development Fund (EAP-
                         SLIDF), which is also financing upgrading and rehabilitation of selected components of the primary
                         distribution network in Freetown. The assessment will form the basis for prioritizing specific
                         investments under the upcoming operation. In particular, two types of investments will be
                         indentified: (a) urgent investments to address critical infrastructure rehabilitation; and (b) prioritized
                         investments aimed at improving network performance. The preparation of urgent investments will be
                         fast-tracked by the Project Management Unit (PMU) established at the Minster of Energy (MoE),
                         which is responsible for implementation of the SLIDF project. Once on board, the MC will
                         implement urgent investments, finalize a prioritized investment plan using inputs from the
                         assessment and execute it as part of the management contract.

                         Component 3: Preparatory Support for Power Sector Investments. This component envisages three
                         sub-components to be implemented by the Ministry of Energy (MoE).

                         Sub-component 3.A: Sector Planning Assistance. This sub-component is meant to strengthen the
                         planning capacity of sector institutions, which is currently stretched to the maximum due to the
                         limited staff and financial resources. Technical assistance will be provided to the MoE for feasibility,
                         assessment and/or study of the most promising opportunities in power generation, and/or related
                         transmission and distribution, which may include major infrastructure.

                         Sub-component 3.B: Project Implementation Support. This will envisage preparatory support by the
                         Project Implementation Unit (PMU) already established at the MoE for implementation of the EAP-
                         SLIDF to competitively procure a qualified MC for NPA (as defined in Component 1), as well as for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         preparatory engineering and tendering activities for urgent investments to be advanced (as defined in
                         Component 2) and related preparation and implementation of safeguards.

                         Sub-component 3.C: Monitoring and Evaluation. The third sub-component will envisage a two-parts
                         monitoring and evaluation activity, including performance monitoring and impact evaluation
                         respectively. The first will concern the assessment of the MC performance. An independent technical
                         consultant will be engaged in order to monitor the progress and performance of the MC against the
                         deliverables and targets agreed in the management contract. The second part will consist of an
                         impact evaluation (IE) strictly related to the Project to assess the benefits to the affected communities
                         of the proposed rehabilitation and upgrade of Freetown distribution network. The Project has been
                         selected for rigorous impact evaluation as part of the IDA 16 Impact Evaluation Program launched
                         by the World Bank to demonstrate the results and assess the effectiveness in the use of IDA
                         resources. A qualified consultant will be competitively selected under this component to carry out the
                         impact evaluation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project activities will be undertaken in the Greater Freetown Area. Freetown is the capital city of
                         Sierra Leone and is located in the Western Area (which is divided into two districts: Western Area
                         Rural and Western Area Urban). Freetown is on a peninsula with an area of 557 km² and a


                                                                        Page 3 of 9
                         population estimated by the UN at 875,000 (2009 figures). Freetown is densely populated with
                         homes, community structures, kiosks (permanent and semi-permanent), and permanent buildings
                         around the distribution network. The component 2 of the project will be significant with respect to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental and social aspects as this will include mostly reinforcement, rehabilitation and
                         expansion of the existing primary MV distribution grid supplying urban areas of Freetown. The
                         project will replace low voltage and overhead distribution and transmission lines within existing right
                         of way to minimize physical footprints and public inconvenience during construction stage.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Moses Yao Duphey (AFTN3)
                         Sanjay Srivastava (AFTN3)
                         Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (AFTCS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes               It is anticipated that there will be limited
                         BP 4.01                                              impacts on the surrounding environment, or
                                                                              communities. Most adverse environment impacts
                                                                              are expected to be construction related and
                                                                              temporary, such as occupational health and safety
                                                                              mostly during construction stage, which can be
                                                                              mitigated through implementation of
                                                                              Environmental Management Plan. An
                                                                              Environment and Social Management Framework
                                                                              (ESMF) has been prepared as specific sites and
                                                                              alignment will not be known prior to appraisal.
                                                                              Guidance on management of environment and
                                                                              social concerns including avoidance, mitigation
                                                                              and monitoring of concerns, such as dust control;
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              disruption of supply; waste management,
                                                                              especially around the substations to be
                                                                              rehabilitated under the project are included in the
                                                                              ESMF.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No                The distribution facilities to be rehabilitated
                                                                              under the project are largely existing ones and not
                                                                              located within or close any protected areas or
                                                                              critical habitat, or any with high biodiversity
                                                                              value. Also, extension of distribution lines - if
                                                                              any will be identified by the condition assessment
                                                                              to be completed under the EAP-SLIDF, and will
                                                                              not pass over any protected areas or critical
                                                                              natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No                Same as above. Project affected areas are urban
                                                                              areas only. No impacts on forests are expected.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09              No                No herbicides or pesticides will be used and
                                                                              only manual means will be used for the
                                                                              maintenance of the right of way of the
                                                                              distribution line.


                                                                      Page 4 of 9
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes              Given the physical feature of expected project
                            BP 4.11                                             areas and nature of the proposed physical
                                                                                construction activities and the project areas, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                possibility of finding evidence of physical
                                                                                cultural resources during construction is very low.
                                                                                However, the ESMF includes a procedure for
                                                                                dealing with cases of chance finds.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No               A screening by the team indicates that there are
                                                                                no indigenous peoples as per OP 4.10 in the
                                                                                project area (Greater Freetown).
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes              It is anticipated that there will be impacts as
                            4.12                                                envisioned in OP 4.12. An RPF has been
                                                                                prepared as specific sites will not be known prior
                                                                                to appraisal.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               Not Applicable.

                            Projects on International        No                   Not Applicable.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   Not Applicable.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                Under Component 2, the project will finance the reinforcement, rehabilitation and expansion of
Public Disclosure Copy




                              the primary MV distribution grid in Freetown. Works will target 33kV substations and feeder
                              lines including existing links that are expected to be replaced to help reduce technical losses. In
                              addition, investments in target secondary MV and LV lines will be made (rehabilitation and
                              upgrading). LV system upgrade will take into account high consumption areas. Most distribution
                              lines and substation will be on existing land (Over-head lines) as well as within the existing RoW,
                              thereby minimizing the adverse impacts resulting from completely new location, alignment or new
                              towers/poles.

                             Activities under component 2 are expected to have low environmental and social impacts, which
                             can be mitigated through implementation and monitoring of Environmental Management Plan.

                             An ESMF has been prepared to ensure that adequate mitigation measures for addressing potential
                             impacts on the environment and surrounding communities are implemented.

                             The ESMF contains the guidelines and procedures for assessing environmental and social impacts
                             throughout the rehabilitation of the distribution lines and substations as well as impact mitigation
                             principles. Guidance on management of environment and social concerns including avoidance,
                             mitigation and monitoring of concerns, such as dust control; disruption of supply; waste
                             management, especially around the substations to be rehabilitated under the project are included in
                             the ESMF. Institutional arrangements and monitoring and evaluation of the impacts of the


                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                           distribution lines and substations are spelt out in the ESMF.

                           It is anticipated that there may be impacts on individuals including loss of shelter, loss of assets,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and loss of income sources. Loss of shelter and assets may be in part or whole and loss of income
                           sources may be temporary. A RPF has been prepared that defines the procedures for rehabilitation
                           and resettlement as per the Bank Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12).
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The project is expected to have indirect impacts on: (i) socioeconomic conditions; (iii) land use
                           and public recreation; and (iv) utilities. There could be short term but temporary negative impacts
                           during construction stage on air quality, soil, landscape, workers health and safety, public services,
                           traffic and transportation, and livelihoods. These adverse impacts have been assessed to be not
                           significant and will be addressed through implementation of appropriate mitigation measures.

                           Removing critical distribution capacity bottlenecks along Freetown distribution network will
                           enable expanded, stable and more reliable electricity supply to Freetown residents.

                           No long-term impacts are anticipated due to future activities in the area.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            The distribution facilities to be rehabilitated under the project are existing facilities and there is
                           no plan to move them to alternate sites. The routing of the distribution line in the Freetown area
                           was set up several decades ago. Although at that time is was designed to avoid densely populated
                           areas, today the RoW is occupied by slum settlements. In order to avoid adverse impacts, the
                           project will take into account the existing physical conditions and ensure that repairs and
                           rehabilitation works are conducted in an appropriate manner and consistent with the guidelines
                           defined in the ESMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The condition assessment of Freetown distribution network to be completed under the EAP-
                           SLIDF will identify specific investments. The assessment will build on system studies and a load
                           flow study. Field visits to proposed sites will identify opportunities for re-routing to minimize
                           impacts on assets and livelihoods.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The Borrower has prepared an ESMF and an RPF to mitigate impacts under OP 4.01 and OP
                           4.12.

                           Implementation arrangements of the ESMF and RPF are as follows:
                           -       The preparation and implementation of relevant instruments for the urgent investments
                           envisioned under Component 2 will be undertaken by the PMU established at the MoE for the
                           EAP-SLIDF.
                           -       The preparation of the relevant instruments for the remaining investments will be
                           undertaken by the MC (to be hired under Component 1).
                           -       The two implementing units will coordinate closely for ensuring consistency and smooth
                           discharge of safeguards activities.
                           The MC’s responsibilities will include implementation of safeguard policies, including
                           resettlement. The MC will be required to mobilize capacity to implement safeguard policies,


                                                                       Page 6 of 9
                           which will be included among personnel requirements set by the management contract
                           Capacity building for strengthening NPA’s long-term capacity to manage social and
                           environmental impacts of their work is envisaged under the EAP-SLIDF project and will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           continued by the MC.
                           In addition, an inter-ministerial committee has been specifically set up under the EAP-SLIDF for
                           monitoring the RoW of distribution lines in urban areas and ensuring that encroachments are
                           controlled. Technical assistance under the EAP-SLIDF project will be also dedicated to build
                           monitoring capacity.

                           In an effort to ensure effective communication and consultation with project affected people, NPA
                           will prepare a comprehensive communication plan covering both the EAP-SLIDF and the
                           proposed IDA project to ensure that, among other things, timely and relevant information related
                           to environmental, social, and safety issues are disseminated among PAPs in a form and manner
                           that is accessible. The strategy will be implemented by the Communication Specialist hired by the
                           EAP-SLIDF.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders for the project are individuals in the project area, including those who will
                           be affected by the project, relevant ministries, government departments and agencies (such as the
                           Ministry of Energy; Ministry of Land, Country Planning and the Environment; Ministry of Works,
                           Housing and Infrastructure; Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development; Freetown
                           City Council - including the markets division; etc.), and relevant trader associations.

                           Consultations on ESMF were undertaken with various stakeholders, including environmental
                           agencies, local civil society groups, and community leaders, which conveyed broad support for the
                           project. The ESMF results were presented and discussed in several consultations with government
                           and non-government representatives. The NPA organized a community meeting with occupants of
                           the RoW to inform them about ESMF and the required safety procedures inside the RoW.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The RPF provides consultation guidelines. The RPF emphasizes the need for regular consultation
                           with Project Affected People using locally relevant and context specific forms.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        28-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     11-Jun-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Sierra Leone                                                       13-May-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        30-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     11-Jun-2013


                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Sierra Leone                                                     07-Jun-2013
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?




                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Elvira Morella
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 21-Jun-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Meike van Ginneken (SM)                      Date: 21-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
