                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC1505

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Ethiopia                         Project ID:     P130276
                            Project Name:     Pastoral Community Development Project III (P130276)
                            Task Team         Laketch Mikael Imru
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         17-Jun-2013                      Estimated       26-Sep-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTA3                            Lending         Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Animal production (25%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
                                              (25%), Irrigation and drainage (20%), General water, sanit ation and flood
                                              protection sector (15%), Other social services (15%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (33%), Other social development (17%),
                                              Natural disaster management (17%), Decentralization (17%), Rural policies and
                                              institutions (16%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    230.00                   Total Bank Financing:        100.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                              Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         35.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                               100.00
                              International Fund for Agriculture Development                             95.00
                              Total                                                                     230.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           To enhance growth and stability of incomes, increase asset base and improve access to public
                           services among pastoral communities through the operationalization of demand driven models of
                         investment and service delivery (social, financial and support to livelihoods) throughout Ethiopia’s
                         pastoral and agro-pastoral woredas
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         PCDP III will continue with and geographically expand implementation of most PCDP I and II
                         components with some modifications to promote better quality of investments and services and
                         ensure institutionalization of new approaches. It is proposed that PCDP III have four components as
                         follows:
                         a.      Service Provision for Sustainable Livelihoods through community investment funds (171
                         million USD)
                         b.      Rural Livelihoods Program , (35 million USD)
                         c.      Knowledge Management and Learning (7 million USD) ; and,
                         d.      Project Management and M&E (17 million USD).

                         PCDP III will not continue with its interventions under the Pastoral Risk Management component of
                         the Program. In May, 2010, the GoE shared with its development partners a draft “National Policy
                         and Strategy for Disaster Risk Management (DRM)? that promote a holistic approach to dealing with
                         multi-hazard disasters and has subsequently developed a comprehensive DRM investment
                         framework that takes full account of lessons from PCDP I and II. PCDP’s Pastoral Risk Management
                         component is best implemented in a coordinated manner within the DRM SPIF. Additionally, the
                         World Bank and the African Development Bank are in the process of preparing with the GoE the
                         RPLRP recognizing that many of the issues of pastoralists’ vulnerability in the Horn of Africa
                         (including Ethiopia) are regional in nature. The RPLRP will take forward some of PCDP’s DRM
                         initiatives in a regional context. The preparation of this project is being carried out in close
                         consultation with the PCDP team.

                         Implementation reviews of PCDP activities have provided several recommendations and
                         opportunities to strengthen phase III design within each project component as follows:
                         •       Service Provision for Sustainable Livelihoods through CIF: while PCDP phases I and II
Public Disclosure Copy




                         have helped to expand public services to the generally under-served pastoral and agro-pastoral areas
                         of Ethiopia; and, introduced demand-driven models for grassroots service delivery and investment,
                         more needs to be done in terms of (i) institutionalizing the CDD process promoted as a model of
                         public investment and service delivery ---through a strong program of capacity building of both
                         communities and local level implementing bodies and extending the CDD process to woreda level
                         planning as well as better coordination with complementary interventions; e.g., PSNP; (ii) improving
                         quality of service delivery, particularly in terms of offering options that relate to pastoralist
                         livelihood systems in Ethiopia (such as mobile services, gender sensitivity, ensuring availability of
                         water at service points, etc.) and (iii) introducing community feedback mechanisms on PCDP
                         services and investments (such as community score cards successfully piloted under the PBS’ social
                         accountability interventions) to deepen PCDP’s achievements in community empowerment.

                         The geographic scope of the CIF will be expanded to cover all pastoral and agro-pastoral woredas of
                         the country that are not affected by conflict (hence risk disruption of activities—see Section 5). The
                         Program will, however, no longer be involved in woredas that were covered in its first phase as it is
                         expected that such woredas will graduate out of the program at the end of PCDP II. Furthermore,
                         PCDP III will consider introducing performance based allocations to the CIF in the woredas that
                         remain.

                         •       Rural Livelihoods Program: PCDP III will continue to promote the establishment of pastoral
                         SACCOs in PCDP program woredas and deepen its capacity building support to already established
                         SACCOs. As in the case of PCDP II, support will include awareness building programs and training,
                         provision of basic office equipment, account books and promotional material, financing (on a sliding
Public Disclosure Copy




                         scale) the recruitment of book-keepers for new SACCOs and a grant ofup to 200% of pre-registration
                         compulsory and voluntary savings as seed capital for income generating activities. The RLP will
                         also continue supporting pastoral households in the development of viable income generating
                         activities. Options for linking pastoral households more effectively with national markets will also be
                         explored. The preparation of PCDP III will further explore options for consolidating SACCOs into
                         larger units and developing linkages with formal MFIs or banks to leverage additional loan capital
                         and expand the scale of operation of an individual SACCO.

                         As in the case of the CIF, the geographic scope of the RLP will be expanded to cover most pastoral
                         and agro-pastoral woredas of the country.

                         •       Participatory Learning and Knowledge Management (PLKM). Many of the interventions
                         under this component remain valid, particularly in relation to putting in place a systematic
                         communications, knowledge management and networking strategy to support sectoral dialogue, and
                         to promote effective decision making and transparency within the project. However, implementation
                         of the PCDP II’s efforts towards participatory action learning and policy implementation studies has
                         not been successful. Given that PCDP III is the final phase of the Program, it is proposed that these
                         sub-components be re-focused towards documenting and disseminating best practices. It is also
                         proposed that as PCDP’s DRM activities are moved to other operations, this component include
                         technical assistance to program development under the DRM SPIF so that progress to date in
                         developing pastoral early warning systems, disaster preparedness and con tingency plans and
                         regional DPSIPs are properly incorporated within the DRM SPIF.

                         •        Project Support: The third phase will continue with emphasis on strong M&E systems and
                         support to implementation capacity development, particularly in terms of strengthening financial
                         management and procurement capacity. The fiduciary risk of the Program is rated as high given
Public Disclosure Copy




                         weak financial management and procurement capacity within implementing agencies and the
                         decentralized nature of the Program. To mitigate this risk, PCDP III will continue to invest in the
                         capacity of local government personnel. High turnover of staff makes it difficult to ensure long-term
                         capacity development and care will be taken to roll out trainings in a continuous manner. Local
                         government will also continue to be supported by MSTs that will be strengthened so that they have
                         the capacity to mentor and coach woreda staff and can ensure that timely financial and activity
                         reports are being produced; and, step in at times of staff departure to perform necessary back up
                         functions until replacements are put in place. Additionally, investments in the capacity of
                         communities will allow them to play a leading role in the management of the Program’s community
                         level investments.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         PCDP III will be located in most pastoral and agro-pastoral areas of Ethiopia including Afar National
                         Regional State, Somali National Regional State; and, several districts in the Oromiya, Gambella and
                         Southern Nations Nationalities and Peoples Regions.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         There is staff in place within the Federal Program Coordination Unit to manage safeguards issues
                         and the mobile support teams also have focal persons. The staff at all levels may need further training
                           to strengthen social and environmental impact assessments for sub projects as well as
                           implementation and monitoring of safeguards. If the project determines that OP/BP 4.10 on
                           Indigenous People is triggered, there is a need to provide technical assistance for the project in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           preparing Indigenous Peoples’ Plans.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Edward Felix Dwumfour (AFTN3)
                           Desta Solomon (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              PCDP III will finance small scale community
                           BP 4.01                                               driven sub-projects some of which will require
                                                                                 environmental management. These can include
                                                                                 schools, health posts, veterinary posts, small
                                                                                 water supply and irrigation, small feeder roads,
                                                                                 catchment management improvements. The
                                                                                 ESMF for PCDP II will be used for this project
                                                                                 and updated, as necessary.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes              Pastoral areas encompass some natural habitats
                                                                                 which are protected by law, such as the Awash
                                                                                 and Yangudi Rasa National Parks (Afar),
                                                                                 Yabello sanctuary (Borena) and the Babile
                                                                                 Wildlife Sanctuary (Somali). It is conceivable
                                                                                 that PCDP III may operate in woredas that
                                                                                 include or border upon these areas or other areas
                                                                                 that qualify as natural habitats under OP. 4.36.
                                                                                 Mitigation measures are in the ESMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No               Forests are not a common feature of the
                                                                                 Ethiopian lowlands where PCDP III will operate
                                                                                 and thus the project is not expected to affect or
                                                                                 involve forests.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              Yes              Promotion of rain fed and/or irrigated farming
                                                                                 where feasible and profitable is part of
                                                                                 promoting sustainable livelihoods and may
                                                                                 indirectly involve use of pesticides. The
                                                                                 Pesticide Management Plan from PCDP II will
                                                                                 be used for this project and updated, as
                                                                                 necessary.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No               There are few areas in the Ethiopian lowlands
                           BP 4.11                                               that constitute cultural property in the sense
                                                                                 described in OP. 4.11. The micro-projects
                                                                                 would be unlikely to involve excavation or
                                                                                 inundation and are thus not likely to affect
                                                                                 physical cultural resources. Furthermore,
                                                                                 activities will be carried out only in areas
                                                                                                                                 selected by local citizens who would give great
                                                                                                                                 importance to safeguarding their cultural
                                                                                                                                 property
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     TBD                           The GoE and Bank have agreed on a Terms of
                                                                                                                                 Reference for a screening of ethnic groups in
                                                                                                                                 five regions, including Gambella, against the
                                                                                                                                 defining criteria in OP 4.10, and this work is
                                                                                                                                 ongoing. A social assessment is also being
                                                                                                                                 undertaken. If it is determined that the PCDP
                                                                                                                                 III involves indigenous peoples, an Indigenous
                                                                                                                                 Peoples Planning framework will be developed.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           PCDP III interventions may involve acquisition
                                 4.12                                                                                            of land and /or restriction of access to
                                                                                                                                 communal natural resources. An RPF will be
                                                                                                                                 developed.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            PCDP III will not finance large investments
                                                                                                                                 aimed at dam construction, nor does it depend
                                                                                                                                 on dams for irrigation and water supply.
                                 Projects on International                                         Yes                           Notification of intended water use has been sent
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            to Somalia and Kenya under PCDP I.
                                                                                                                                 Preparation for PCDP III will check if
                                                                                                                                 investments result cumulatively in more
                                                                                                                                 irrigated area than specified in the notifications.
                                                                                                                                 If PCDP III expands to the Gambella Region,
                                                                                                                                 additional notifications will be required since
                                                                                                                                 water systems in this Region are part of the
                                                                                                                                 White Nile River Basin which was not included
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 under the earlier phases of the Program.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not being implemented in any
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Mar-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      PCDP III will continue to apply the Environmental and Social Framework (ESMF) and Pesticides
                                      Management Plan (PPM) already in place. IP Screening will be carried out in the next two PCDP
                                      III will continue to apply the Environmental and Social Framework (ESMF) and Pesticides
                                      Management Plan (PPM) already in place. IP Screening will be carried out in the next two
                                      months, following which the GoE will undertake a social assessment, undertake free prior and
                                      informed consultations, as well as preparation of an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
                                      (IPPF) to be completed during preparation.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Laketch Mikael Imru




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Approved By:
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 20-Mar-2013
                         Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Tijan M. Sallah (SM)          Date: 26-Mar-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
