                                                                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                              CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC52
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Aug-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       India                                   Project ID:                      P118826
                              Project Name:                  India: Bihar Integrated Social Protection Strengthening Project (P1188
                              Task Team Leader:              Puja Vasudeva Dutta
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 27-Feb-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:            17-Jul-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 SASSP                                   Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        Public administration- Other social services (50%), Other social services (50%)
                              Theme:                         Social safety nets (50%), Other social protection and risk management (50%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                     Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                        0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                              70.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                    70.00
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              9. The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the implementation of social protection programs in Bihar by building
                              capacity, strengthening systems and demonstrating innovative approaches to improve program outcomes.

                              C. Project Description

                              This project would strengthen SP administration through improvements in the institutions and systems for program delivery. The project aims to
Public Disclosure Copy




                              modernize service standards and operational processes in order to deliver high standards of service, reduce duplication of effort, encourage
                              development of harmonized procedures and introduce transparency. This project focuses on the three programs # MGNREG (public works), IAY
                              (cash transfer) and social pensions (cash transfer) # and social care services administered by the Departments of Rural Development and Social
                              Welfare. Taken together, these programs represent a significant portion of the state SP system - expenditure on these programs in 2009-10
                              amounted to about two-thirds of the total SP spending in the state, or about 3% of GSDP. Given that RDD administers the BPL List used by
                              several programs, including those administered by departments not included in this project, the proposed project would promote greater cross-
                              program coherence and support GoB in moving towards a common platform for integrated SP delivery. This would help ensure that programs
                              reach the intended groups and improve the efficiency of public spending on SP. The proposed operation would be a SIL to be implemented over a
                              5-year period. During preparation, the team will explore with the Government of Bihar the possibility of using Disbursement Linked Indicators
                              (DLIs) to finance a part of the project.

                              The proposed project would have two main components structured around the institutional strengthening of the two institutions responsible for the
                              implementation of SP programs and services mentioned above. Both components will have two sub-components: (a) institutional strengthening of
                              the relevant implementing agency, including support for the day-to-day implementation of the project; and (b) piloting innovations to address
                              program-specific challenges with a view to identify appropriate models, understand the issues involved in scaling up and integration with existing
                              state systems. The selection of pilot districts would be made on the basis of criteria to be defined during project preparation.

                              Component 1: Transforming safety net delivery (approximate cost US$45 million): This component would support the Bihar Rural Development
                              Society (BRDS), an autonomous society envisaged as the implementation arm of the Rural Development Department, in transforming safety nets
                              delivery in Bihar. This component is expected to contribute to improved delivery of safety nets in terms of a greater share of the target population
                              receiving program benefits coverage and improved ability to track beneficiaries. It would have two sub-components:

                                Sub-component A: Institutional strengthening of BRDS: This would support the development of appropriate institutional rules and operational
                              framework as well as provide specific technical capacity critical for SP program delivery. This would include strengthening the following core
                              elements of the delivery infrastructure: (i) Performance enhancement of staff and partners engaged in the implementation of MGNREG, IAY and
                              BPL by using training and capacity building to improve performance; (ii) Promoting partnerships with non-government organizations (NGOs),
                              community-based organizations (CBOs) and others to increase outreach and coverage of safety nets. This would entail defining an appropriate
                              Public-Private-Community Partnership (PPCP) policy for social sectors. It would also require investment in technical capacity to establish and
                              manage these partnerships; (iii) Streamlining financial management through the scale-up of the Central Plan Scheme Monitoring System across
                              various programs and possibly district-level financial management support through technical support agencies leading to more efficient and
                              transparent management of program funds; and (iv) Integrating current scattered initiatives into a robust monitoring, evaluation and learning (M,
                              L&E) system. This would encompass an integrated transactions-based Management Information System (MIS) coupled with systematic f ield-
                         based, third-party and/or community process and outcome monitoring. This would allow for real-time information on key program indicators that
                         would help identify problems at each stage of delivery (application/enrolment, verification, payment, and grievance redressal). This would also
                         include support for the state#s initiative in integrating UID, e-shakti and BPL enrolment. By the end of the project, support provided under this sub-
                         component would be critical to the establishment of an autonomous State Data Management Agency (SDMA) which would serve as a central
                         state-level repository for all relevant citizen master data (including Census, BPL, UID and others as relevant) and all SP programs across all state
                         departments.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Sub-component B: Piloting innovations in safety nets: This sub-component would support pilots aimed at transforming the way BRDS does
                         business and providing an integrated platform for program delivery. Currently, the following two pilots are being considered: (i) One-stop citizen
                         service center (Kabhi Bhi Kahin Bhi Sewayen) in order to provide a single interface for citizens at a modernized, integrated block-level facility.
                         Building on the recommendations of RDD#s recent Business Process Restructuring (BPR) study, this would initially offer programs and services
                         provided by BRDS. However, the intent is for this to serve as a common platform for programs and services offered by other state departments.
                         Several options will be considered during preparation to provide a common platform for integrated SP delivery at the district and block level; and
                         (ii) Pilot payment models to address the critical challenge of ensuring timely delivery of MGNREG and IAY benefits. This model can potentially
                         provide a platform for other cash transfers in the state (e.g., social pensions administered by DoSW).

                         Component 2: Transforming delivery of social pensions and social care services (approximate cost US$25 million): This component would support
                         the Society for the Rehabilitation of the Ultra Poor (SRUP), an autonomous society under the Department of Social Welfare and its Directorate of
                         Social Security, in addressing the needs of vulnerable groups like older persons and persons with disabilities. This component is expected to lead
                         to better planning, management, monitoring and supervision of social care programs and services. It would have two sub-components:

                           Sub-component A: Institutional Strengthening of SRUP: This sub-component would support SRUP in providing an enabling policy environment for
                         these groups, developing state-specific programs for addressing their needs and providing specific technical capacity to deliver these programs
                         and services. This would include the following: (i) Comprehensive support for the development of policies and program guidelines, such as the
                         state policies for Older Persons and Persons with Disabilities. This also comprises defining the standards of care, including guidelines, rules and
                         regulations for provision of institutional and non-institutional care (based on program guidelines) and acceptable standards for all services; (ii)
                         Promoting partnerships with NGOs for delivering social care services in a manner consistent with the defined standards of care and regulations.
                         Applying the Public-Private Community Partnership (PPCP) policy for social sectors to be developed under Sub-component 1A of this project, this
                         sub-component would develop systems for NGO accreditation, continuous assessment and engagement and would provide technical capacity to
                         establish, oversee and manage these partnerships; (iii) Training and capacity building of staff and NGO partners engaged in the implementation of
                         these programs and services. Given the scarcity of qualified personnel for such delivery, this would also explore initiatives to expand the pool of
                         functionaries for institutions like DDRCs, service providers like therapists, etc; (iv) Streamlining procedures for disability certification which is the
                         first step for PWDs to access social pensions and other social services. This would also establish an electronic registry of persons with disabilities
                         in the state; and (v) Establishing a robust monitoring, evaluation and learning (M,E&L) system including a transactions-based integrated
                         Management Information System (MIS) and systematic field-based third-party and/or community verification and monitoring. This would streamline
                         and make more transparent the delivery of social pensions in the state as well as allow for timely oversight of institutions.

                           Sub-component B: Piloting innovations in social care services: This sub-component aims to increase outreach of social care services at the
                         district level and below and promote community-based rehabilitation. The proposed pilot would finance a one-stop integrated service center for
                         older persons and persons with disabilities in selected project districts. These centers would provide a package of services (such as counseling,
                         physiotherapy, assistive devices, etc.) either in-house or through a pre-identified referral network (e.g., with district hospitals). These would also
                         form the base for applications for social pensions and information on any state policies, programs and services, and would include emergency
Public Disclosure Copy




                         outreach services through a 24/7 telephone helpline. Lastly, these centers would also serve as the base for outreach of social care and
                         community-based rehabilitation services for these groups, e.g., through mobile vans, partnerships with NGOs, volunteer services for community
                         and home based care. The possibilities for co-location and coordination of these district-level centers with the BRDS block-level centers will be
                         explored during project preparation.

                         Several activities desc ribed above are designed with the intention to promote integration of SP delivery in the state. For instance, at the policy
                         level, the definition of the PPCP policy for social sectors would apply across the board. The proposed support for establishing an integrated MIS
                         and a data management unit would enable a comprehensive view of all citizen information, providing a common platform for identification,
                         enrolment and verification and the first step towards an integrated SP system for the state. Strengthening BPL data management (building on the
                         base of UID) would leverage better program outcomes for all other programs (IAY, PDS, RSBY, social pensions) in the state, including those not
                         administered by the counterpart departments. Similarly, streamlined systems for financial management at the district, block and panchayat level
                         would promote transparency across programs, while the payment intermediary pilot, if successful, could potentially provide a platform for benefit
                         delivery for all cash transfers in the state. At the district level and below, the proposed pilot centers could potentially provide an effective interface
                         to citizens for delivery of safety nets, social pensions and social care services. Opportunities to promote maximum coordination and coherence
                         across programs and departments will be actively explored during preparation.

                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The project will be implemented in the State of Bihar, India. Bihar is India's second poorest and third most populous state, with 56% of the rural
                         population living below the poverty line. The state also ranks poorly on other indicators of human development suchas infant and child mortality,
                         under-nutrition and literacy. Bihar is primarily rural and agrarian, with high levels of seasonal migration in search of low-skilled casual work.
                         Though recent years have witnessed a spurt in economic growth, Bihar has continued to perform poorly with respect to poverty reduction. About
                         73 percent of the geographical area of the state is flood-prone due to heavy rainfall in the catchments of the rivers that originate in neighboring
                         countries, shifting river courses, etc. Floods are annual phenomenon in the northern districts, particularly in the Kosi belt comprising of Saharsa,
                         Supaul and Madhepura districts. Water logging affects over 1550 sq km of land in Bihar and the state on the whole has very small area under
                         forest cover (6.87%).

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                         There is some familiarity within certain levels of Government of Bihar about the World Bank➢? s safeguard policy requirements, given a number of
                         projects being supported through Bank funding in the state. For example, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has recently been prepared to
                         guide the preparation of a resettlement plan under the Bihar Panchayat Strengthening Project. Similarly, an Environmental Management
                         Framework (EMF) was developed for the same project. Similar instruments also exist for the other projects that are currently under implementation
                           in the state. However, the two key implementing agencies, namely BRDS and SRUP, which would be involved in the proposed project, barely have
                           any exposure to the objectives and requirements of Bank➢? s environment and social safeguard policies. Therefore, specific attention will be
                           required towards capacity augmentation of the two key players for ensuring effective safeguards management.

                           The training and support for safeguards would be integrated as part of the overall institutional and organizational strengthening components
                           planned for the Bihar Rural Development Society (BRDS), an autonomous society under the Rural Development Department and Society for the
                           Rehabilitation of the Ultra Poor (SRUP, an autonomous society under the Department of Social Welfare and its Directorate of Social Security)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           under the project. A detailed capacity assessment will be carried out as part of safeguards studies, based on which propositions will be made for
                           creating/strengthening Borrower➢? s institutional capacity on safeguards.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Sangeeta Kumari (SASDS)
                           Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (SASDI)
                           Kalyani Kandula (SASGP)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                    Yes        No        TBD                                 Explanation
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01               ✖                          Some of the specific interventions envisaged under the project such
                                                                                                         as the establishment of a one-stop citizen service center at block
                                                                                                         level, housing support center, and the integrated service centers for
                                                                                                         elderly and disabled would trigger the environment safeguard policy
                                                                                                         OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment). The EA would help in
                                                                                                         ensuring the soundness and sustainability of such specific
                                                                                                         investments from an environmental perspective and would support
                                                                                                         the integration of environmental dimensions into the over-all
                                                                                                         decision-making process. Based on the nature, type and scale of
                                                                                                         proposed/envisaged project interventions, the environmental
                                                                                                         categorization for the project is 'B'. Potential adverse environmental
                                                                                                         impacts are likely to be site specific, few and largely reversible with
                                                                                                         appropriate design and implementation of mitigation measures.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                 ✖
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                                          ✖
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                                     ✖
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                      ✖
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                               ✖
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                   ✖      This policy may or may not be triggered. This will depend on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                         whether there would be land acquisition issues.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   ✖
                            Projects on International Waters OP/BP 7.50                 ✖
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                       ✖
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 18-Jan-2012
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
Public Disclosure Copy




                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                The safeguard related studies are likely to be initiated in September 2011 and a draft Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                (ESMF) version is expected in February 2012. The safeguard studies would be built-upon the work that has been carried out for the Bihar
                                Panchayat Strengthening Project (BPSP) and the Bihar Kosi Flood Recovery Project (BKFRP).

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name: Maria E. Gracheva                                                                               Date: 29-Sep-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                                                                         Date: 29-Sep-2011
                            Comments:          cleared.
                            Sector Manager:                                  Name: Pablo Gottret (SM)                                                                              Date: 06-Oct-2011
                            Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
