INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA453
b  Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Feb-2012
0
1 1. BASIC INFORMATION
U)    1. Basic Project Data
0
0
.U,
Q      Country:               Malawi                       Project ID:             P128576
.      Project Name:         Additional Financing to the Malawi Agricultural Development Program Support Project (P128576)
Task Team Leader:      Olivier Durand
Estimated Appraisal Date: 02-Feb-2012               Estimated Board Date:   15-Mar-2012
Managing Unit:        AFTAR                         Lending Instrument:     Specific Investment Loan
Sector:               Agricultural extension and research (40%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (40%), Public
administration- Agriculture, fishi ng and forestry (20%)
Theme:                 Rural services and infrastructure (80%), Rural policies and institutions (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Financing Source                                                                      Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       4.90
International Development Association (IDA)                                             30.00
Free-standing Cofinancing Trust Fund                                                    47.80
Total                                                                                    82.70
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Is this a Repeater project? No
2. Project Objectives
There Project Development Objective is to improve the effectiveness of investments aimed at food security and sustainable agricultural growth.
3. Project Description
o     The project has four components: (i) Institutional development and capacity building in preparation for a SWAp in agriculture; (ii) Sustainable food
0      security, to increase the land, water and nutrient use efficiency of maize based cropping systems and improve payoffs to the FISP, and to increase
a)    the resilience of the maize supply system to climate induced risks and shocks; (iii) Project coordination; and (iv) a new component on rural roads
U), improvement. The proposed additional financing responds to the request from the Government of Malawi (GoM) dated November 4th, 2011 to: (i)
0     scale up on-going activities to increase the number of farmers receiving support from the project; (ii) include new interventions in the field of
.n    agricultural diversification and access to markets; and, (iii) undertake a minor restructuring (change of project name, revision to results framework,
Q      closing date extension).
-O This Additional Financing is justified by the three main lines of reasoning: (a) First, the project had a somewhat slow and delayed start, but has
0..    now gained significant momentum and recognition, as it plays a crucial role in supporting the effective elaboration of the ASWAp and boosting
sustainable agricultural growth and food security, while using the regular structures of MoAIWD. This has induced an increasing number of
development partners to contemplate co-financing. Scaling-up project activities and extending the project closure date would allow for a more
comprehensive improvement of overall governance of the agricultural sector by building technical, managerial and administrative capacities in the
recently formed MoAIWD at central, provincial and district levels, while it would also allow for de facto coordinated support to the ASWAp through
the establishment of the proposed MDTF. (b) Second, the additional financing and the additional co-financing together will allow for a much
stronger increase in the efficiency, payoff and impact of the FISP and a major increase in the number of direct project beneficiaries. (c) Third,
additional financing provides an opportunity to implement additional activities that (a) fit in the ASWAp, (b) considerably contribute to the PDO, and
(c) may otherwise have to await financing through a new IDA agricultural investment project.
The main purpose of the MDTF is to scale up on-going activities of the ASWAp-SP with a particular attention to: (a) Under component 1:
strengthening MoAIWD administrative systems, particularly at the district level with a stronger focus on monitoring and evaluation systems;
strengthening MoAIWD's capacities for ASWAp finalization and implementation; (b) Under component 2: (i) enhancing FISP organization and
implementation, monitoring and evaluation, with a stronger focus on maize and legumes seeds availability; (ii) increasing the nationwide coverage
of research and extension activities to reach out to more farmers and to increase FISP payoffs and impact on smallholders; and, (iii) improving the
efficiency of agricultural research and extensions services while promoting a more pluralistic approach to delivering these services.
To increase project impact on food security and growth, four sets of additional activities are proposed under the additional IDA credit: (a) Diversify
maize-based production systems by: (i) extending the current research and extension approach to other important crops (with a particular focus on
pulses/ legumes important for nutrition, with growing local and regional markets); and (ii) improving legume crop production and marketing, and
ensuring availability of sufficient certified legume seeds to meet increasing demand both within and outside of FISP. (b) Promote land tenure
security to encourage improved land management investments for agricultural productivity, by strengthening the land administration capacity (land
surveying and registration); (c)  Improve the agricultural business environment and promote agribusiness partnerships in support of
Page 1 of 4


﻿agricultural diversification, a more market oriented agriculture and integration into agricultural value chains and regional markets; (d) Improve
market access of the most productive agricultural areas through the improvement and sustainable maintenance of feeder roads.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
The agriculture-related component of the Project, with its additional activities, will retain its focus as a nation-wide project. The new rural roads
component will target roads in areas with the potential for high agricultural production in the following Districts: Chikwawa, Chitipa, Salima,
>1    Mwanza and Ntcheu. Production areas within the districts will be identified by the MoAIWD, and the selection of individual roads will then take
0     place. Tertiary, District and Community Roads will be the main focus for improvements works, although unpaved Secondary Roads may also
O      benefit where they constrain access to areas of production. It is estimated that 550km of road will be improved, with approximately 300 km
a)    receiving spot improvements. The majority of the roads that will be the subject of interventions will be identified during the course of the project as
M     a result of dialogue between the Ministry of Agriculture, the District Administrations and the Roads Authority.
0
o     5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
.U,
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
-0    Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN)
6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered?  Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01  Yes       Project activities related to agricultural productivity increase and to the rural roads
improvement are expected to have some limited impact on the environment. The
original Project's Environment and Social Impact Assessment identifies these
impact and proposes mitigation measures included in an Environment and Social
Management Framework. Drawing on the ESMF for the Bank-financed
Infrastructure Support Project, the project ESMF has been updated to address the
potential impacts of upgrading/rehabilitating/maintaining rural feeder roads.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No
Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
Pest Management OP 4.09            Yes         Project's agricultural extension activities promote the use of pesticides, especially
as a way to reduce post-harvest losses in grain storage. The original Project's Pest
Management Plan has been updated and disclosed as as stand-alone instrument.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11  No
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12  Yes       Rehabilitation or upgrading of feeder roads may lead to small scale land-taking or
isolated cases of displacement, creating the need for a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF), as the sites and civil works are not yet known, and the eventual
preparation of Resettlement Action Plans, as necessary during implementation.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP  No
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60  No
O
0
-Z II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant andlor irreversible impacts:
The original Project was classified category B and triggered safeguards policies OP4.01 and OP4.09. The initial Environmental and Social
Impact Assessment (ESIA) report had identified potential adverse environmental and social impacts such as loss of vegetation, soil erosion,
siltation, water and soil pollution, and adverse impacts on human health due to increased use of agro-chemicals. None of these impacts will be
large scale or irreversible. An Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) which includes a Pest Management Plan (PMP) is in
place. The additional financing will scale up extension activities for productivity increase and will finance the rehabilitation of unpaved feeder
roads. New agricultural activities do not trigger any new safeguards policies. However, rehabilitation or upgrading of feeder roads may lead to
small scale land-taking or isolated cases of displacement, creating the need for a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), as the sites and civil
works are not yet known, and the eventual preparation of Resettlement Action Plans, as necessary. The RPF in use under the Bank-funded
Infrastructure Support Project, which includes similar types of road interventions, has been updated and adapted to the roads component of the
proposed additional financing. Resettlement Action Plans would be prepared as necessary during project implementation, once sites and works
identification is finalized. The original ESMF has been updated to address the impacts of and mitigation measures for the rural feeder roads,
and a PMP has been prepared as a stand-alone instrument. They have been disclosed before Project appraisal along with the updated RPF.
2. Describe any potential indirect andlor long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
The project is not expected to have any indirect and/or long-term impacts as the potential impacts are limited and can be easily mitigated. The
roads component will involve rehabilitation, spot improvement, low-volume sealing and maintenance of sections of the existing rural roads
network. The roads to benefit from improvements will only be identified when implementation starts. The safeguards policy OP 4.12 on
Involuntary Resettlement is triggered, but it is anticipated that resettlement will primarily involve limited land-take along the roads.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
This project supports the Agricultural Sector Wide Approach (ASWAp) of the Government of Malawi. Hence, the discussion of alternatives was
not relevant.
Page 2 of 4


﻿4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
and implement the measures described.
The original Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and its Pest Management Plan (PMP) are still in place and have been
disseminated to agricultural extension staff on the ground. The last mid-term review of the Project noted significant improvements in the
monitoring of potential adverse impacts, as well as in disseminating information on pesticide management to farmers through training of
extension staff and farmer field days. All pesticides (insecticides and herbicides) being tested under the Project have been registered for sale
by the Pesticide Control Board. Farmers visited during supervision missions appeared to be well versed in the need for careful pesticide
0-       management. Adequate equipment and protective clothing have been distributed to farmers. Under the proposed AF, further training will be
0        developed to increase awareness and dissemination of key messages to farmers and to strengthen the monitoring and evaluation of
safeguards-related activities and impact on the ground. Large scale demonstrations and extension activities are being developed to promote
sustainable land and water management production techniques.
0
O
Based on the experience of the Bank-funded Infrastructure Support Project, the updated ESMF will include a screening process to determine if,
Q        for each selected road (i) an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment is required, and (ii) any resettlement will be necessary that will
L        require the preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). In line with the policy and the mandate of the Roads Authority, the services of a
Consultant to carry out the screening and prepare any necessary ESIAs and RAPs for the selected roads will be procured. Where resettlement
is required then it will be done in accordance with the legal requirements, guidelines and the project's Resettlement Policy Framework. The
Roads Authority has an Environmental Management Unit which will work with the Department of Environment to ensure that the component
activities comply with the environmental requirements as stipulated in the Environmental Protection laws and the Bank's safeguard policies. It is
expected that resettlement costs will be borne by government.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders consulted during the original ESIA preparation included staff at the relevant ministries, the Environmental Affairs
Department, the Pesticide Control Board, members of District Development Committees, agricultural extension staff, local leaders and chiefs,
and farmers in the selected districts throughout Malawi. Their views had been incorporated into the ESIA Report with, as a result, a stronger
attention given to capacity building on mitigation measures for stakeholders at the District level, especially for extension workers who will work
at the grassroots level and for farmers leaders who will be in direct contact with other farmers. Specific training and equipment were also
planned upfront for farmers leaders who will develop on-farm trials and demonstration plots on integrated pest management and post-harvest
treatments. As part of the updating of the ESMF and preparation of the PMP further consultations were organized with extension officers and
lead farmers. Public consultation and community participation will be mandatory for all projects requiring land acquisition, compensation and
resettlement for the ASWAp-SP road component activities. During screening there must be adequate consultation and involvement of the local
communities and the affected persons. Specifically, the affected persons will be informed about the intentions to use the earmarked sites for
the ASWAp-SP activities and structures.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  25-Jan-2012
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              03-Feb-2012
C        Date of submission to InfoShop                                               03-Feb-2012
a)      For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
U)      Directors
0
Z5      Resettlement Action PlanlFramework/Policy Process
.U,
Q        Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               Yes
-        Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  25-Jan-2012
0-       Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              02-Feb-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                               02-Feb-2012
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  26-Jan-2012
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              03-Feb-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                               03-Feb-2012
If the project triggers the Pest Management andlor Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Auditior EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Page 3 of 4


﻿If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are  Yes [X]  No[  ]  NA[
PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the  Yes[ X  ]  NA
0.      plan?
0
C)     The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
a)
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?  Yes [  No     NA[
0       Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language  Yes [ x  No  NA[
.Un     that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?  Yes [ XI  No [  ]  NA [
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [
impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [
been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
Ill. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:          Olivier Durand
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                 Date: 08-Feb-2012
Sector Manager:            Name lain G. Shuker (SM)                                Date: 08-Feb-2012
0
)
0
0
Page 4 of 4


