                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA350
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Jan-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Senegal                                 Project ID:                      P122841
                              Project Name:                  Stormwater Mgt. and Climate Change Adaptation Project (P122841)
                              Task Team Leader:              Denis Jean-Jacques Jordy
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 09-Jan-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:            10-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 AFTEN                                   Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        Flood protection (60%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%)
                              Theme:                         Other urban development (30%), Natural disaster management (30%), Climate change (20%), Other environment
                                                             and natural resources mana gement (20%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                  Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                  BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                      17.00
                                  International Development Association (IDA)                                                                             55.20
                                  JAPAN Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)                                                                     10.00
                                  Nordic Development Fund (NDF)                                                                                            4.00
                                  Total                                                                                                                   86.20
                              Environmental Category:        A - Full Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The proposed project will improve drainage and flood prevention in peri-urban Dakar for the benefit of local residents.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              3. Project Description

                              The project consists of four components described in subsequent paragraphs.

                              Component A. Flood risk mainstreaming in urban sector (total US$ 4 million including taxes and contingencies).

                              Component A will comprise three sub-components: (i) Urban planning and management aiming to integrate stormwater flood risks into local and
                              national urban planning and management tools to ensure short- and medium-term flood prevention and decreased vulnerability; (ii) Institutional
                              strengthening of national government departments and municipalities of greater Dakar through development and implementation of a module-
                              based training program to address flood risk management and urban climate change adaptation; (iii) the development of a future larger Integrated
                              urban stormwater management and climate change adaptation program.


                              Component B. Drainage investments and management (total US$ 66.5 million including taxes and contingencies).

                              Component B will comprise two sub-components: (i) Drainage infrastructure investments, and (ii) Operation and maintenance of drainage systems.
                              The component aims to establish a primary (and in some areas secondary) drainage system in the districts of Pikine and Guédiawaye; to be done
                              in two investments phases and to ensure its effective operation and maintenance through clear institutional responsibilities and adequate financial,
                              technical and human capacity. The first priority investment tranche compliant with the Drainage Master Plan under preparation, will cover 3 sites
                              (Dalifort, Wakhinane Nimzat and Niety Mbar, Bagdad and Keur Massar Village). The first tranche would include in one of the sites (Wakhinane and
                              Niety Mbar) additional basic urban rehabilitation such as access road improvement, including road connections as a pilot that could be scaled up
                              within forthcoming urban development programs. The exact scope of the following investment tranche two is pending completion and validation of
                              the detailed Drainage Investment Plan.


                              Component C. Community engagement in urban flood-risk reduction and adaptation to climate change (total US$ 6.3 million including taxes and
                              contingencies).

                              Component C will comprise two sub-components: (i) Flood resilience awareness, communication and community capacity-building, and (ii) Flood
                              risk-reduction sub-projects. The component aims to increase local and national awareness of flood prevention and adaptation measures and to
                              engage municipalities, local residents, associations and support groups within Pikine and Guédiawaye in the project supported preventive
                              measures and responses to reduce the risk of recurrent floods. The component will develop an information, education and communication (IEC)
                              strategy and media support tools targeting national as well as local stakeholders focusing on storm water management and flood prevention,
                                                                                                                                                                     Page 1 of 5
                         preparedness and response and awareness raising promoting stronger resilience. Implementation of this strategy at local level will be done by
                         selected non-governmental “social facilitators?. Throughout project duration, theses social facilitators will carry out a highly consultative and
                         participatory process involving local stakeholders, communities and committees to accompany the larger infrastructure investments under
                         component B, to ensure community participation and engagement in IEC measures, in local operation and maintenance as well as to assist with
                         implementation of urban climate change resilience activities planned for under the communal action plans. The facilitators will further assist with
                         the development, implementation and monitoring of flood risk reduction pilot sub-projects under MDA’s supervision. A specific sub-projects manual
                         will be included in the project’s implementation manual.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component D. Project coordination, management, monitoring and evaluation (US$ 9.3 million including taxes and contingencies).

                         Component D will comprise two sub-components: (i) Project coordination and management, and (ii) Monitoring and evaluation. It aims to provide
                         efficient and effective management support for project implementation and monitoring and evaluation. The project has been shortlisted as
                         candidate for a Bank-internal impact evaluation process and adequate resources will be made available. This will be achieved by supporting the
                         MDA with adequate technical and fiduciary staffing, operational support and equipment and guided by a detailed project implementation manual
                         and M&E plan.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The project will cover the peri-urban areas of Dakar, and mainly the District of Pikine and Guediawaye.


                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Demba Balde (AFTCS)
                         Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN)
                         Denis Jean-Jacques Jordy (AFTEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                   Yes       No      Explanation
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                ✖                The project is categorized A due to the potential adverse environmental and
                                                                                             social impacts of the civil works associated with the construction of the
                                                                                             drainage infrastructure with the option to change it to a Category B depending
                                                                                             on the findings and recommendations of the technical feasibility study and
                                                                                             environmental and social impact assessment carried out during project
                                                                                             preparation. The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                                                                                             of the Local Authority Development Project (urban project) will be revised and
                                                                                             updated for the overall project and will fully apply for the pilot investments
                                                                                             under component C. Concerning the dranage investments (component B), an
                                                                                             Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and an Environmental
                                                                                             Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared. These environmental safeguards
                                                                                             instruments of ESMF, ESIA and EMP will be disclosed in-country and at the
                                                                                             Info-shop prior to appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                        ✖                OP/BP 4.04 is triggered due to interventions in four basins. However, the
                                                                                             investments have been selected to avoid critical habitats in conformity with the
                                                                                             guidelines of the OP/BP 4.04. The project activities would not result in any
                                                                                             significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats. Further, there
                                                                                             will be no biodiversity loss through conversion of natural habitats in the four
                                                                                             basins.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                                           ✖
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                            ✖                OP/BP 4.09 is triggered because the retention basins that will be put in place
                                                                                             as part of the drainage system might need to be treated in order to control
                                                                                             water borne diseases. Although the project would not finance these products,
                                                                                             the project might promote the purchase and use of anti vector insecticides by
                                                                                             the Government services in charge of malaria control and hygiene and
                                                                                             sanitation. How these anti vector insecticides would be properly used including
                                                                                             training on usage is contained as an annex in the ESMF.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11             ✖                OP/BP 4.11 is triggered and the ESMF states that if cultural resources are
                                                                                             found during civil work a ‘chance find’ procedures will launched in accordance
                                                                                             with national regulation and OP/BP 4.11.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                ✖
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                ✖                The policy is triggered as there is the likelihood that infrastructural investments
                                                                                             might lead to resettlement of households; in particular to those living where the
                                                                                             drainage channels will be built. There is also the possibility of restriction of
                                                                                             access to sources of livelihood during civil works. The existing Resettlement
                                                                                             Policy Framework (RPF) of the Local Authority Development Project (urban
                                                                                             project will be revised and updated for the overall project and will fully apply for
                                                                                             the pilot investments under component C. Concerning the drainage
                                                                                             investments (component B), a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be
                                                                                             prepared. These social safeguards instruments of RPF and RAP will be
                                                                                             disclosed in-country and at the Info shop prior to appraisal.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                    ✖

                                                                                                                                                                     Page 2 of 5
                               6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                   Yes        No     Explanation
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                    ✖
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                        ✖
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                 The proposed project is designed to have beneficial impacts on the population in terms of reduced vulnerability to flooding and improved
                                 livelihoods conditions. The project is categorized A because of the potential adverse environmental and social impacts of the civil works related
                                 to the construction of the drainage infrastructures in particular, in areas where they were non-existent. Five safeguard policies are triggered:
                                 Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/
                                 BP 4.11) and Involuntary Resettlement (OB/BP 4.12).

                                 The drainage investments will take into account the existing settlements and be designed / selected in order to minimize the resettlement of
                                 residents, mainly those living where the drainage channel will be built. During civil works, they might be loss of land or restriction of access to
                                 sources of livelihood. The environmental impact associated with the construction and operation of the stormwater drainage system and the pilot
                                 projects is expected to be moderate because the existing environment is already largely degraded.

                                 The environmental impact associated with the construction and operation of the stormwater drainage system and the pilot projects is expected
                                 to be moderate because the existing environment is already largely degraded.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                 No potential indirect or long term or cumulative impacts are foreseen during project implementation.
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                 The first phase drainage investments covering the basins of Dalifort; Wakhinane and Niety Bar; and Keur Massar have been identified and
                                 interventions have been carefully selected to avoid resettlement of persons and limit restriction to assets or sources of livelihood.
                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                                  and implement the measures described.
                                 Three instruments have been prepared: (i) An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for first phase drainage investments, (ii) an
                                 Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and (iii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and will be used for
                                 implementation purposes; in particular these frameworks will fully apply to the second phase of investments under component B and micro-
                                 project planned under component C. Since the project includes land use planning aspects, the project task team will ensure that appropriate
                                 consultations with project stakeholders will be carried out and the capacity building of key local and governmental agencies and institutions
                                 responsible for planning will be build, in order to mainstream flood risks in land use planning and management. This is consistent with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Bank’s Interim Guidance Note on Land use Planning. Public consultations have been held on the project and safeguards instruments. These
                                 safeguards instruments have been reviewed, approved and disclosed in-country and on infoshop.

                                 OP/BP 4.04 is triggered on a precautionary basis due to interventions in four basins. However, the investments have been selected to avoid
                                 critical habitats in conformity with the guidelines of the OP/BP 4.04. The project activities would not result in any significant conversion or
                                 degradation of critical natural habitats. Further, there will be no biodiversity loss through conversion of natural habitats in the four basins.

                                 OP/BP 4.09 is triggered because the temporary retention basins that will be put in place as part of the drainage system might need to be
                                 treated in order to control water borne diseases. Although the project would not finance these products, the project might promote the purchase
                                 and use of anti vector insecticides by the Government services in charge of malaria control and hygiene and sanitation. How these anti vector
                                 insecticides would be properly used including training on usage is contained as an annex in the ESMF.

                                 OP/BP 4.11 is triggered because the project may affect physical cultural resources. The ESMF states that if cultural resources are found during
                                 civil work a ‘chance finds’ procedures will launched in accordance with national regulation and OP/BP 4.11.

                                 The ESIA and ESMF contain draft Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) acceptable to the Bank that specify mitigation
                                 measures for various potential adverse impacts in the pre-construction, construction and operation phases of the project. Funds for
                                 implementing the ESMPs are also included in the project cost estimates.

                                 As the project may result in land acquisition/involuntary resettlement, an RPF has been prepared. It includes guidance for compensation and
                                 resettlement assistance measures, as well as provisions for consultation and grievance redress.

                                 The first phase of drainage investments covering the basins of Dalifort; Wakhinane and Niety Bar; Keur Massar village has been identified and
                                 interventions have been carefully selected to avoid resettlement of persons and limit restriction to assets or sources of livelihood. As a result
                                 only loss of revenues and land are expected, as indicated in the RPF. An Abbreviated RAP (ARAP) will be prepared, and disclosed before
                                 effectiveness once the detailed engineering studies have been completed. The ARAP could not be prepared before appraisal because the
                                 exact locations and alignments of the drainage channels and retentions basins will only be known when the detailed engineering studies, which
                                 include complex hydrologic and hydraulic modeling, will be completed (before effectiveness). These studies require strong modeling due to the
                                 complex hydrologic and hydraulic system, before effectiveness. The ARAP will include any necessary mitigation measures to be implemented.

                                 For phase 2, limited resettlement (around 224 households) and loss of revenues are expected. A RAP will be developed to identify impacts of
                                 the drainage works, necessary mitigation measures such as compensations of affected households resulting from unforeseen land acquisition.
                                 In addition the awareness raising and communication strategy developed under component C will be implemented with the participation of all
                                                                                                                                                                         Page 3 of 5
                           actors including local communities and will also be designed in order to facilitate the resettlement process.

                           The Municipal Development Agency (MDA), which is the executing agency of the project is experienced in safeguard policies in line with
                           existing country legislation and World Bank procedures. MDA has already prepared and implemented successfully an Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework and a Resettlement Policy Framework for large urban investments with potential environmental and social impacts
                           under the Local Authority Development Project. The MDA, the Senegalese Environment Agency, the participating enterprises and supervising
                           consultants have been given well defined roles in the different instruments to ensure that environmental and social safeguards guidelines
Public Disclosure Copy




                           including occupational, health and safety guidelines. The MDA will also ensure that all bidding documents and contracts have the environmental
                           and social management clauses to tie the enterprises and supervising consultants on the need to adhere to sustainable environment, social,
                           health, and safety guidelines during civil works.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders are the Ministries (and their relevant agencies/departments) in charge of urban development, habitat, hydraulics, drainage
                           and sanitation; environment and protection of nature; and local development and decentralization; the municipalities of Pikine and Guediawaye,
                           participating communities, NGOs and other relevant institutions.

                           All the relevant bodies have been adequately informed of the Project. Concerns of the communities and some details of consultations have
                           been provided as Annexes in the ESIA, ESMF and RPF. Most of the people have been affected by floods for many years, and they welcome
                           the project. The key concerns raised during the consultation process include the lack of involvement of population in project activities, the risk of
                           clogging of drainage channel by solid wastes, weak O&M that could affect the performance of the system, resettlement without compensation,
                           and delay in project implementation. All these concerns have been addressed in project design mainly through a strong participatory process in
                           project, the construction of closed channels in densely populated areas and support to a sustainable O&M system. Resettlement procedures
                           will comply with OP 4.12. The first investment tranche is expected to start soon after effectiveness.

                           One of the key principles of this project from the outset was to foster participation of all relevant stakeholders. This approach will be sustained
                           throughout project implementation. The environmental and social assessment studies, namely the ESIA, ESMF and RPF, were also carried out
                           according to the same principle, using broad-based public consultation approach, involving the above stakeholder groups. The objective was to
                           raise awareness of project activities and impacts and foster ownership on their part.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                             Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                18-Nov-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                            20-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                             21-Dec-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                             Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                18-Nov-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                            20-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                             21-Dec-2011
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                             NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                NA
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                            NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                             NA
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         a standalone Pest Management Plan was not prepared. Instead How these anti vector insecticides would be properly used including training on
                         usage is contained as an annex in the ESMF.

                         The OP/BP 4.09 is triggered because the temporary retention basins that will be put in place as part of the drainage system might need to be
                         treated in order to control water borne diseases. Although the project would not finance these products, the project might promote the purchase
                         and use of anti vector insecticides by the Government services in charge of malaria control and hygiene and sanitation. How these anti vector
                         insecticides would be properly used including training on usage is contained as an annex in the ESMF.

                         OP/BP 4.11 is triggered and the ESMF states that if cultural resources are found during civil work and a ‘chance finds’ procedures will launched in
                         accordance with national regulation and OP/BP 4.11.

                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment

                                                                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 5
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                              If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                              If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are                   Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                              Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                              Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on               Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the             Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                     Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language             Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for          Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                     Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard           Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same               Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Signed and submitted by:                                                  Name                                                      Date
                            Task Team Leader:                     Denis Jean-Jacques Jordy                                                       06-Jan-2012
                            Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:      Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                    06-Jan-2012
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                       Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough (SM)                                               07-Jan-2012
                            Comments:      Approved




                                                                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 5
