                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC581
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Mar-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Namibia                                  Project ID:                      P128511
                              Project Name:                  Second Namibian Coast Conservation and Management Project (P128511)
                              Task Team Leader:              Claudia Sobrevila
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 24-Jul-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:            06-Dec-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 AFTEN                                    Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Focal Area:                    Biodiversity
                              Sector:                        Forestry (50%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%)
                              Theme:                         Biodiversity (30%), Environmental policies and institutions (30%), Climate change (20%), Water resource
                                                             management (20%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                        17.32
                                   Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                                          3.57
                                   Total                                                                                                                     20.89
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? Yes

                              B. Global Environmental Objective(s)

                              To maintream an integrated coastal zone management approach (ICZM) for the development of the Namibian coast.

                              C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              This project is expected to be funded by a US$3,577,000 GEF grant and US$17,332,000 in co-financing from GRN. The partnership between the
                              GEF, the Government of Namibia and the private sector (tourism, fisheries and mining) is an innovative and exciting approach to marine and
                              coastal zone conservation and to mainstreaming integrated coastal zone management (ICZM) in productive sectors in Namibia.

                              Coastal management in Namibia is currently on the cusp of success and failure. The NACOMA project has supported essential initial steps
                              towards establishing an effective governance framework, promoting decentralized decision making and protecting key marine and coastal
                              biodiversity. Ongoing support for coastal governance activities through this project are essential to: a) boost the baseline of a developing, yet
                              currently inadequate integrated coastal governance framework; b) strengthen newly proclaimed yet ineffectively managed coastal and marine
                              protected areas; c) support preliminary steps towards mainstreaming the ICZM approach into production sectors; and d) bring new opportunities to
                              integrate renewal energy programs in the National Coastal Policy. In the absence of support, there is a high likelihood of persistent degradation of
                              high-value, unique biodiversity and natural resources and loss of opportunities for sustainable coastal development.

                              The proposed project would include three interrelated components and an administrative management component.

                              Component 1: Implementation of the National Coastal Policy (NCP)
                              This component would conduct the following activities with GEF funds: a) an economic and environmental assessment of the coastal tourism
                              sector and recommendations to focus on how to incorporate an ICZM approach in policies and regulatory frameworks and provide alternative
                              benefits of tourism to production sectors; b) a strategy for renewable energy (including solar, biogas, concentrated solar power and ocean)
                              specifically for the coast. This will be done jointly with coastal local authorities and the energy and mining sectors; c) the development of tools for
                              the sustainable land management and development practices in the wider coastal landscapes and seascapes and of at least two certified coastal
                              production landscapes and seascapes (i.e. fisheries and mariculture, tourism or mining); and d) a study of the economic impacts of coastal erosion
                              and climate change effects on biodiversity, ecosystems and coastal inhabitants (including coastal Ramsar sites).
                              With counterpart funds, this component would support: a) the designation of the permanent institutional structure for the NCP and the long term
                              budgeting; b) the functioning of advisory mechanisms for collaboration and integration among sectoral agencies and across multiple scales on
                              sustainable coastal and ocean management issues ; and c) the influencing of key policies and regulatory frameworks to incorporate marine and
                              coastal biodiversity and renewable energy technologies in fisheries, tourism, energy and mining.

                              Component 2: Institutional Strengthening, Knowledge and Research for ICM
                              This component would conduct the following activities with GEF funds: a) the development of a monitoring system to ensure compliance and
                              enforcement of coastal regulatory framework at the national, regional and local level; b) the establishment of a coastal and marine biodiversity
                              information center and the upgrading of existing coastal information centers that will become a hub for disseminating and communicating key
                           information gathered by NACOMA on legislation, policies, best practices for the tourism, fisheries and mining sector, biodiversity and ecological
                           information, major potential threats. The center will also play a critical role for training and youth and volunteer programs to raise awareness about
                           the values of the coast and marine natural resources.
                           This component would conduct the following activities with counterpart funds: a) the functioning of inter-ministerial committees for integrated
                           ocean and coastal management to monitor enforcement and compliance to the NCP including climate change mitigation measures; b) co-financing
                           of the coastal and marine biodiversity information center in cooperation with the private sector and other donors; c) support awareness-raising
                           initiatives and communication campaigns on coastal and marine biodiversity and climate change mitigation (to support technicians in design,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           installation and maintenance of solar, biogas, concentrated solar and ocean energy systems); and d) research projects on key coastal and marine
                           biodiversity required to generate up to date information to display at the center.

                           Component 3: Coastal and Marine Protected Areas Investments
                           This component would support on-the ground investments within and outside coastal and marine protected areas. The GEF fund would finance:
                           a) the infrastructure and equipment for Dorob National Park (DNP - 811,800 ha) and the development of sustainable financing plans for the marine
                           and coastal PA system (i.e. Namib-Skeleton Coast National Park made up of Skeleton Coast Park (1,639,000 ha), Namib-Naukluft Park
                           (4,976,800 ha), Sperrgebiet National Park (2,600,000 ha) and Namibian Islands Marine Protected Area (1,180,000 ha); b) the implementation of a
                           small and medium micro enterprises (SMME) program for: i) rehabilitation of degraded lands with communities involvement around PAs; and ii)
                           piloting renewable energy technologies in the coastal areas such as solar, biogas, concentrated solar and ocean energy systems where
                           appropriate.
                           This component would support with counterpart funds: a) the posting of new staff in the coastal zone to work on research, law enforcement, crime
                           prevention and tourism development; b) investments in some marine and coastal park infrastructure; and c) the posting of more staff to improve
                           management effectiveness of marine and coastal protected areas and to advise the fishing industry on harvesting and reducing by-catch
                           mortalities.

                           Component 4: Project Management
                           This component would support the day to day operation of a project implementation unit responsible for the following functions: a) administration;
                           b) coordination; c) financial and audit management; d) procurement management; e) monitoring and evaluation; f) fundraising; and g) reporting.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           The project is located in the Namibia coast. It comprises the hot desert sands that meet the icy Benguela current. There are few places left on the
                           planet where one can experience such vast stretches of undeveloped wilderness. Both, the desert sands and the Benguela current have
                           abundant life, the desert as a result of the life giving fogs and the Benguela through the upwelling “cells? and longshore drift. The Succulent Karoo
                           biome of the southern Namib desert has more diversity than any other desert in the world. The waters of the Namibian coast support some of the
                           greatest concentrations of marine life found in the world. This high level of biological productivity is the result of seasonable south to southeast
                           winds which induce upwelling that provides an abundant supply of nutrients in the upper layers. These nutrients together with sunlight promote
                           blooms of phytoplankton, rich resources of zooplankton and an abundance of pelagic fish such as pilchard, anchovy and juvenile horse mackerel.
                           These fish shoals in turn provide food for large populations of higher predators such as sharks, seals, cetaceans and seabirds. The coastal region
                           has been relatively inaccessible to date, and there have been few opportunities for use of coastal land and resources by residents of coastal
                           regions. As a result, Namibia has an exceptionally low, and geographically very concentrated, coastal population compared to other countries.
                           However, increasing human pressures over the past several years highlight the urgent need for sound coastal planning and management to
                           ensure sustainable and optimal use of coastal areas and their resources in the future.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Government of the Republic of Namibia (GRN) has already implemented the NACOMA project with support from a MET Project Coordination
                           Office (PCO) based in Swakopmund responsible for day to day project management and coordination. The same arrangements will be used for
                           the proposed project. A Project Steering Committee (SC) guides MET and its project team in the implementation of the project. It comprises MET
                           (chair) and Ministry of Regional Local Governments, Housing and Rural Development (deputy-chair), Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources,
                           Ministry of Mines and Energy, Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry, Ministry of Work and Transport, Communication, National Planning
                           Commission and Chief Executive Officer (CEOs) of Kunene, Erongo, Hardap and Karas Region. The Integrated Coastal Zone Management
                           Committee (ICZMC) provides inputs and advice to the SC as defined in the financing agreement. It comprises the regional councils of the four
                           coastal regions, coastal focal points from MET, MRLGHRD, MFMR, MME, MAWF and MWT and coastal local authority representatives from
                           Swakopmund, Walvis Bay, Henties Bay and Lüderitz and non-institutional stakeholders and co-opted entities. A Scientific Group (SG) provides
                           scientific input as requested by SC, ICZMC or MET/project team and was put in place to assist in screening matching grant proposals, develop
                           indicators for coastal zone management monitoring mechanisms and to contribute to targeted capacity building efforts. All these institutional
                           arrangements provide effective transparency and assurances that the environmental and social dimensions of the project follow the highest
                           standard. The project will follow Bank’s safeguards policy, as done for the NACOMA project.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           George Campos Ledec (AFTEN)
                           Claudia Sobrevila (AFTEN)
                           Paula F. Lytle (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                               Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes                While this is an environmental project, the project has been classified as an
                                                                                              environmental safeguard category "B" project, to ensure that the GRN follows
                                                                                              the ESMF for the project to ensure that on-the-ground activities such as the
                                                                                              National Park refurbishing and some small micro-enterprise projects with local
                                                                                              communities are implemented in compliance with WB EA Policy 4.01 and similar
                                                                                                                        Namibian EA requirements, and to ensure that mitigation measures are spelled
                                                                                                                        out for all possible negative impacts prior to implementation of any on-the-
                                                                                                                        ground activities.
                                Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                        Yes                    The project involves management of natural habitats, including parks.

                                Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                 No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Pest Management OP 4.09                                            No

                                Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                             No

                                Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                      No

                                Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                Yes                    A process framework (PF) is proposed to ensure that eligible affected persons
                                                                                                                        are assisted in their efforts to restore or improve their livelihoods while
                                                                                                                        contributing to maintain the environmental sustainability of protected areas
                                                                                                                        included in the project. A PF has been developed for the NACOMA project in
                                                                                                                        2010 and will be updated for the new project. The PF will also provide a
                                                                                                                        description of the institutional arrangements through which the communities will
                                                                                                                        participate in the management of the natural resources and monitoring as well
                                                                                                                        as criteria and procedures to be followed in case restriction of access to marine
                                                                                                                        and terrestrial resources.
                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No

                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          No
                                7.50
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No



                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 18-Jul-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    The ESMF and PF will be part of preparation activities and will be sent to the Bank for review prior to appraisal.

                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: Claudia Sobrevila
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                     Date: 06-Mar-2012
                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Dahlia Lotayef (SM)                                                                             Date: 07-Mar-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
