                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC1394

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Sep-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ghana                            Project ID:      P127452
                            Project Name:      Ghana Public Sector Reform Project (P127452)
                            Task Team          Serdar Yilmaz
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          01-May-2013                      Estimated        11-Sep-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTP3                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector:         General public administration sector (100%)
                            Theme:          Administrative and civil service reform (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                    10.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                        10.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           19.    The Project supports the job creation goal laid out in the Government of Ghana New
                           Approach to Public Sector Reform Program. The project development objective is to improve public
                           administration and public policy making capacity in selected key ministries to enhance enabling
                           environment for businesses to invest in the economy and create jobs in their respective sectors.
                           C. Project Description
                           21.     The proposed Project would be financed by a US$ 10 million Specific Investment Loan
                           (SIL), and would use a results-based investment lending modality to support project implementation.
                           The proposed activities under the project will not entail any safeguard issues as it will not involve
                           civil works and retrenchment of employees.
                           22.     The project supports the implementation of the government's flagship reform program
                         --"New Approach to Public Sector Reforms." The project will target a limited number of ministries
                         (3 to 5 ministries) to strengthen their institutional capacity to make and implement public policies for
                         enhancing enabling environment for private sector to invest in the economy and create jobs in their
Public Disclosure Copy




                         respective sectors. The project will also strengthen public sector results chain. In this process, the
                         project will support key central management agencies (Public Sector Reform Secretariat, Public
                         Services Commission, Office of the Head of Civil Service, State Enterprise Commission, Public
                         Procurement Authority) in fulfilling their role in reform management. Support to key central
                         management agencies will focus on developing policies and implementation tools for cross-cutting
                         reforms such as human resource and performance management, procurement contract management
                         and payment systems. However, the implementation of these policies and tools will be only in the
                         intervention ministries (3 to 5 ministries). The Project will disburse against achievement of selected
                         intermediate indicators and results along an identified reform path. The project aims to achieve the
                         objectives of each of the reform areas and the overall PDO, by making disbursement when identified
                         and agreed steps (disbursement linked indicators or DLIs) are achieved or completed. The results
                         focus helps to address the collective action and coordination problems by better aligning the
                         incentives of different actors (the rationale behind the project design is further detailed in Annex IV).

                         Description
                         Component 1: Institutional Strengthening for Better Public Sector Management

                         23.      The first component will support NAPSR's vision of establishing new institutions and
                         processes to improve public administration and public policy making capacity of selected ministries
                         (3 to 5 ministries) to deliver on the NAPSR priority area of job creation. The NAPSR Approach does
                         not support direct job creation through government agencies, but by improving the enabling
                         environment for improved partnerships between the private and public institutions for sustainable job
                         creation at sector level. It envisages improving enabling environment for job creation. The aim of
                         this component is to strengthen institutional capacity of selected ministries to make and implement
                         public policies to enhance enabling environment for the private sector to invest in the economy and
                         create jobs (see Annex IV). It will focus on:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Formation of deliberative institutions is at the centre of the new approach and aims to
                         strengthen cooperation between public sector institutions and the private sector through
                         establishment of Ministerial Advisory Boards (MABs), Project Advisory Committees (PACs) and
                         Project Management Units (PMUs). These institutions are expected to create a platform for
                         interactions between government and non-government actors to build consensus around priority
                         policies for removing barriers to job creation. The project will pay attention to important issues
                         around the legitimacy of this deliberative institution, such as representation and recruitment
                         processes, their role and power, accountability and their size taking into account international
                         experiences (see Annex III).
                                 Str engthening public administration capacity is a key objective of the NAPSR. This
                         component will strengthen downstream institutional capacity of a limited number of ministries (3 to
                         5 ministries) to formulate and implement policies for job creation. It will aim to redress the structural
                         weaknesses in the organization and management of these ministries.
                                 Strengthening public policy making capacity for job creation is at the heart of the NAPSR.
                         This component will strengthen public policy making function of a limited number of ministries (3 to
                         5 ministries) in job creation and industrial policy making (see Annex IV).
                         24.      The following are the proposed areas to define DLIs:
                                 Policy formulation capacity leading to job creation in the selected sectors.
                                 Increased levels of foreign and domestic private sector investment in the selected sectors.
                                 Appropriate organizational structures, processes and staffing in the selected ministries to
                         perform their functions effectively.
                                 Development of effective Contract Management and Payment procedures for procurement.
                                 Establishment of a Procurement Unit in the selected ministries.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Development of a performance contract system for the relevant subvented agencies linked to
                         the selected ministries.

                         Component 2: Support to Key Central Management Agencies

                         25.      Inadequate support from central agencies for cross-cutting issues, exemplified most
                         prominently in lack of a coherent human resource management policy and lack of a coordinated and
                         strategic focus of capacity development initiatives is a major impediment in front of public sector
                         reforms. This component will provide support to key central management agencies for upstream
                         coordination in the implementation of public sector reforms. As central management functions play a
                         crucial role in public sector reform programs, component two will focus on development of key
                         management policies and frameworks. Over the years Ghana has suffered progressive depletion of
                         skilled manpower in the middle level cadre of professional and technical staff. Human resource
                         management has been highlighted in the NAPSR and in the Ghana Shared Growth and Development
                         agenda as areas of improvement in the medium term. The government acknowledges that it must
                         rebuild its civil service if it is to achieve its ambitious objectives of public sector reforms within the
                         context of a middle income country. The Office of the Head of the Civil Service and the Public
                         Services Commission have both designed medium term improvement plans to build a professional
                         public sector management practice. They have included performance management as part of their
                         plans for improving civil service and public service. These plans aim to create common human
                         resource management and performance management framework policies. The NAPSR also
                         recognizes the importance of robust procurement systems in achieving its objectives.

                         26.     The aim of this component is to complement overall reforms undertaken by various
                         development partners as well as the government. The component will support development of human
                         resource management and performance frameworks as well as strengthening of country systems in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         procurement. The following are the proposed areas to define DLIs:
                                Better functioning of PSC and OHCS for effective human resource management.
                                Comprehensive human resource management framework and tools and well-trained people
                         to implement it.
                                Performance related rewards and sanction system in place in the intervention ministries.
                                Better record management policy and system in place for better decision-making and
                         transparency.
                                Establishment of control mechanisms to assist procurement in the intervention ministries.
                                Establishment of independent complaints handling mechanism in the intervention ministries.

                         Component 3: Project Coordination, Management, Monitoring and Evaluation

                         27.      This component will support (i) the coordination and efficient administrative, technical and
                         financial management of the project and (ii) the monitoring and evaluation of the performance,
                         results, and impacts of the project and overall program. The Public Sector Reform Secretariat is
                         responsible for the overall management and coordination of the Project and will ensure the quality of
                         technical and fiduciary aspects of all project activities. The PSR Secretariat will also liaise closely
                         with key government ministries. Coordination mechanisms between projects and donors involved in
                         public sector reform will be reinforced for optimal synergies.
                               28.      Project monitoring and evaluation will include: the monitoring and evaluation of the
                               performance, results, and impacts of the project and overall program (i) real-time monitoring of
                               physical and financial execution of the Project; (ii) tracking project progress with respect to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                               agreed results-oriented indicators; (iii) technical and financial audits of the Project; (iv) monitoring
                               and evaluating the economic and institutional impact of the Program and the Project at the national
                               level, and (v) drawing lessons from the various public sector reform efforts.
                               D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the                                                                                    safeguard
                               analysis (if known)
                               The project area is Accra. The project will not include any civil works or other activities that may
                               have an impact on the environmental or social safeguards policies.
                               E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                               N/A

                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 04-Mar-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      N/A
                         IV. APPROVALS


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Serdar Yilmaz

                         Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 29-Sep-2012
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Mark Roland Thomas (SM)       Date: 18-Sep-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
