                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA703
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Aug-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Bhutan                                   Project ID:                       P123820
                              Project Name:                   Remote Rural Communities Development Project (P123820)
                              Task Team Leader:               Bekzod Shamsiev
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 17-Aug-2012                                    Estimated Board Date:             02-Oct-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  SASDL                                    Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Crops (40%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), Irrigation and drainage (20%)
                              Theme:                          Rural services and infrastructure (60%), Other rural development (40%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                           0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                  9.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                        9.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The project development objective is to increase agriculture productivity and access to community assets in remote rural areas by improving
                              access to markets, irrigation, agricultural technologies and community infrastructure.

                              3. Project Description

                              The project will consist of three components.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Component A. Rural Infrastructure (USD6.2 million). The focus of this component is to connect the communities to larger roads and regional
                              markets and to improve production potential through improved availability ofirrigation. This component would consist of two main sub-components:

                              A.1. Rural accessibility (USD3.4 million). This sub-component will finance farm road development, consisting of new farm road construction,
                              landslide protection, and river crossing structures. Specifically, it would fund the following activities:
                              (a)       New farm road construction. This subcomponent will include 34 km of farm roads chosen from the list of farm road proposals totaling
                              87.5 km which remained unfinanced under the Tenth FYP. The roads are located in Haa, Dagana, Samtse, Trongsa, and Wangdue dzongkhags.
                              This sub-component will also fund low cost causeways (concrete or stone paved), timber/concrete bridges, or Bailey bridges.
                              (b)       Landslide protection structures. This subcomponent will finance protective works addressing landslide risks and would respond to
                              damage from future events. It will include a provisional budget to cover civil works against potential landslides in locations to be identified during
                              the project life. Such locations would become apparent after one or two monsoon exposures.
                              12.           A.2. Irrigation (USD2.7 million). This sub-component will finance:

                              (a)       Irrigation infrastructure rehabilitation and modernization. The project will rehabilitate about 67 schemes serving an area of about 1,000
                              hectares.

                              (b)        High efficiency irrigation development. The project will fund modernization of a existing systems covering about 60 ha. The high
                              efficiency irrigation development will include pilots to test new technologies such as gravity-fed low pressure sprinkler, micro-jets, and drip systems.

                              (c)       Water Storage Structures. The project will support the installation of two storage structures
                              in each district, where feasible.

                              (d)       Engineering Support. During the first years of project implementation, the project will provide intermittent support by an experienced
                              regional hydraulic or irrigation engineer.

                              (e)      Water User Associations (WUA) Training and Support. The project will provide targeted training and support required for the WUAs to
                              undertake these duties.

                              Component B. Community, Marketing and Productive Infrastructure (USD3.1 million). This component would cover investments in marketing and
                              post-harvest infrastructure, critical community-level infrastructure, and investments identified by producers to increase agricultural productivity. It
                              would consist of two sub-components:

                                                                                                                                                                           Page 1 of 6
                         B.1. Establishing community and marketing infrastructure (USD1.1 million). Although specific investment needs cannot be determined prior to
                         implementation, it is expected that this component will support development of basic rural infrastructure and related technical assistance for
                         drinking water supply systems, rural sanitation infrastructure, electrification, foot bridges, school building construction and repair, small-scale
                         agriculture production and marketing infrastructure, and improved housing. The sub-component will be implemented in the poorest and most
                         disadvantaged geogs within the project area with a poverty rate of over 50%. These include Biru, Bangra, Denchukha, Dorokha, Dungtoe,
                         Namgaychoeling, Tading geogs in Samtse dzongkhag and Getana, Lokchina geogs in Chukkha dzongkhag. It is expected that between 60 and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         100 sub-projects will be completed over a three-year period.

                         B.2. Improving Productive Assets of Existing Producer Groups (USD2.0 million). The interventions supported by this sub-component would
                         address major productivity constraints and enhance farm income of participating producers in a differentiated way, depending on the specificity of
                         each project location. Specifically, the project will finance the rehabilitation of declining citrus orchards and assist producers with replanting of
                         cardamom plantations that have been devastated by fungal and viral diseases in recent years. Such investments will address the needs of about
                         2,100 households. Project resources will be also provided to poultry groups organized around about 240 farming households, to enable an
                         increased production of eggs that are in high demand by the communities. Investment packages will be provided to organized groups on a cost-
                         sharing basis, along the lines of existing schemes that are promoted by the MOAF through the geog RNR staff in many parts of the country.

                         Similarly, and also on a cost-sharing basis, over 25 Community Forest Groups and about 1,500 households will receive project assistance and
                         support for their wood and non-wood-forest products (NWFP) production and value addition activities. Finally, the project will support investments
                         of tested wildlife damage mitigation and sustainable land management technologies (developed by the Sustainable Land Management Project) in
                         all project dzongkhags. While this intervention is estimated to benefit directly over 1,500 households, the population in the surrounding
                         communities will also be aware of such technologies.

                         Component C: Project Management and Institutional Strengthening (USD0.5 million). This component supports project management, including the
                         monitoring and evaluation functions of the project. It covers: (a) technical and financial management, (b) procurement, and (c) supervision of
                         compliance with environmental and social safeguards. This component also would strengthen the capacity of the MoAF to effectively coordinate
                         implementation and provide procurement support to local communities as needed. This component also would support mid-term and end-of-
                         project project monitoring surveys that would provide project performance information at the activity, output, and outcome levels to meet the
                         requirements of the existing RGoB monitoring system and the PLAMS (Planning and Monitoring System).

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The project will benefit about 6,440 households living in rural areas in Bhutan. As part of the RGoB’s general drive to increase the efficiency and
                         effectiveness of public expenditure, poverty mapping will be used as a means to target project resources to the most remote and poorest rural
                         areas in the country. Thus, project activities will be concentrated in 26 geogs in six dzongkhags (Samtse, Haa, Chhukha, Trongsa, Dagana and
                         Wangdue) in Western and Southern Bhutan, all of which have significant concentrations of poverty. Within these dzongkhags, project activities will
                         focus on geogs with a large number of poor and will ensure participation of women. Based on the Rural Poverty Assessment in Bhutan, the 2010
                         poverty estimate in the project area (26 selected geogs) is 46.2%, about double the national level (23.0 %) Women represent about 41% of all
                         people employed in agriculture in the project area. About 29percent of all households residing in the project area are headed by women
                         (Population and Housing Census, 2005).

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Malcolm A. B. Jansen (SASDI)
                         Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
                         Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)
                         Darshani De Silva (SASDI)
                         Hari Prasad Bhattarai (SASDA)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             Yes              This is applicable given the emphasis on rural infrastructure development and to
                                                                                          assess the risk it poses on land, water, vegetation and cultural property. An
                                                                                          Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been developed to ensure all
                                                                                          environmental impacts are considered in planning, implementation and monitoring
                                                                                          of project activities. For the infrastructure including farm road and irrigation
                                                                                          schemes, the EMF includes provision for undertaking environmental screening and
                                                                                          limited EA if necessary (Full EA or EIA required activity is not eligible).
                                                                                          Environmental codes of practices as outlined in the Environmental Friendly Road
                                                                                          Construction guidelines that have been developed by the Royal Government of
                                                                                          Bhutan will be used. In terms of the community components, this Policy / EMF is
                                                                                          also relevant for the management of community level natural resources within the
                                                                                          project areas.. Screening Checklist for identifying and addressing potential
                                                                                          environment impacts have been developed and staff will be trained to use these
                                                                                          during the community planning process.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                     No               This is likely not applicable. Although there is a national park and known bird
                                                                                          habitat/high biodiversity area, activities located in those areas or dependent on
                                                                                          resources from them are not-eligible. The infrastructure activities will be small-
                                                                                          scale. These activities are highly unlikely to cause significant conversion or
                                                                                          degradation of natural habitats.




                                                                                                                                                                    Page 2 of 6
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                             Yes              Some of the infrastructure to be supported under the project may be located in the
                                                                                               forest area. The project envisages community and private forests and some limited
                                                                                               afforestation of degraded areas to curb land degradation. However, the project will
                                                                                               not engage in commercial forestry activities. Environmental screening/ assessment
                                                                                               will address any issue related to forest.
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                        Yes              The project might involve the procurement and use of pesticides on a limited scale
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               to enhance crop production in farmer agricultural lands. However, the
                                                                                               procurement and distribution of pesticides in Bhutan is well controlled through a
                                                                                               centralized system and there will be no procurement of pesticides classified as
                                                                                               Class Ia, Ib and II by WHO. Efforts would be made to use IPM methods to the
                                                                                               extent possible and practical.
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11         No               EMF conclusion is that there are number of cultural and religious sites of local
                                                                                               significance in all the project Geog. Chances of adverse impacts, which may be
                                                                                               limited in scale and nature, on them may not be ruled out due to construction
                                                                                               activities. Activities within 50 of nationally or internationally renowned PCR site is
                                                                                               in the negative list, but activities may be permitted near the local cultural sites.
                                                                                               Environmental screening/ assessment will address risks to the cultural/religious
                                                                                               sites, if any.
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  No               There are no separate disadvantaged ethnic groups different from the dominant
                                                                                               population who will be adversely affected by the project. However, there are
                                                                                               vulnerable households across ethnic groups. A Vulnerable Community
                                                                                               Development Framework has been developed that includes special measures to
                                                                                               protect socially and economically vulnerable households such as women headed
                                                                                               households and people living in extreme poverty.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            Yes              The Project proposes to finance small, community-level infrastructure investments,
                                                                                               including irrigation and water harvesting/ management structures, rural access
                                                                                               roads, and community facilities (sale centers, packaging houses, storage facilities
                                                                                               etc.). These investments may require lands for their construction. The impacts are
                                                                                               expected to be marginal. In the event that minor land acquisition (most likely to be
                                                                                               only for the farm roads) is unavoidable, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP)
                                                                                               has been prepared that lays out principles, entitlement policies and planning steps
                                                                                               to address such impacts.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No               Negative list of subproject/ activity include any water retaining structure or barrier
                                                                                               across stream 10 m or more in height or that pose significant disaster risks if it
                                                                                               breaks.
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP      Yes              The project area covers existing irrigation network which draws water from rivers
                               7.50                                                            going through Bhutan's territory and then flow to India. Thus the project triggers
                                                                                               World Bank OP/BP 7.50 (Projects on International Waterways). The proposed
                                                                                               investments under the project are mainly for renovation of irrigation canals, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               improvements of drainage infrastructure, which are not expected to change the
                                                                                               volume of extraction/discharge water or quality of water of these rivers, but rather
                                                                                               will lead to more effective irrigation and drainage of the water. Thus the project
                                                                                               implementation would improve the transboundary water resources use and their
                                                                                               quality. Based on mentioned, the project team is processing an exception to the
                                                                                               notification requirement under paragraph 7(a) of the Policy.
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any potential l arge scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                   The project is expected to have positive environmental and social impacts by enabling rural communities to use land and other resources in a
                                 more sustainable manner and help them achieve higher incomes through enhanced agricultural productivity and improved marketing.
                                 However, limited environmental impacts such as landslides/ erosion, loss/degradation of forests/vegetation, workers’ and community health
                                 safety and sanitation, and construction period disturbances are possible from the community infrastructures. These impacts are likely to be
                                 limited to site and its immediate surrounding and can be managed through readily available measures. The project will follow a participatory
                                 and inclusive process of direct and systematic participation of beneficiary communities in the selection, implementation and monitoring of
                                 project investments. Consultations with local communities indicate a strong support for the project, in particular for proposals to improve
                                 agricultural productivity and marketing, and improve access to markets. The identified main positive social impacts of the project are improved
                                 investments in agriculture and land resources, increased market access and credit facilities and improved water delivery and management at
                                 the farmland.

                                 Given that investments would be small, localized nature, the project will not result in significant adverse social impacts, such as physical
                                 relocation of people or the large scale acquisition of private lands. The proposed investments will have their footings on the ground and will
                                 need lands. However, the land needs are expected to be small in quantity and the impacts of such marginal. To the extent possible,
                                 alternative designs and alignment (in particular for roads and irrigation facilities) will be considered to avoid land acquisition and minimize
                                 adverse social impacts.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:

                                                                                                                                                                           Page 3 of 6
                             No highly significant long term indirect impact is expected from the project. One potential long term or indirect impact of the road construction,
                           though may not be highly significant, could be increased demographic pressure on resources hitherto isolated from human settlement. The
                           Environmental Screening and/or EMP of each subproject or activity or environmental clearance terms & condition will have mitigation specified
                           to address negative impacts that could arise from enhanced resource use and access. It would also include special measures to ensure slope
                           stabilization of the farm roads. Given the nature of the types of investments to be supported by the project, it is anticipated that there will be
                           minimum cumulative social and environmental adverse impacts, since the screening process will eliminate sites that may result in any serious
                           impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                            One option considered was to build roads with minimum of costs, but the long term environmental impacts of building such roads would have
                           been enormous. An alternative was to build roads based on the concept of “environmentally-friendly construction? (EFRC) methods. While this
                           originally took time to be understood and adopted, it is now applied to all feeder roads in Bhutan. Evidence suggests that compliance with
                           EFRC increases up-front costs of investment, but minimizes environmental damage and decreases maintenance costs significantly. The
                           proposed project will adopt EFRC for farm road construction and higher construction costs are built into project costing. RGoB recently revised
                           Farm Road Policy which increased the Farm Road Unit cost from Nu 1.2 million per km to Nu 2.6 million per km, and the revised Irrigation
                           Policy permits use of contractor, for more skilled works, in the community irrigation schemes. These revisions make it possible to use
                           environmentally friendly construction techniques/ methods.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                            RGoB has prepared an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) for the project in order to screen/ assess, use appropriate mitigations,
                           and manage any environmental issue resulting from the small-scale interventions spread far and wide across six districts (26 Geogs). The EMF
                           requires, each investment to be subjected to screening and, if required, preparation of an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), obtaining
                           No Objection letter from competent agency, The subproject/ activity will be subjected to periodic compliance and final monitoring.
                           Memorandum of Understanding will be agreed upon by each of the stakeholders – Community representatives (i.e. Water User Committee),
                           and geog and dzongkhag representatives. The implementation of the EMP and the Memorandum of Understanding will be periodically
                           monitored by the community and Project Management Team, and/or by NECS/DEC , PPD/MoAF. A subproject's EMP consists of the set of
                           mitigation, monitoring, and institutional measures to be taken during implementation and operation to eliminate adverse environmental and
                           social impacts, offset them, or reduce them to acceptable levels. The plan also includes the actions needed to implement these measures.

                           Assessment made during EMF preparation indicates there is general awareness about environmental requirements among the staff of
                           dzongkhag and ministry, but their ability to perform is constrained by the lack of human and financial resources, and by lack of specific skills.
                           The EMF has included a plan for addressing this issue in the context of the project, and suggests the following measures: provision of
                           additional human resources (on need basis), orientations and training tailored to the specific needs, engaging private sector or NGO, and
                           supporting NECS and/or PPD/MoAF in conducting environmental due diligence of the project.

                           The project follows a programmatic fashion. A Social Management Framework (SMF) has been prepared for this project. The SMF includes a)
                           a Land Acquisition And Rehabilitation Framework that lays out the principles, entitlement policies and compensation as well as resettlement
                           planning process, b) a Vulnerable Community Development Framework that lays out the objectives, principles, identification of such
                           households and development interventions, c) a gender and social inclusion framework that describes its principles, approach and
                           interventions, d) a Community Consultation and participation framework, e) project planning procedures, f) institutional arrangements and g)
                           grievance redress as well as monitoring mechanisms.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           In addition, to ensure transparency and equity, a Process Framework (PF) for the participation of local communities in the implementation of
                           community activities has been developed to detail the principles and processes for assisting communities to manage any negative potential
                           impacts. Since the exact social impacts of access will only be identified during project implementation, the Process Framework will ensure that
                           mitigation of any negative impacts deriving from development activities or potential restriction access by communities to natural resources will
                           be based on a participatory process involving all affected stakeholders, and on their consent regarding the type of mitigation measures to
                           compensate any loss of income or the scale of restriction of resource use that are needed. Any desired changes by the communities in the
                           ways in which local populations exercise customary tenure rights in the project sites will not be imposed on them, but will emerge for a
                           consultative process satisfactory to the World Bank. Annual project work plans including management arrangements for community access to
                           resources in project sites and associated mitigation measures will require World Bank agreement.

                           Field based consultations also indicated that there were no social groups present in these communities with a social and cultural identity distinct
                           from the dominant society that would make them vulnerable to being disadvantaged in the development process. Since project activities are
                           based on local demands and identified through a highly participative and inclusive process, the project will ensure that vulnerable groups are
                           involved in decision making throughout the planning and implementation phase of the project, and that these groups will be provided assistance
                           in accordance to their priorities. To effectively monitor project impacts on the vulnerable, the socioeconomic baseline established for the project
                           will include specific data on representative vulnerable households (e.g. women and women headed households, the most poor, farmers with
                           marginal land holdings and the landless).
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders include communities/ users, geog, chiog, dzongkhag, and MoAF. Local-level consultations were carried out with primary
                           stakeholders, specifically the local communities, Geog Tshogde (GT) members and Geog Renewable Natural Resources (RNR) extension
                           agents. The consultations with local communities involved group discussions and household interviews. During the field consultation, special
                           attention was given to including women and vulnerable people. At the central level, consultative meetings were held with the representation
                           from all the major government agencies: Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Works and Human Settlement; Ministry of Trade and Industry; National
                           Environment Commission Secretariat; Bhutan Development Bank Limited, and the Ministry of Agriculture and its Departments of Agriculture,
                           Forestry, and Livestock. A formal stakeholder consultation, participated by government agencies and NGOs, was held in Thimphu on May 17,
                           2012. Annex 7 of EMF summarize the consultation feedbacks.

                           The project is based on a strong participatory approach in the selection, implementation, monitoring and operation and maintenance of project
                           facilities through the direct participation of beneficiary communities. The SA (developed on the basis of consultation with affected communities)


                                                                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 6
                              provides guidance on the overall consultation strategy and mechanisms to ensure community awareness and involvement in the project, as
                              well as participatory monitoring and evaluation modalities.

                            B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              03-Aug-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          14-Aug-2012
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           14-Aug-2012
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                              Directors
                             Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              03-Aug-2012
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          14-Aug-2012
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           14-Aug-2012
                             Pest Management Plan
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                           Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              03-Aug-2012
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          14-Aug-2012
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           14-Aug-2012
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?               Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]

                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                              If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are             Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]
                              PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                              Management Specialist?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the       Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]
                              plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                              Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for        Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]
                              certification system?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                              Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                          Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]

                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?               Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language       Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for    Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?               Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard     Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same         Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Bekzod Shamsiev
                            Approved By:


                                                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 6
                         Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)   Date: 15-Aug-2012
                         Sector Manager:                    Name Simeon Kacou Ehui (SM)     Date: 19-Aug-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                Page 6 of 6
