                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                               Report No.:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Sep-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Somalia                                  Project ID:                        P128143
                              Project Name:                   SOMALIA: Drought Management and Livelihood Protection (P128143)
                              Task Team Leader:               Husam Abudagga
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 18-Aug-2011                                    Estimated Board Date:              22-Aug-2011
                              Managing Unit:                  AFTAR                                    Lending Instrument:                Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), Crops (25%), Animal production (25%)
                              Theme:                          Rural non-farm income generation (50%), Other rural development (50%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                          Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                      0.00
                                   Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery                                                                           5.00
                                   State and Peace Building Fund                                                                                                 4.00
                                   Financing Gap                                                                                                                 0.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                         9.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The project development objective (PDO) is to provide targeted emergency support to drought affected populations in Somalia including cash for
                              work to preserve their livelihoods and the distribution of agricultural inputs, livestock feed or veterinary services in order to support the recovery of
                              agriculture and livestock productive capacity.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              3. Project Description

                              The Bank will use an Emergency Response Loan (ERL) instrument financed by donor grants from GFDRR (USD 5 million) and SPF (USD 4
                              million). This is the Bank's only operation operating inside Somalia.

                              Component 1: Targeted Cash-for-Work (CFW). (Total Cost USD 3.5 million; SPF, USD 3.4 million; GFDRR, USD 0.1 million; including
                              contingencies)

                              The objective of this component is to improve food access through markets for the most vulnerable population groups affected by the drought and,
                              as a secondary outcome, to rehabilitate infrastructure/assets that improve long term drought resilience. Instead of providing direct food, however,
                              the project will provide cash-for-work (CFW). This decision is based on the following facts: (i) local markets are providing sufficient food availability
                              and have the capacity to do so in future; (ii) food distribution as humanitarian assistance is currently provided by other agencies (see above); (iii)
                              given the political environment, CFW avoids any "alms-giving# and associated religious connotations, that Food-for-Work programs may have.
                              This last point reduces the potential for conflict in the delivery of the assistance that the project provides and thus allows access to more areas.
                              The CFW program would provide vulnerable households enough incremental income to meet their household food purchasing needs for at least
                              2.5 months or until the drought ends. Payment rates will be food price inflation indexed. The program would be targeted at households most
                              affected by the drought, and those with high dependency ratios. Selection of recipients of CFW would be done in consultation with local
                              communities. Female headed households would be given preference and at least 30 percent of CFW recipients should be women with a goal of
                              achieving even higher participation rates. It is estimated that 70 percent of the CFW program will be disbursed in the first four months of the
                              program.

                              Cash-for-Work would be focused on the rehabilitation and/or safeguarding of productive assets and rural infrastructure that builds drought
                              resilience and mitigates the impact of future shocks. While the design of this component remains flexible and demand-driven, beneficiaries would
                              be provided with a menu of investment options that support drought resilience. Examples of investments included in the menu are canals, water
                              catchments, water storage, borehole maintenance and other investments with the potential to improve drought management. Beneficiaries would
                              be provided information to encourage them to select these options. For this purpose, a quick study will be undertaken to identify as many possible
                              drought resilience interventions as possible that would work in this context. These interventions could be added to the existing menu of options
                              available to beneficiaries.

                              Component 2: Recovery of Agriculture and Livestock Productive Capacity. (Total Cost USD 4.2 million; SPF, USD0.0 million; GFDRR, USD 4.2
                              million; including contingencies)

                                                                                                                                                                            Page 1 of 4
                               The objective of this component is to preserve household assets and foster rapid recovery and restoration of livelihoods of farmers and pastoralists
                               most affected by the drought when the drought abates. Preserving assets increases household level resilience to future shocks such as droughts.
                               For pastoralists this would be achieved by maintaining a critical mass of household livestock assets through better animal health and nutrition
                               during the drought. For crop producers this would be achieved by minimizing household cash outflows for food purchases through supporting a
                               quick return to crop production next season.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               This component would support about 35,000 heads of households with either crop or livestock support packages, of this all of the crop packages
                               and 50 percent of the livestock packages would be delivered in the first four months of the project.

                               The anticipated specific support for cereal production includes provision of seeds, fertilizers (Urea and/or Triple Super Phosphate (TSP), and
                               extension advice. Seeds will be procured either locally (focusing the sourcing of seeds, where possible, in area where other FAO projects are
                               supporting good quality seeds# production), or from neighboring countries depending on availability. Seed quality control will be enforced through
                               the FAO-Somalia established and tested system irrespective of the source.
                               Support for livestock would include maintenance feed and supplements, pasture seed and/or veterinary medicine and services for supporting
                               about 450,000 animals. Animal health services will be provided through a local private veterinary association, SOWELPA that is already supported
                               by the FAO, to provide basic extension and veterinary services to the livestock producers.

                               As with the cash-for-work intervention under the first component, this component will be demand-driven and provide a menu of options from which
                               beneficiaries can select. This way the component will be flexible and respond effectively to communities# needs. In order to maintain flexibility in
                               a fast changing situation there will be no formal Project level indicators and targets for the share of specific types of agricultural or livestock inputs
                               used. However, the project monitoring system will keep records of the share of the different types of inputs provided.

                               Component 3. Project Management and Monitoring. (Total Cost USD 1.3 million; SPF, USD 0.6 million; GFDRR, USD 0.7 million; including
                               contingencies)

                               This project will be managed by FAO. This component will cover FAO overhead costs and other management costs directly associated with the
                               delivery of the two components above. The overhead costs are defined as a fixed rate under the UN-FPA Agreement. This rate is set at 7 percent
                               of project costs. FAO maintains an office in Nairobi, Kenya that focuses exclusively on Somalia operations and a network of small temporary
                               offices in Somalia through which the project will be managed. This Project is being implemented in a high risk operating environment with a large
                               number of small transactions. This requires a high level of supervision and fiduciary oversight. The project is also a difficult physical operating
                               environment requiring a high level of security and high travel costs related to supervision. The level of investment in project management is
                               appropriate for the level of physical and fiduciary risk. FAO will prepare an operations manual that will be used to guide Project implementation.

                               4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                               The project will target the drought-affected areas of Southern Somalia, where the current drought is resulting in famine.


                               5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                               Nyambura Githagui (AFTCS)
                               Svetlana Khvostova (AFTOS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                               6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                     Yes        No      Explanation
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                             ✖
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                     ✖
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                                              ✖
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                                         ✖
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                          ✖
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                   ✖
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                             ✖
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                       ✖
                               Projects on International Waters OP/BP 7.50                     ✖
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                           ✖

                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  For World Bank records only, the project has been classified as a Category B operation and OP 4.01 is triggered. However, it is important to
                                  note that classification of the Project as Category B and the triggering of OP 4.01 and OP 4.09 are solely for the purposes of signaling that had
                                  this been a standard Bank operation, not using the FPA instrument, these elements would be appropriate and relevant safeguard tools would
                                  have to be prepared. But, given the FPA and the fact that Bank policies do not apply in this instance, the Bank's safeguard policy requirements
                                  also do not apply to this operation.

                                  For World Bank reference purposes only, this pro-forma ISDS was been prepared for this project to provide an indication of the safeguards risk
                                  and triggers that would apply if the World Bank#s policies were used. Under World Bank Operational Policies, Environmental Assessment OP
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 2 of 4
                           4.01 would be triggered since the project will finance rehabilitation of productive infrastructure/assets such as canals, water catchments,
                           borehole rehabilitation, and feeder roads.

                           The Pest Management OP 4.09 would also be triggered as the project will be supplying fertilizers and possibly other agro-chemicals to the
                           affected communities.

                           Given the application of the United Nations Fiduciary Principles Accord (FPA) for this operation, World Bank safeguard policies do not apply.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Specifically and for the World Bank record, the team has confirmed that FAO employs Environmental Impact Assessment procedures to ensure
                           that its field operations are consistent with its sixteen governing principles. These principles include, in addition to various aspects of
                           environmental and social impact, biodiversity, management of forests, and Involuntary resettlement.

                           The FAOEIA procedures appear to be broadly consistent with the World Bank's general requirements including the World Bank's
                           Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines for applicable activities, though in less detail. The Guidelines calls for the appointment of an
                           Environmental Focal Point and the preparation of a rapid Environmental Assessment/Action Plan.

                           The World Bank has considered the environmental and social risks associated with this project and understands that there may be minor, site
                           specific and time-bound rehabilitation of small civil works involved.

                           FAO#s Environmental Guidelines are broadly consistent with the Bank's Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines for the productive
                           infrastructure rehabilitation interventions proposed under the operation. As fertilizer distribution is among the project planned activities, FAO#s
                           policies encompass a Pest Management Plan generated during the life of a project.

                           While the project#s potential adverse environmental impacts will not be significant or irreversible. The proposed project activities do not involve
                           involuntary resettlement of PAPs, acquisition of land or loss of shelter, assets or access to resources, loss of income or means of livelihood. OP
                           4.12 Involuntary Resettlement would not be triggered.

                           To assess and mitigate potential environmental and social risks identified during project preparation, an Environmental Assessment, prepared
                           by FAO will need to cover to the following and other potential safeguards-related project risks:

                           a) Promotion of sanitation activities including hygiene (including basic HIV/AIDS prevention measures);
                           b) Safe management of pesticides and veterinary drugs;
                           c)        Efficient use of rehabilitated water and transportation infrastructure;
                           d) Safe waste disposal practices, including latrines and garbage facilities;
                           e)          Involvement of women and the elderly in Cash for Work program and other activities that they are able to perform and beneficial to
                           them;
                           f) Use of rehabilitated infrastructure through Cash for Work;
                           g) Accountability for funds and resources and public disclosure of the ratios of benefits to households;
                           h) Where possible, personal protection equipment should be provided for Project Beneficiaries involved in the Component 1 activities.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                           Potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to project activities are not anticipated.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           In light of Somalia#s food crisis, alternatives to the proposed project were not considered.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                           Specifically and for the World Bank record, the team has confirmed that FAO uses EIA procedures, which appear to have the status of policy for
                           that agency.

                           The Guidelines appear to be broadly consistent with the World Bank's general requirements including the World Bank's Environmental, Health
                           and Safety Guidelines for applicable activities, though in less detail. The Guidelines calls for the appointment of an Environmental Focal Point
                           and the preparation of a rapid Environmental Assessment/Action Plan.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders include representatives from project beneficiaries, NGOs, local government organizations, and FAO.

                           FAO will be the implementing agency for this project. The Organization has the capacity and tools to ensure environmentally and socially
                           sustainable implementation of the planned investments. It is recommended that the project should revise and adopt the safeguards instrument,
                           developed for the just completed Emergency-response project P113218, which spelt out the screening procedures for the water and
                           infrastructure sub-projects.

                           The envisioned Environmental Assessment should also include a consultation requirement for relevant stakeholders and potentially affected
                           persons. The outcomes of these consultations should be made accessible to the public.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                                                                                                                                                                    Page 3 of 4
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Signed and submitted by:                                                Name                                                 Date
                            Task Team Leader:                    Svetlana Khvostova                                                       28-Sep-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                              28-Sep-2011
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                      Karen Mcconnell Brooks (SM)                                              28-Sep-2011
                            Comments:     I have reviewed this document and concur with the findings of the team. Please see the notation below regarding UN-FPA and impli
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 4
