                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC431

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Feb-2012
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mongolia                        Project ID:     P125964
                            Project Name:      Mongolia Livestock and Agricultural Marketing Project (P125964)
                            Task Team          Charles Annor-Frempong
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          29-Oct-2012                     Estimated       14-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                           Lending         Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (50%), Animal production (25%),
                                               Agricultural extension and research (25%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural markets (50%), Rural policies and institutions (20%), Other environment
                                               and natural resources management (10%), Micro, Small a nd Medium Enterprise
                                               support (10%), Gender (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     11.49                    Total Bank Financing:         0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    0.49
                              Global Agriculture and Food Security Program                               11.00
                              Total                                                                      11.49
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives


                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project design is based on the original proposal submitted by the Government of
                         Mongolia to GAFSP, which was approved by the GAFSP Selection Committee in November 2010.
                         Since then, the concept has been further refined and deepened. Key design features of the project
                         concept are:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Scope: The project would cover all critical aspects at the county (soum) level for developing the
                         sector. A criticism of some previous initiatives in the livestock sector is that they have been overly
                         focused on a single issue and therefore have not led to desired outcomes. The approach in this project
                         is to support both marketing and production issues, focusing not only at the herder level but also up
                         the marketing chain, to provide a more comprehensive model for the development of the sector,
                         albeit on a limited geographical scale. A core goal of the project is to develop stronger linkages
                         between herders and markets. This implies working closely with the private sector. The approach
                         taken will put agribusiness at the center of the approach, building services around emerging markets.

                         Geographic focus: The project will be geographically focused on five (out of 21) provinces (aimags),
                         and within each of these aimags on three or four soums, with support therefore targeted at a total of
                         approximately 15-20 soums (out of 330 nationwide). These are all areas either within or adjacent to
                         the proposed Foot and Mouth Disease-free zone. The limited geographical focus would concentrate
                         resources in order to demonstrate a meaningful impact on herder livelihoods and the livestock sector
                         within those locations. Approaches taken will be designed to be sustainable and would emphasize the
                         need to be replicable in other parts of the country.

                         Consistency with on-going programs: The project would contribute to achieving the goals of the
                         National Livestock Program and be consistent with the approach and activities included in the
                         Program. This includes contributing to achieving long term goals for the sector, for example to
                         increase the export market potential for the sector. The activities under the project would be
                         complementary to those on-going projects and prevent duplication.

                         Component 1 – Linking Farmers to Markets (approximately US$ 4.0 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-Component 1a:          Value Chain Development (approximately US$ 3.0 million)
                         This component aims to improve the efficiency of livestock markets. It would focus on strengthening
                         marketing arrangements in selected value chains between trading partners. Livestock value chains
                         are currently weak and inefficient, whilst the quality of products remains poor. Produce markets lack
                         more sophisticated institutional arrangements for price discovery, linking product quality to market
                         demand, and reducing transaction costs. The component would support “productive partnerships?
                         between producers (organized in groups or cooperatives) and processors. This approach reduces the
                         risks to agribusiness to invest in more remote agricultural production regions and increases the
                         quality of produce from herders. Partnerships would be identified through a competitive process.
                         Selected partnerships would be supported with technical assistance to prepare full business plans, and
                         once approved, matching grants would be used to help finance investments at the soum level and
                         below to support the achievement of the business plan objectives (for instance to support improved
                         quality of product, value adding activities or a more consistent supply). During preparation, the team
                         would further explore the option to support livestock auctions for commercial and improved breeding
                         stock. This will support more efficient commercial connections between buyers and sellers and
                         facilitate transparent price discovery.

                         Sub-Component 1b:         Diversification (approximately US1.0 million)
                         The component will support horticulture for income diversification and alternative livelihoods for
                         rural families. This will: i) improve household and regional food security; ii) increase household
                         income; iii) provide local employment; iv) promote agricultural development and diversification;
                         and, v) provide an exit strategy from herding. Basic production support will go to groups of
                         unemployed families and herders with very few animals. Matching grants will be made to established
Public Disclosure Copy




                         growers to build greenhouses, improve their irrigation systems and plant small fruit and berry plots.
                         Small-scale processing at the soum which allow local growers to add value and shelf-life would also
                         be supported.

                         Component 2 – Raising Livestock Productivity and Quality (approx. US$ 6.0 million)

                         Sub-component 2a:        Animal health (approximately US$ 1.5 million)
                         Animal health activities will support the development of export markets. Activities include: i) raising
                         the knowledge and skills of veterinarians and paraprofessionals; ii) strengthening the FMD free zone;
                         iii) upgrading animal health services and disease surveillance; and iv) technical assistance to increase
                         exports. Project investments would be made into activities including: i) soum animal handling and
                         veterinary equipment; ii) border inspection post and buffer-zone check points; iii) cold chain
                         equipment; and, iv) aimag laboratory equipment.

                         Sub-component 2b:         Animal Breeding and Genetic Improvement (approx. US$ 2.5 million)
                         This sub-component will improve the quality of Mongolia livestock by improving economic traits
                         demanded by end-users. The genetic improvement program will support the preservation of
                         indigenous Mongolian sheep and cashmere goat breeds. The component will increase the quality of
                         livestock products and animal productivity thereby contributing to improved household incomes and
                         the proportion of total income earned from agriculture. Around six nucleus herds would be
                         established for cashmere goats and sheep which would supply improved male animals to around 15
                         male flocks. Dairy breed improvement will be achieved through improving artificial insemination
                         (AI) capacity. Beef breed improvement will be achieved by providing improved beef bulls to
                         herders.

                         Sub-component 2c:         Animal Nutrition (approximately US$ 2.0 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Nutrition is the single greatest constraint in Mongolian livestock production. This sub-component
                         would improved herder capacity to produce feeds and manage livestock feeding programs. The
                         improved nutritional levels will improve reproductive rates and improved weight gains and
                         contribute directly to improving household incomes and the proportion of income earned from
                         agricultural production. Financing would be provided for the establishment of forage production and
                         small-scale processing facilities at the soum level. The program will be supported by participatory
                         training and farmer-focused research. Nucleus herd and dairy sites could be used for demonstration
                         purposes so that herders and dairy producers in the industry at large can better understand the
                         relationship between nutrition and productivity.

                         Component 3: Management and Donor Coordination (approximately US$1.0 million)

                         The project will support the coordination of project activities and the fiduciary functions of the
                         Projects Implementation Unit (PIU) in the MOFALI. The PIU will be staffed and equipped to carry
                         out these activities. The project will finance incremental staff, consultants, operating costs, some
                         technical assistance and training, M&E activities and impact assessments, information dissemination
                         and annual audits. Aimag and soum project and donor coordination functions will also be supported
                         through Bank finance.
                         Financing arrangements.
                         The GAFSP Selection Committee has approved USD12.5 million for financing the Mongolian
                           proposal. This will be split between this US$11 million project to be supervised by the World Bank
                           and a US$1.5 million Technical Assistance project executed by the FAO. While these are
                           institutionally separate projects, from Government and GAFSP perspective they are a joint project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The Project will be implemented in five aimags: Gobi-Altai, Bayankhongor, Zavkhan, Arkhangai
                           and Khuvsgul. These are five western aimags stretching from the southern border with China to the
                           northern border with Russia. They cover several of the most prevalent ecological zones in Mongolia,
                           from arid desert in the south, through semi-arid grassland, to steppe and in the northern part the
                           steppe-forest. Within the five aimags, several soums would be selected (most likely three in each
                           aimag). The criteria for the selection of soums have not yet been finalized, but as the core component
                           of the project is to improve market linkages, these would likely be soums relatively close to urban
                           centres and / or marketing infrastructure.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The implementation agency would be the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Light Industry. This is
                           the first investment project that the Bank has had with this Ministry and so there has been no direct
                           experience of the agency’s capacity for safeguard policies. The Bank does have other operations with
                           some activities which are similar in design. For example under the Second Sustainable Livelihoods
                           Project (SLP), the Pasture Risk Management component supports the establishment of small scale
                           fodder crop and set-aside plots and where appropriate, the renovation of wells. Under SLP, safeguard
                           issues (including monitoring) have typically been outsourced to local consultants, who have
                           demonstrated good knowledge and capacity for safeguard policies and it is likely that similar
                           consultants would be contracted under this project. Further, it should be noted that the Ministry has
                           had experience as the implementation agency for other similar types of project funded by
                           international financing institutions (including the International Fund for Agricultural Development
                           and the Asian Development Bank).
                           The Implementation Agency will receive necessary training on the Bank safeguard polices during
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project preparation. Consultant will be engaged to prepare relevant safeguard documents and to
                           provide the Implementation Agency with on-the-job training if needed. Though training the capacity
                           of the Implementation Agency will be strengthened to meet the Bank’s requirements during project
                           preparation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS)
                           Feng Ji (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The overall impact of the project on the
                           BP 4.01                                              environment is expected to be positive.
                                                                                Livestock nutrition is a core theme of the
                                                                                project - required for improving quality of
                                                                                livestock and increasing productivity. A critical
                                                                                issue in the Mongolian livestock sector has been
                                                                                poor nutrition as animals depend upon open
                                                                                grazing – this has led to a decline in the quality
                         of pastureland. Under the project, a greater
                         emphasis on a more balance approach to
                         nutrition would be promoted, with increased
Public Disclosure Copy




                         production of fodder, and, it is hoped, a reduced
                         dependency on open pasture.

                         Given the nature and small scale of the
                         proposed activities scattered in the five aimags/
                         provinces under the project, a Category B
                         project is proposed. However, there are likely to
                         be some concerns relating to adverse impacts
                         associated with Component 1 and Component
                         2, including, among others:
                         •         impacts of improved fodder
                         &vegetable production in project area and the
                         potential pesticides which may be induced by
                         the project.
                         •         impacts on water resources, e.g. the
                         digging of shallow wells for fodder production
                         and vegetable plots;
                         •         impacts of more intensive forms of
                         livestock production, including manure
                         management.
                         •         small scale construction-related
                         impacts(e.g. livestock sheds,);

                         Therefore, for the purpose of mitigating any
                         adverse impacts caused by these activities, an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be
                         prepared including the following:
                         •         Environmental guidelines to address
                         siting of fodder and vegetable production and
                         potential adverse impacts from the production(e.
                         g. likely use of fertilizer and pesticides, and
                         water resources management);
                         •         Environmental guidelines for siting of
                         livestock production, manure management, and
                         training arrangement for local farmers;
                         •         Environmental guidelines to address
                         general impacts of small scale construction (e.g.
                         livestock sheds, small irrigation facilities,
                         chance find procedures);
                         • Environmental guidelines to address waste
                         generated from laboratories financed under the
                         project;
                         • Some activities under Sub-component 1a may
                         be determined until project implementation. For
                                                                 these activities the EMP will include selection
                                                                 criteria and general guidelines with regard to
                                                                 identification, monitoring and mitigation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 possible adverse environmental impacts of these
                                                                 activities.
                                                                 • Institutional arrangements for the
                                                                 implementation of the above environmental
                                                                 guidelines/manuals.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD   The project will support vegetable production,
                                                                 and although there is i) no intention to use
                                                                 project funds for pesticides procurement and ii)
                                                                 generally vegetable production systems in
                                                                 Mongolia are considered “green?, there is a
                                                                 chance the these investments would induce
                                                                 pesticide use. If required, a Pest Management
                                                                 Plan (PMP) will be prepared to address this
                                                                 potential impact.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    Based on the available information, the project
                         BP 4.11                                 will not adversely affect sites with
                                                                 archeological, paleontological, historical,
                                                                 religious, or unique natural values. Chance finds
                                                                 during construction might occur and relevant
                                                                 clauses will be included in all construction
                                                                 contracts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   According to the Bank definition, there is one
                                                                 ethnic group, the Tsaatan, in Khovsgul aimag,
                                                                 which meet the IP criteria in the proposed
                                                                 project provinces. The task team drew upon the
                                                                 screening which was conducted as part of
                                                                 another ongoing Bank financed operations, the
                                                                 Second Sustainable Livelihoods Project and the
                                                                 Index based Livestock Insurance Project. The
                                                                 Tsaatan reindeer herders are concentrated in a
                                                                 single remote soum (Tsaaganoor) of the aimag.
                                                                 As the aim of the project is to support market
                                                                 development, one of the key criteria in the
                                                                 selection of the soums under the project will be
                                                                 the proximity of the soums to the aimag center
                                                                 and to market infrastructure (main roads). In
                                                                 Khovsgul, this will necessarily mean the
                                                                 selection of soums in the south of the aimag
                                                                 where none of the Tsaatan herders currently
                                                                 reside. If this selection criteria changes during
                                                                                                                                 preparation and a soum is selected that includes
                                                                                                                                 Tsaatan, an Indigneous Peoples Plan would be
                                                                                                                                 prepared.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            This project will not require land acquisition
                                 4.12                                                                                            and resettlement.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 29-Feb-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      December 31, 2011
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Charles Annor-Frempong

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 29-May-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
