                                                                  INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                           APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                        Report No.: ISDSA94
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Oct-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                      Liberia                                Project ID:                      P127319
                              Project Name:                 Liberia Integrated Public Financial Management Reform Project (P127319
                              Task Team Leader:             Ismaila B. Ceesay
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 31-Oct-2011                                Estimated Board Date:            15-Dec-2011
                              Managing Unit:                AFTFM                                  Lending Instrument:              Technical Assistance Loan
                              Sector:                       General public administration sector (100%)
                              Theme:                        Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (75%), Tax policy and administration (5%), Other
                                                            accountability/anti-corrup tion (20%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                  Financing Source                                                                                                   Amount
                                  BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                      0.00
                                  International Development Association (IDA)                                                                             5.00
                                  African Development Bank                                                                                                4.60
                                  US Agency for International Development (USAID)                                                                         3.85
                                  SWEDEN Swedish Intl. Dev. Cooperation Agency (SIDA)                                                                    15.10
                                  Financing Gap                                                                                                           0.00
                                  Total                                                                                                                  28.55
                              Environmental Category:       C - Not Required
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The objective of the proposed project is to "Improve budget coverage, fiscal policy management, financial control, and oversight of government
                              finances in Liberia"

                              In order to achieve the development objective, the project would support the implementation of reform actions identified in the GoL approved PFM
                              Reform Strategy under the following key themes: (i) Improving budget credibility; (ii) Expanding budget coverage and strengthening budget
                              execution; (iii) Strengthening revenue mobilization; (iv) Enhancing transparency and accountability in PFM; (v) Enhancing controls and respect of
                              the PFM legal framework; and (vi) Strengthening treasury management. It will establish tangible improvements in transaction processing,
                              reconciliation, and fiscal and financial reporting procedures; and improve budget management and resource allocation and administrative capacity
                              to gradually develop Liberia's own institutional, organizational, informational, and human resource capacities. The PFM Reform Strategy
                              objectives against each of the themes are addressed in the project components as designed, where one or more objectives have been combined
                              for efficiency and implementation sake. The Strategy is anchored on five basic criteria: sequencing of major actions; simplicity and realism;
                              lessons learned in prior reforms; ownership and sustainability; and partnership and collaboration.

                              3. Project Description

                              This technical assistance (TA) project was conceptualized to respond to the GoL PFM Reform Strategy that aims at strengthening the foundation
                              of the overall PFM governance, ranging from planning, budgeting, accounting and reporting, internal audit and controls, public procurement, and
                              revenue management, to external audit and legislative and public oversight. A number of these interventions under the Project together constitute
                              the core of the reforms envisaged in the government#s strategy document. In addition to this Project, the AfDB is supporting Liberia in the
                              development and roll-out of the customs automation system (ASYCUDA); the IMF is providing TA for PFM reforms and fiscal decentralization as
                              well as the core areas of reform in revenue mobilization and administration; the EC is supporting strengthening of the external audit oversight
                              function; ODI is supporting the development of an enhanced budget framework through its Budget Strengthening Initiative; and the USAID is
                              supporting the public sector reform measures in some core M&As as well as the Legislative Budget Office. The activities to be supported under
                              the proposed operation in those areas will focus on complementary reforms not catered for in those defined support programs. The Donor
                              Assistance Matrix (Table 5) provides a synopsis of complementary donor support to PFM reform actions already included as part of the overall
                              reform strategy of the GoL.The Project will be implemented through five distinct components and related sub-components as defined below:

                              Component 1: Enhancing Budget Planning Systems, Coverage, and Credibility (USD$1.84 million)

                              The objective of this component is to establish comprehensive budget coverage and strengthen fiscal policy and budget management at all levels
                              of government. The component has three sub-components as follows:

                                                                                                                                                                     Page 1 of 7
                         (a) Sub-Component 1.1: Enhanced Macro-Fiscal Framework (USD$0.35 million).

                         The objective of this sub-component is to establish analytical tools and capacity to prepare the medium term fiscal framework (MTFF) and revenue
                         forecasts as a reliable envelope for budget management.

                         The Project will provide financial support to back up AfDB#s and ODI#s support, in the form of funding for: (i) training in macroeconomic modeling,
                         financial programming and revenue forecasting, supported in part by consultancies; and (ii) computers and accessories. Expected outputs in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         support of the objective are a robust macroeconomic model, trained staff, and a strengthened MTFF. The upgrading of the Aid Management
                         Platform that will be supported under Component 2.4 will also be aligned directly with the support for the strengthening and implementation of the
                         MTFF.

                         (b) Sub-Component 1.2: Fiscal Reporting and Fiscal Policy Review (USD$0.29 million)

                         The objective is to establish IFMIS-generated fiscal operations reports (FORs) as a basis for regular fiscal policy review as well as establish a
                         fiscal monitoring framework for SOEs that helps to identify risks with a view to reducing overall fiscal risks to GoL. A basis for producing IFMIS
                         generated reports has been established by mapping the CoA object classification to GFSM 2001. However, as the mapping does not yet cover all
                         financing accounts due to incomplete coverage of IFMIS, FORs will continue to be produced manually for some time. After mapping of the
                         financing accounts, a plan shall be developed to introduce a pilot FOR that will progressively incorporate IFMIS data as coverage is improved.
                         Plans will also be made to incorporate FOR data in mid-term reviews and to publish these reports when data adequacy is established. The
                         reporting arrangements will also include a form of simplified #citizens reports# that would meet the specific requirements of those in the rural areas
                         so as to reinforce transparency and mitigate the effects of the political and ethnic divide. In respect of the monitoring of SOEs, the foreseen
                         benchmark for this sub-component is the regular reporting on SOE financial performance and potential risks to the fiscal position. A statement on
                         fiscal risk, comprising SOEs, should be included in the annual budget papers.

                         (c) Sub-Component 1.3: Enhanced Budget Framework (USD$1.19 million).

                         The objective is to build capacity for medium-term budgeting and establish an orderly, realistic budget process that includes all central government
                         M&As and counties. Support from IMF and ODI is mainly in the form of TA and USAID is also in the process of designing complementary support
                         in the area of the public sector investment program (PSIP) and development of costed sector strategies. Given the major institutional and human
                         resource capacity challenges to enhancing the budget framework, the Project will provide financial support for building planning, capital project
                         selection, and budgeting capacity in the Budget Department in MoF and in M&As in due course.

                         Project activities will comprise (i) Support to the medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) Secretariat in MoF, through production of training
                         documents, delivery of workshops, and supporting the implementation of the road-map for medium term budget framework (MTBF) roll-out that
                         has been developed with IMF and ODI assistance, with the aim of achieving a robust MTBF, inclusive of donor-financed projects; and (ii) Support
                         for strengthening planning and budget preparation processes with focus on the preparation of comprehensive forward spending estimates
                         (necessary first step in establishing a MTBF), the development at M&As of costed sector strategies, investment plans, and budget preparation
                         capabilities, and the establishing of public consultations and hearings as a formal feature of the budget preparation process. Inputs will be in the
                         form of consultancies, computers, and accessories and vehicles.

                         In addition, the Project will also support implementation of the 2009 Liberia National Gender Policy through the promotion of gender budgeting. As
                         per this policy, gender budgeting shall be incorporated in the national budget system in order to achieve government commitments on gender
Public Disclosure Copy




                         equity and equality. Hence, while general budgeting capacity is strengthened, the project will seek to gradually develop gender budgeting capacity
                         skills of policy makers, planners, and budgeting institutions in M&As#particularly in the MoF and MoPEA#in order to facilitate the development and
                         implementation of gender budgeting where women and men will benefit from the national budget equitably.

                         Component 2: Strengthening PFM Legal Framework, Budget Execution, Accounting and Reporting: (USD$10.26 million).

                         The objective of this component is to strengthen the legal basis for budget management while ensuring that the budget is executed as planned and
                         the quality of information on fiscal operations is improved for more informed government decision making. It has six sub-components:

                         (a) Sub-Component 2.1: Review of PFM legal framework (USD$0.05 million)

                         The 2009 PFM Act is currently undergoing some reviews and updating for eventual approval by the post-election Legislature. The PFM
                         Regulations are also being revised to cater for some salient amendments required to strengthen the subsidiary legislation in a number of areas.
                         This sub-component will extend the work being carried out in those areas and provide the financing needed for building an understanding of the
                         Law and Regulations across government to improve compliance in the management and oversight of public finances. The design recognizes that,
                         beyond an understanding of the PFM regulations, what is needed is a change in the incentive structure for PFM reforms. The Project will work
                         both on building capacity and changing incentives by working with M&As and civil society organizations on service delivery, transparency, and
                         accountability.

                         (a) Sub-Component 2.2: IFMIS Roll-out to M&As (USD$8.22 million).

                         The objective of this sub-component is to extend IFMIS financial management functionality to M&As and donor funds (also refer to sub-component
                         2.6). This sub-component will build on the work done under the current IFMIS project and support the roll-out of the FreeBalance-based budget
                         preparation, execution, and fiscal reporting modules of the IFMIS to M&As and, on a phased basis, to donor funded projects. The component will
                         also complete the implementation of the payroll system initiated under the IFMIS project.

                         The main activities to be financed under this sub-component will include: (i) implementation services, software costs, and training related to the
                         roll-out of FreeBalance to M&As; (ii) full implementation of the payroll system initiated under the IFMIS project; and (iii) implementation of requisite
                         e-transcript interfaces with county level systems.

                         (c) Sub-Component 2.3: Strengthening Financial Standards, Accounting and Reporting (USD$0.04 million)

                         The objective of this sub-component is to strengthen the application of international standards of accounting and reporting to establish a robust
                                                                                                                                                                   Page 2 of 7
                         and accountable financial management framework.

                         Under this sub-component, the project will finance TA in M&As to build capacity in implementing guidelines for producing IPSAS Cash Standards
                         financial statements from existing reporting arrangements structured on the GFS-compliant CoA in the FreeBalance. The TA will also review the
                         current accounting and financial processes and recommend improvements in identified areas to bring these processes in line with best practices.

                         (d) Sub-Component 2.4: Treasury, Cash, Debt and Aid Management (USD$0.62 million).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The sub-component aims to incorporate all funds defined in the 2009 PFM Act in a Treasury Single Account (TSA) held at the Central Bank of
                         Liberia (CBL) to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of GoL#s cash and debt management. The IMF is providing TA in support of key
                         elements of this sub-component.

                         The Project will complement IMF#s support through the provision of financial support for consultancies, software purchase, training, and
                         workshops as inputs for the following activities: (i) establishing a TSA to strengthen fiscal control and GFS reporting; (ii) phased inclusion of donor
                         funds in the TSA as also highlighted in sub-component 2.6; and (iii) improving cash and debt management. The main output, contingent upon
                         activity (i) being accomplished, will be the establishment of cash flow forecasting and cash management mechanism under the auspices of the
                         Treasury Liquidity Committee that will be created, and under which the Cash Management Unit of the Comptroller and Accountant General#s
                         Department (CAGD) will fall.

                         The following additional activities related to debt management will also be financed: (i) training activities beyond those that AfDB and ODI are
                         financing; (ii) purchases of periodic CS-DRMS upgrades; and (iii) development/purchase of a domestic debt management module as an addition to
                         CS-DRMS. Under Sub-component 2.2, the Project will finance the development of an automatic interface between CS-DRMS and IFMIS. The end-
                         point will be an operational comprehensive debt database that can generate comprehensive debt reports and be used as a basis for debt
                         sustainability analysis, and which fully interfaces with the IFMIS.

                         (e) Sub-Component 2.5: Establishment of County Treasuries (USD$0.49 million)

                         This sub-component will establish basic financial management and fiduciary control at county level in support of the GoL's gradual decentralization
                         policy. It aims to lay the basic foundation for de-concentrating financial management of service delivery activities in the 15 counties in support of
                         Liberia#s National Policy on Decentralization and Local Governance recently issued by Governance Commission in pursuit of the Government#s
                         commitment to moving towards fiscal decentralization to lower tiers of government. The sub-component will aim to jump-start the gradual and
                         phased implementation of the framework for establishing County Treasuries designed under IMF TA and approved by the GoL.

                         The activities covered under the sub-component include the basic internal renovation of existing county accounting offices, setting up of a treasury
                         framework including the design and provision of simplified book-keeping and accounting tools, basic furnishing of country treasury offices, and
                         capacity building of country treasury officers through consultancies. The sub-component does not anticipate the roll-out of FreeBalance
                         applications (but e-transcripts) during the life of this project.

                         (f) Sub-Component 2.6: Donor Project Financial Management/Use of Country Systems (USD$0.84 million)

                         The objective of the sub-component is to establish a direct linkage between the Project Financial Management Unit (PFMU) and IFMIS to achieve
                         increased use of country financial management systems as well as 'aid on accounting' and 'aid on reporting'.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Key activities covered under the sub-component include: consultancy services to design the budgeting, accounting, and reporting tools within
                         IFMIS using the Government#s CoA; training the staff of the PFMU in the CAGD Accounting Services Unit on the implementation of project
                         accounting as part of the overall GoL accounting arrangements; and piloting the transition from stand-alone financial management (FM)
                         arrangements for donor-funded projects to integrated GoL FM arrangements.

                         Component 3: Revenue Mobilization and Administration (USD$ 5.38 million)

                         The objective of this component is to complement efforts aimed at improving the efficiency and integrity of revenue administration and increase
                         domestic revenue of central government entities, and to integrate revenue systems with overall PFM. The component has three sub-components:

                         (a) Sub-Component 3.1: Capacity Development of Customs (USD$0.20 million)

                         The objective of this sub-component is to complement the activities supported by GoL (customs automation # ASYCUDA) funded through an
                         arrangement under the AfDB budget support operation by providing requisite hardware and operational expenses not currently funded under the
                         UNCTAD/UNOPS contracts. Other activities to be supported under the sub-component include the provision of logistical requirements like vehicles
                         to the rural collectorate teams to better function in their roles.

                         (b) Sub-Component 3.2: Tax Automation (SIGTAS) (USD$4.22 million)

                         This sub-component is aimed at strengthening the tax collection system, including the non-tax domestic revenues.

                         Key priority activities supported under the sub-component include (i) the refurbishment of collectorate sites in rural areas (no new construction
                         envisaged); (ii) provision of TA for Implementation of SIGTAS roll-out and training; (iii) procurement of hardware and related software, and certain
                         SIGTAS modules; and (iv) operational expenses for effective SIGTAS project management, including technical staffing and change management.

                         c) Sub-Component 3.3: Establishment of Revenue Authority (USD0.96 million)

                         The objective of this sub-component is to strengthen tax revenue administrative framework to facilitate policy implementation and improve revenue
                         collection. An independent revenue authority will be created and act as a catalyst to facilitate implementation of key reforms designed to produce a
                         modern efficient tax regime in Liberia and accelerate revenue growth.

                         The activities to be financed under this project include internal renovation of a new revenue authority building, capacity building, equipment,
                                                                                                                                                                    Page 3 of 7
                         change management, and technical assistance. TA is currently mainly provided to the MoF under the IMF#s Topical Trust Fund for tax policy and
                         administration and it is assumed that this assistance would continue to be provided to the revenue authority as it is established.

                         Component 4: Enhancing Transparency and Accountability (USD$6.23 million).

                         The objective of this component is to improve transparency and accountability in PFM by increasing the Government#s ability to report on and
                         account for the revenues it collects and for public expenditures and to strengthen the GAC and Legislature, enabling them to execute better their
Public Disclosure Copy




                         oversight function as assigned under the Liberian Constitution and the PFM Act.

                         Under this component, there are five sub-components:

                         (a) Sub-Component 4.1: Strengthening Public Procurement Oversight (USD$0.31 million)

                         The objective of the sub-component is to strengthen the institutional capacity of the PPCC to deliver on its mandate and support the establishment
                         of transparent, competitive, and efficient public procurement processes in government.

                         The following activities will be financed under the sub-component: (i) TA to support institutional capacity building; (ii) training of PPCC staff; (iii)
                         PPCC outreach to M&As to provide training on procurement guidelines; (iv) support for South-South knowledge exchange activities; and (vi)
                         provision of LAN network to allow for view-only interface with IFMIS procurement module, and to enable the PPCC to publish its review reports as
                         required by the PPC Act.

                         (b) Sub-Component 4.2: Strengthening Internal Audit and Controls (USD$1.56).

                         The objective of this sub-component is to develop an effective, independent, and objective internal audit function that ensures adequate M&A
                         management oversight of their internal controls.

                         The activities to be financed under the sub-component include: (i) TA support for establishing the Internal Audit Governance Board and
                         Secretariat; (ii) providing operational tools (e.g. computers hardware) for internal auditors assigned to M&As; (iii) training of internal auditors across
                         M&As on CAATS and specialized certifications; (iv) implementation of internal audit manuals; (v) development and implementation of a risk-based
                         audit methodology; and (vi) facilitation of regulatory oversight and follow-up actions through the Internal Audit Governance Board.

                         (c) Sub-Component 4.3: Strengthening External Audit (USD$3.23 million).

                         The objective of this sub-component is to strengthen the financial oversight role of the GAC and improve financial compliance through expanding
                         the scope of external audits and helping to strengthen the follow-up and response to audit findings.

                         The following specific activities shall be financed under this sub-component: (i) TA to train GAC staff on Procurement Audit, Information Systems
                         Audit, Revenue Audit, Public and Environmental Audit, Oil and Gas Audit among others; (ii) relevant professional training and certification for GAC
                         staff; (iii) implementation of risk-based audit methodology; and (iv) logistics support including computers, vehicles, and furniture. Live audit training
                         will be provided as part of the TA delivery, and the training outcomes will be reviewed regularly by the quality assurance unit of the GAC to ensure
                         that the capacity of the GAC staff to conduct the audits independently is achieved. In addition, interface between the GAC and the civil society
                         organizations (CSOs), including the media, will be strengthened through the public relations wing of the GAC to enhance external audit impact.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (d) Sub-Component 4.4: Enhancing Legislative Oversight (USD$0.63 million).

                         The objective of this sub-component is to enhance the capacity of the Legislature to apply appropriate standards of PFM accountability to the
                         executive branch. The sub-component will focus on the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) and complement other activities under implementation
                         at the Legislature in support of strengthening the capacity of the Legislative Budget Office (LBO) funded through the USAID (NDI).

                         This sub-component will focus on strengthening the outreach program of the PAC as well as the Ways and Means Committee of the Legislature
                         through South-South study tours, and local training by specialist consultants. Other specific activities to also be financed under this sub-
                         component include: (i) provision of logistical support, office equipment and LAN network needed to facilitate the work of the LBO and the legislative
                         committees; and (ii) expertise training and seminars on budget analysis for LBO staff.

                         (f) Sub-Component 4.5: Civil Society and Social Accountability (USD$$0.50 million).

                         The objective of this sub-component is to strengthen the capacity of non-state actors (NSAs) as critical watchdogs in ensuring transparency and
                         accountability in the use of public finances.

                         The activities to be financed under the sub-component include: (i) the establishment of a platform for information sharing between the government
                         and the public through engagement with NSAs; (ii) provision of grants to NSAs to help build their capacity in the analysis and monitoring of the
                         national and local government budget preparation, approval, and execution cycles; (iii) advocacy activities and dissemination of information on all
                         aspects of PFM at the national and local government levels; and (iv) media training for journalists on covering government budget and spending
                         matters.

                         Component 5: Program Governance and Project Management (USD$4.85 million)

                         The objective of this component is to provide a robust project and program management function that caters to the needs of integrated
                         coordination and monitoring of the implementation of the program, serve as the enabling component for delivery of PFM human resource capacity,
                         and assure the appropriate sequencing of inte rventions across the various reform fronts. The component has four sub-components:

                         (a) Sub-Component 5.1: Program Coordination (USD$0.65 million)

                         This sub-component aims at establishing a coordinated arrangement for supporting and facilitating the delivery of the outcomes under each of the
                         project components and sub-components. It will serve as the domain of the PFM Reform Coordination Unit (RCU) Secretariat for the effective
                                                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 7
                         functioning of the institutional arrangements of the Project as well as for PFM reforms generally, and will build the administrative basis for a well-
                         coordinated GoL-development partners# relationship in the area of PFM support.

                         Coordination will be managed through the RCU that has already been established in the MoF. The RCU is currently staffed by a Coordinator and
                         a number of key professional staff. The staffing will be enhanced to cater to the increasing responsibilities of the Unit and the Project will mainly
                         finance consulting/contract staff whose responsibilities will include knowledge transfer as well as the operational costs of coordination, including
                         logistical support. The IMF has a crucial ongoing role in supporting the strengthening and effective functioning of the Unit, both through the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provision of a TA Advisor and short-term expert assignments.

                         (b) Sub-Component 5.2: Institutional and Capacity Building (USD$3.17 million)

                         The objective of this sub-component is to strengthen PFM and procurement training and HRMIS development to enhance the capacity of the civil
                         service. Under this sub-component, the PFM Capacity Building Implementation Framework developed and approved by the GoL, with TA from the
                         IMF, will serve as the guiding framework for implementing the institutional and capacity building initiatives. This strategy takes a cue from the
                         National Capacity Building Strategy (NCBS) of Liberia and assurances will be made that capacity development interventions are sensitive to
                         gender, ethnicity, and the dynamics of Liberia#s post-conflict society, in line with the NCBS. Consistent with the Civil Service Reform Strategy, the
                         project will also ensure that female employees are given special attention in training and mentoring, including in the selection for development and
                         career advancement training.

                         A number of initiatives, some of which started in 2008 (including the admission of university graduates into a two-year Masters Degree program at
                         the Financial Management Training Program, FMTP), will be supported by this sub-component. Also, the sub-component will cater to the need for
                         consolidating on the flow of qualified procurement specialists into the civil service through a one-year certification program in public procurement at
                         the FMTP. Strengthening the ability of the Civil Service Agency (CSA), as an institution, to design the career path for PFM staffing and monitor the
                         human resources capacity and strength within the civil service will also be one of the key areas of focus in institutional capacity building.

                         (c) Sub-Component 5.3: Monitoring and Evaluation and Change Management (USD$0.46)

                         The objective of this sub-component is to monitor, evaluate, and review progress on all project components and sub-components; identify issues
                         that may impede progress; develop effective change management strategies; and communicate key aspects of progress to the public. In terms of
                         monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and capacity building, the main interventions relate to ensuring that the annual PEFA self-assessments of key
                         indicators are undertaken and are fed into the PFM reform process and to government functions in planning and budgeting as part of the M&E
                         framework (MF) for the overall PFM program. As such, the interventions are means to two ends: meeting the data needs to annually update the
                         PDO level results indicators in the results monitoring of the project (Annex 1), on which the success of the projects eventually will be judged, and
                         more importantly, indications on whether the PFM process is moving in the right directions and thus to highlight the areas for corrective action.
                         What is important is that the key government officials understand the purpose, scope, and potential use of the assessment, have endorsed the
                         implementation process, and have been able to contribute to the report through reviewing and commenting on drafts at critical stages. For the self-
                         assessment, it is crucial that a core group of civil servants be trained and guided to undertake a candid, reliable, and valid assessment and
                         analysis.

                         The staffing of the M&E unit is limited to one M&E officer and one capacity building expert (both recently appointed in the PFM RCU), and one
                         change management specialist who is yet to be appointed. It is envisaged that at least one consultant will be appointed under the project to assist
                         in these duties and to build capacity in PEFA self-assessment, in process backstopping for the first two assessments, and ensure harmony in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         PFM MF, including with the PEFA process. The M&E officer should also maintain data that will facilitate annual PEFA self-assessments and
                         periodic independent full PEFA assessments.

                         The nature of the tasks and their relative unfamiliarity means that training and, likely, some TA support for th ese functions are required in the near
                         future. The M&E officer should apply the harmonized M&E framework to monitor and evaluate progress towards the project objectives as laid out
                         in the results monitoring table and identify any factors that may impede progress toward the overarching development objectives of PFM reforms
                         as well as the PDO of this project.

                         The IMF has an ongoing TA support in the design of the M&E framework for the overall PFM reforms as well as the capacity building towards the
                         implementation of the framework. Training and consultancy support is provided within the sub-component to complement ongoing TA activities.

                         (d) Sub-Component 5.4: Project Fiduciary (USD$0.57 million)

                         This sub-component will ensure that funds advanced for project execution are used for purposes intended, and with efficiency and economy.

                         Due to the dearth of procurement capacity in government, this sub-component will focus on building procurement capacity within the nascent PFM
                         RCU for the implementation of PFM reforms in general. TA support will be provided under this component to hire an international procurement
                         specialist to help build procurement capacity in the RCU. The Financial Management function of the project will be mainstreamed in the CAGD#s
                         Accounting Operations Unit.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         Monrovia, Liberia


                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                     Yes        No     Explanation
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                            ✖      N/A


                                                                                                                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                               6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                          Yes         No       Explanation
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                           ✖       N/A
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                    ✖       N/A
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                                               ✖       N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                                ✖       N/A
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                         ✖       N/A
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                   ✖       N/A
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                             ✖       N/A
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                             ✖       N/A
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                 ✖       N/A


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                 N/A
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                 N/A
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                 N/A
                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                                  and implement the measures described.
                                 N/A
                               5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                                  on potentially affected people.
                                 N/A

                               B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                               Technical Assistance Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                               For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please indicate type of document disclosed, if any.

                               N/A
                               If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                               disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                               If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                               N/A

                               C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                               The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                                 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                                Yes [     ]        No [     ]          NA [   ]

                                 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language                        Yes [     ]        No [     ]          NA [   ]
                                 that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                               All Safeguard Policies
                                 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for                     Yes [     ]        No [     ]          NA [   ]
                                 the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                                 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                                Yes [     ]        No [     ]          NA [   ]

                                 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard                      Yes [     ]        No [     ]          NA [   ]
                                 impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                                 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same                          Yes [     ]        No [     ]          NA [   ]
                                 been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                               Signed and submitted by:                                                         Name                                                               Date
                               Task Team Leader:                         Ismaila B. Ceesay                                                                       23-Oct-2011

                                                                                                                                                                                           Page 6 of 7
                         Approved By:
                         Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   28-Oct-2011
                         Comments:
                         Sector Manager:                    Renaud Seligmann (SM)         02-Nov-2011
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Comments:    Approved.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                        Page 7 of 7
