                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA2514
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                            Project ID:    P129794
                            Project Name:      India - CTF support for NMEEE - Super Efficient Equipment Program
                                               (P129794)
                            Task Team          Ashish Khanna
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       18-Mar-2013                         Estimated   30-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: SASDE                                Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (80%), Infrastructure services for private sector development
                                              (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      50.00           Total Bank Financing:                 0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                        0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     0.00
                              Climate Investment Funds                                                                 50.00
                              Total                                                                                    50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To achieve energy savings in user households and to demonstrate the commercial viability of SEE
                           fans to appliance manufacturers.


                                                                      Page 1 of 6
                         3. Project Description
                         Component 1: Incentive Program for Ceiling Fans (US$ 45 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will finance the provision of financial incentives to manufacturers to produce
                         competitively-priced SEE fans. This is anticipated to address the barriers to the EE market for ceiling
                         fans discussed in Section I.b., and (a) generate sufficient consumer demand to allow manufacturers’
                         to reach economies of scale and lower their manufacturing costs and (b) achieve sufficient market
                         penetration to raise consumer awareness and increase consumer demand for SEE fans. In this way,
                         the financial incentive should kick start a transformation in the EE ceiling fan market.

                         Project Size: The project will fund approximately five million fans over a four-year period. A small
                         project of one million fans, as initially proposed by the client, would not provide enough certainty
                         about future sales to allow multiple manufacturers to participate and incentivizes those to invest in
                         assembly lines, while a large project of ten million fans or more would be too large for the market to
                         absorb over the project period. Over a project period of four years, given the market size described in
                         Section I, the five million fans thus funded by this project would represent between one and six
                         percent of annual ceiling fan sales.

                         Participating Manufacturers: This project relies on participation from the private sector. It will work
                         with registered (i.e., “organized?) manufacturers, as project disbursements will be based on sales
                         verified using tax and excise records, for which firms will need to be registered and subject to India’s
                         industrial taxation rules. The project will select between four and six manufacturers (of a total of nine
                         large, organized manufacturers) to receive disbursements based on the outcome of a reverse auction.
                         The auction is integral to the program and is key to selecting manufacturers who can further the goal
                         of successful market transformation. To encourage at least half of the eight large registered
                         manufacturers to participate in the program, the bidding framework has been structured to involve
                         several players. In addition, in order to let the private sector optimize its costs and operations, the
                         bidding framework allows participating manufacturers to set their own prices (with certain
Public Disclosure Copy




                         limitations, specified below) and choose their own technology to meet the program’s standards.

                         This program will provide competitively discovered incentives to four to six manufacturers, based on
                         verified sales of their qualifying super-efficient products. These incentives will be decided based on
                         the bids by the manufacturers, subject to a maximum ceiling per unit and minimum and maximum
                         limits of annual sales. Following precedence of the National Solar Mission, the program will use a
                         reverse bidding process to determine the incentive amounts and which manufacturers will receive
                         incentives. Since the project is targeting the formal sector manufacturers, it is expected that 4-6
                         manufacturers will be competitively chosen, and each will be allocated production of between 0.5
                         and 2 million fans in a graded manner, based on the incentives each proposes. The lowest bidder (the
                         one providing maximum discount to consumers) will be selected and allocated production of
                         maximum 2 million fans. The second lowest will get a band of 0.5 to 1.5 million. The rest of the
                         selected bidders, 2 to 4 depending on the available allocations, can each claim between 0.5 to 1
                         million fans.

                         The bidding framework will specify performance-linked technical specifications that the subsidized
                         SEE fans will need to meet. Based on a detailed technology assessment conducted by a technical
                         expert team and market surveys, technology-agnostic specifications for eligible fans have been set
                         up. Participating manufacturer will have to propose models that can meet and exceed these
                         specifications. To ensure that the proposition does not create bias for any particular technology, the


                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                         specifications are only the minimum standard requirements that will ensure quality of the SEE fans
                         and the desired energy savings.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Incentive Disbursement and Reallocation: Disbursements to manufacturers will occur upon
                         verification of the quantity and quality of participating manufacturers’ quarterly sales. The
                         Monitoring and Verification Agency (MVA) will perform the verification based on excise records.
                         Additional checks using VATs may be conducted if required, but is not a pre-requisite for
                         disbursement. To ensure that all of the incentives are utilized, if the MVA finds that a given
                         manufacturer has not sold at least 25% percent of the initial allocation in the first two years of the
                         program, that manufacturer’s allocation will be cancelled and reallocated to the other manufacturers.

                         Component 2: Market Awareness and Program Administration (US$ 5 million)

                         This component will fund a market awareness campaign. One barrier to the sale of energy efficient
                         appliances is lack of consumer awareness; thus, the SEEP program would support the financial
                         incentive with market awareness initiatives to raise consumer interest in super-efficient appliances.
                         This component will involve planning and implementing an aggressive media campaign to inform
                         consumers of the SEE label and conducting market research to receive feedback and tune the
                         program adequately during its implementation. Participating manufacturers will also conduct
                         marketing of their models at their own expense.

                         This component will also fund the monitoring and verification to confirm manufacturers reported
                         sales, ensure that manufacturers are technically capable of producing fans that meet the program’s
                         efficiency and performance standards, that the fans produced do, in fact, meet those standards, and
                         confirm that fans sold under the SEEP label meet the SEEP efficiency standards. In addition to the
                         elements described above, the MVA will operate a website to provide all necessary information to
                         the public and project participants. Project Financing
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The project interventions will be across India benefiting super energy-efficient ceiling fan
                         manufacturers, selected through competitive bidding process. The selected beneficiaries will be
                         registered (i.e., “organized?) medium to large size industries.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (SASDI)
                         Surbhi Dhingra (SASDS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No




                                                                      Page 3 of 6
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                While the project would lead to energy efficiency benefits, as well as environmental co-benefits,
                              the current environmental status of target industries would be of importance from the regulatory
                              and reputation risks (including the environmental legacy issues) point of view. In addition, the
                              environmental impacts of proposed technology and product changes for producing SEE cannot be
                              ruled out. The environmental safeguard issues will not be significant and/or lead to potential long
                              term irreversible impacts. Also, the proposed EE interventions are targeted at the existing
                              manufacturers whose existence is governed by country environmental regulations.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                The project interventions are focused on incentivizing the existing facilities which produce super
                              energy-efficient appliances. The project or the project activities do not involve in any future
                              activities in the project area
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                The project intent is to improve the efficiency standards for a widely used appliance. The base
                              case is continued use of the current technologies which consume twice the energy as compared to
                              Super Energy Efficient (SEE) appliances.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                BEE as part of its decision process to select the SEEP beneficiaries, will integrate safeguards
                              mechanism as part of delivering the incentives proposed under the SEEP. Considering the ceiling
                              fan sector proposed under the project, the environmental issues/risks could vary depending on the
                              type and size of the SEE production facility, which are not be amenable for upfront environmental
                              assessment and design of a particular environmental management plan. Given this, the project
                              implementation will address the environmental safeguard issues through an Environmental Due
                              Diligence (EDD) mechanism for the ceiling fan sector. The draft EDD report has been prepared by
                              the borrower and is currently reviewed by the bank team. The EDD framework follows the
                              principles and policies laid out under OP 4.01 and comprises: (i) baseline information on

                                                                        Page 4 of 6
                           production process of super energy-efficient fans and the associated environmental issues and
                           risks – this information has already been collected from three representative industries and will be
                           further extended to two more industries; (ii) adequacy of current environmental regulations to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           address environment, health and safety issues; (iii) environmental due diligence procedures to
                           ensure compliance with environmental safeguards aspects and integration of the same in to the
                           process of selection of SEEP beneficiaries through competitive process; and (iv) independent
                           annual environmental audit of environmental safeguards compliance by the selected
                           manufacturers.

                           With regard to borrower's capacity, BEE has adequate competency and human resources to
                           oversee the compliance aspects of Energy and associated Environmental issues. Further, as part of
                           the project preparation activities, BEE had extensive consultations with stakeholders and are fully
                           aligned with EDD provisions at the manufacturing units. As part of the institutional set up within
                           BEE, a designated Energy and Environment specialist will be overseeing the environmental
                           aspects of the project with the assistance of the Monitoring and Verification Agency appointed
                           under the program
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders are the ceiling fan manufacturers. Stakeholder consultations have been
                           completed involving the regulators and manufacturers. The focus of the consultations relate to: (i)
                           understand the manufacturing processes and environmental issues and ascertaining the baseline
                           environmental conditions and issues; (ii) creating awareness among the manufacturers on SEEP
                           interventions; and (iii) consultations on preparing an implementable EDD framework. The EDD is
                           currently finalized by BEE and is due for Bank's clearance for in country disclosure by BEE.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Feb-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-Mar-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            18-Mar-2013
                           Comments: The EDD has been disclosed on the 18th March by the client on the BEE website.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector          Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?


                                                                      Page 5 of 6
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Ashish Khanna
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Regional Safeguards Name: Zia Al Jalaly (RSA)                             Date: 26-Mar-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Jyoti Shukla (SM)                               Date: 24-May-2013




                                                                       Page 6 of 6
