                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA4030
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Myanmar                             Project ID:    P143988
                            Project Name:      Electric Power Project (P143988)
                            Task Team          Dejan R. Ostojic
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          23-Jul-2013                         Estimated   26-Sep-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASTS                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Thermal Power Generation (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        140.00                 Total Bank Financing: 140.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                Financing Gap:          0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                               0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                    140.00
                              Total                                                                                          140.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to increase capacity and efficiency of gas-fired power
                           generation and strengthen the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Electric Power and the
                           Myanmar Electric Power Enterprise.
                            3. Project Description
                           Myanmar is facing large electricity shortages (about 20% of current demand) and high risk of

                                                                        Page 1 of 11
                         blackouts. The expansion of existing Gas Turbine (GT) stations through the installation of Combined
                         Cycle Gas Turbines (CCGTs) has been identified as the fastest and least costly way to increase
                         efficiency of gas utilization, increase generating capacity and reduce emissions. Myanmar Electric
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Power Enterprise (MEPE) operates ten GT stations, including the Thaton GT station in Mon State
                         which was chosen as the best candidate for the expansion of generating capacity with modern, high-
                         efficiency, low-emissions Combined Cycle Gas Turbine (CCGT) plant.

                         The project consists of two components: (a) CCGT power plant at the existing Thaton GT station,
                         and (b) technical assistance component focused on institutional and capacity building support to the
                         Ministry of Electric Power (MOEP) and MEPE.

                         Component 1: CCGT Power Plant (US$ 130 million).
                         The main component of the proposed project is the expansion of the Thaton gas turbine station
                         capacity into a new CCGT power plant. A modern, high-efficiency CCGT power plant, comprising
                         two 40 MW gas turbines with inlet air chillers, and one steam turbine of 26 MW, a heat recovery
                         steam generator (HRSG) and air-cooled steam condenser will be installed in the existing Thaton GT
                         station which currently has a nominal capacity of 50 MW. The selection of the 106 MW CCGT in
                         Thaton is based on two main considerations: (a) the severely constrained availability of gas supply
                         allocation in the domestic gas market; and (b) the age and condition of existing GT stations.

                         The existing Thaton GT station is located near the country’s main gas-pipeline, which runs through
                         the Mon State, and the reliability record of gas supply in Thaton is significantly better than in other
                         GT stations considered as alternative project locations. Also, the existing GTs in Thaton are among
                         the oldest in the country, experiencing increased number of forced outages and very low thermal
                         efficiency (on average below 20 percent). Furthermore, the Thaton station has a relatively strong
                         connection to the 230 kV power transmission network and it provides electricity to both the national
                         grid and local communities in Mon State. Finally, the proposed project will support WBG’s efforts
                         by complementing IPP projects located near major urban areas (such as Yangon and Mandalay), by
                         focusing on mostly rural areas and parts of the country with higher poverty levels and electricity
Public Disclosure Copy




                         shortages incidence.

                         The power plant component will be implemented as a “turn-key” contract including engineering and
                         project management services, supply of equipment, construction, testing, commissioning, and
                         maintenance support. Due to the urgent needs of power supply in Myanmar to reduce load shedding
                         and power shortages, the project is designed to provide electricity as fast as possible through a
                         phased approach. To achieve this, the project will start construction of the first phase (gas cycle) and
                         begin generation one year after the contract signing. The second phase (steam cycle) will follow
                         immediately and will be completed about 15 months after the first phase is commissioned.

                         Component 2: Technical Assistance and Advisory Services (US$10 million).
                         This component will provide technical assistance (TA) and advisory services to MOEP and MEPE in
                         two main areas. The first area of support is related to the capacity building for policy making and
                         regulation in the power sector including, but not limited to: (a) development of National
                         Electrification Program; (b) financial analysis and forecasting for power enterprises; (c) economic
                         valuation of natural gas in the domestic market; and (d) review of electricity tariffs and subsidy
                         mechanisms. The second area of support is related to the capacity building for project
                         implementation including: (a) owners engineer for the implementation of CCGT plant; (b)
                         strengthening of procurement capacity and training on international procurement practices; and (c)
                         improvement of financial management (FM) capacity and training in international FM standards and

                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                         procedures; (d) environmental and social safeguards; and (e) implementation of the Environmental
                         and Social Management Plan (ESMP) at the project site.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Further TA activities, which are not yet fully identified, and require further discussion and study,
                         may be included at later stages of the project. The details of the scope of these activities will be
                         agreed with the government during project implementation, in consultation with other development
                         partners, to ensure a coordinated approach in technical assistance and capacity building support. The
                         Project implementation activities will include close collaboration with RSS in implementing the TA
                         activities.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Thaton GT station is located in a rural area approximately 5 km northeast of the township of
                         Thaton which is the administrative center for Thaton District, Mon State. Physically the land is a
                         relatively flat coastal plain. Flooding of the site is not reported as an issue; open drains carry away
                         excess water to the surrounding terrain with a seasonal water creek in the rainy season. Although
                         water discharges (run-off water as well as domestic wastewater and water used for site cleaning)
                         should not be a significant source of pollution, the current poor state of control to prevent
                         contamination is likely to cause contamination levels that should be prevented. The Environmental
                         and Social Management Plan (ESMP) includes measures for this during project implementation.
                         Land use surrounding the GT station is agricultural (rubber tree plantations, no other crops have been
                         identified near the GT station) with the exception of a tire factory adjacent to the east side of the site.
                         A national road runs along the Project site at short distance (some 1,500m) and is an important
                         contributor to local noise levels. Both the proposed and the current plant operations do not use water
                         for cooling purposes and there are no perennial streams or rivers running through the site or close to
                         the immediate perimeter. All activities related to modernization and expansion will take place within
                         the power plant compound (‘brownfield development’) which is situated on government owned land.
                         This site has been in use for power generation since 1975 when the first two gas turbines were
                         commissioned at the Thaton GT station.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Knut Opsal (AFTCS)
                         Frank Van Woerden (EASER)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The proposed project has been classified as
                          BP 4.01                                              category ‘B’ because the impacts that may occur
                                                                               during construction or operation of the project
                                                                               investment are limited, site-specific and
                                                                               mitigation measures can be readily designed. All
                                                                               the physical work will take place within the
                                                                               existing brownfield location. The project will
                                                                               increase existing power generation capacity, and
                                                                               will have positive impacts by substantially
                                                                               increasing generation efficiency and by
                                                                               substantially reducing emissions and noise levels,
                                                                               while improving reliability and quality of
                                                                               electricity supply in Thaton. The existing turbines



                                                                       Page 3 of 11
                                                                         will be used less than two weeks per year for
                                                                         maintenance and exceptionally during emergency
                                                                         situations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         The project will have limited negative impacts on
                                                                         the environment. Many of the impacts are related
                                                                         to the existing operations. An Environment and
                                                                         Social Assessment (ESA) has been prepared
                                                                         including an Environment and Social
                                                                         Management Plan (ESMP) to mitigate any
                                                                         potential impacts during construction and
                                                                         operation. Lack of institutional capacity for
                                                                         environmental and social protection will be
                                                                         addressed through the technical assistance (TA)
                                                                         component under the project. This TA will
                                                                         include support to develop and implement a
                                                                         certified Environment, Health & Safety
                                                                         Management System under the Project for the
                                                                         existing and new facilities of the Thaton GT
                                                                         power station to address environment, health and
                                                                         safety considerations of future operations.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              The Project site is in at an industrial
                                                                         (brownfield) site with that land use purpose for at
                                                                         least the last 30 years.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              The Project site is in at an industrial
                                                                         (brownfield) site with that land use purpose for at
                                                                         least the last 30 years.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              There will be no procurement of pesticides or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         fertilizers, or any works within the project which
                                                                         would lead to the use or the increased use of
                                                                         pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              All construction and project activities will be
                         BP 4.11                                         within existing site. The Project site is in an
                                                                         industrial (brownfield) site with that land use
                                                                         purpose for at least the last 30 years.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             The policy is triggered because of the presence
                                                                         of IPs within the project’s area of influence. Since
                                                                         IPs represent the overwhelming majority of the
                                                                         potential beneficiaries and affected population in
                                                                         the Project influence area, no separate Indigenous
                                                                         People Plan was prepared. The relevant elements
                                                                         of the policy have been directly integrated into
                                                                         project design and summarized in the PAD.

                                                                         Broad community support (BCS) based on a
                                                                         process of free, prior and informed consultation
                                                                         has been documented in the Social Assessment



                                                                 Page 4 of 11
                                                                       (SA) during project preparation and public
                                                                       consultations. Access to electricity is one of the
                                                                       main priorities of local IPs, as 85 percent of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       households are not electrified, 73 percent of
                                                                       which cannot afford the connection fee. There are
                                                                       expectations that the project will help increase
                                                                       access to electricity in the three villages within
                                                                       the area of influence of the project.

                                                                       The Bank will provide technical assistance and
                                                                       support to the government to prepare and
                                                                       accelerate rural electrification in the s 3three IP
                                                                       villages in the Project’s area of influence.
                                                                       Furthermore, the affected communities will
                                                                       benefit from significantly reduced noise and
                                                                       pollution in the project area. Also, communal
                                                                       facilities, such as schools and hospitals which are
                                                                       connected to the grid, will be provided with more
                                                                       reliable power supply. The improved power
                                                                       supply in the region will result in considerable
                                                                       indirect benefits, which will include increased
                                                                       economic activities and job creation.

                                                                       These measures will be included in the ESMP.
                                                                       The findings of the SA as well as the issues raised
                                                                       in the subsequent stakeholder workshop have
                                                                       been summarized in the section II of ISDS.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No             The SA has confirmed that there will be no
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.12                                          physical resettlement, land acquisition or loss of
                                                                       income associated with the project, and all
                                                                       construction-related activities will take place
                                                                       within the existing site. No other entity except the
                                                                       existing power plant is currently using the project
                                                                       land. The existing plant has been in operation
                                                                       since 1975. The due diligence review during
                                                                       Project preparation did not identify any legacy
                                                                       issues related to prior land use, and no issues
                                                                       were raised during the consultations.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No             The Project will not finance construction or
                                                                       rehabilitation of any dams, nor will it rely on the
                                                                       performance of an existing dam or a dam under
                                                                       construction, as defined in this Policy.
                         Projects on International        No             The Project site is not adjacent to any
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                          international waterway, including any
                                                                       transboundary aquifer.




                                                               Page 5 of 11
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   The project is not in a disputed area.
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Environment: In accordance with the requirement of a Category B project, an Environmental and
                              Social Assessment (ESA) was carried out for the proposed project components, and an
                              environmental and social management plan (ESMP) will be prepared to determine the mitigation
                              measures, monitoring program and necessary institutional arrangements as well as capacity
                              development. The documents will be revised and prepared by an internationally reputable
                              consultancy firm on the basis of good international practices as well as applicable Bank safeguard
                              policies including for WBG General EHS Guidelines and WBG EHS Guidelines for Thermal
                              Power Generation.

                             The Project’s investment will take over power production from the old gas turbines at the Thaton
                             power stations and the old facilities, which will not be dismantled under the Project. The old
                             facilities will only be used in emergency situations or during periods of maintenance of the new
                             equipment. Typically, downtime of the new turbines for maintenance or disruptions, and hence the
                             possibility that the old turbines will be used, is around two weeks per year. With the substantially
                             higher efficiency and environmental performance standards of the new equipment (lower
                             emissions to air, less waste consumption, much lower noise generation levels) and the introduction
                             of a certified Environmental, Health, Safety Management System, the investment will reduce
                             environmental impacts and is considered to be on benefit to the surrounding environment and the
                             local population. Natural gas fired power plant have low emissions of PM10/2.5 and
                             hydrocarbons. With the natural gas’s sulfur contents of 0.002% or less also sulfur dioxide
Public Disclosure Copy




                             emissions are very low. The main air pollutant from natural gas is NOx and emission levels are
                             expected to be around 70% less after the new turbines become operational. The level of carbon
                             dioxide emissions will be substantially reduced per unit of electricity produced, but the total CO2
                             emissions will roughly remain at the existing level because the plant will continue to use the same
                             amount of natural gas. Noise levels at the fence surrounding the site currently reach levels of
                             60-70 dB(A) and at places (main entrance) levels up to 80 dB(A). The noise levels from the new
                             turbines, in compliance with international standards, are expected to be reduced to between 50
                             (nighttime) and 55 dB(A) (daytime) at the fence of the site.

                             Due to lack of adequate national environmental standards, the World Bank Group Environmental
                             Health and Ssafety General Guidelines (WBG EHS Guidelines) and the World Bank Group
                             Guidelines for Thermal Power Generation will apply to the project, and, where applicable, other
                             international good standards such as relevant EU Directives, or US-EPA standards.

                             All investments and other project interventions will occur at the existing site within its perimeter
                             and there are no associated investments (such as transmission and distribution network, water
                             supply, road works).

                             Construction activities with the installation of the CCGT units would cause emissions from
                             construction equipment, airborne dust and noise, as well as small amounts of wastewater (washing


                                                                        Page 6 of 11
                         water) and solid waste (inert construction waste). During the operational phase air emissions and
                         noise levels will be determined by the specifications of the installed equipment, in compliance
                         with WBG EHS Guidelines and international standards, which represent a substantial
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improvement in comparison to the current situation. Wastewater and waste generation are limited
                         and largely unrelated to the core power generation process (cleaning and runoff water, wastewater,
                         etc). Mitigation measures will be included in the ESMP. Potential measures include sorting of
                         waste and collection under municipal services (although these are limited) and basic wastewater
                         control (through retention pond and/or septic tank).

                         An environmental and social management plan (ESMP) will be developed. The ESMP will
                         comply with applicable Bank Safeguard Policies requirements’ and applicable environmental,
                         health, safety, and social standards. The ESMP will include mitigation measures, monitoring
                         plans, institutional arrangements, capacity building and estimated costs for the mitigation
                         measures and monitoring programs for both the construction and operation phases. The ESMP will
                         also include the Environment Health and Safety Management System, to be developed during
                         Project implementation.
                         The due diligence review that was undertaken as part of the ESA showed a lack of safeguards and
                         operation procedures for workers’ health an d safety and environmental good practices. The
                         Environment Health and Safety Management System will include health and safety measures that
                         will substantially improve standards and practices to deal with these issues for both the new and
                         existing facilities in an adequate manner.

                         The Safeguard Policy on Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09) has not been triggered because there wil
                         be no procurement of pesticides or fertilizers, or any works within the Project which would lead to
                         the use or increased use of pesticides. The power generation facilities will use air cooling,
                         therefore there are no discharges of cooling water (and therefore no possibility of cooling water
                         discharge containing pesticides).

                         The Safeguard Policy on Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) has not been triggered because the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will not finance the construction or rehabilitation of any dam, nor will it rely on the performance
                         of an existing dam or a dam under construction, as defined in this Policy. The project site and its
                         functional linkages (connection to the power grid, water supply) as well as the investments under
                         the Project do not include any dams or impoundments.

                         Social: Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10). A Social Assessment (SA) was carried out as part of the
                         ESA process. The closest habitation is some 500m from the site perimeter fence, and there are
                         three villages surrounding the proposed project site. Two of these, Than Ban, and Kyar Pan are
                         located about 1.5 km from the project site. Than Ban has a total household population of 150 (400
                         persons) while Kyar Pan consists of 330 households (1500 persons). A third village, Nyaun Wyne,
                         is located 2 km from the project site and is comprised of 252 households. In addition 120 staff
                         households are located next to the plant. The majority of the inhabitants in the three villages are
                         ethnic minorities. In Than Ban, the Keren represent 90% of the population, while there is almost
                         an even distribution among Keren (45%) and Pao (40%) in Kyar Pan. In Nyaun Wyne 80% belong
                         to the Keren group.


                         The Indigenous Peoples policy is triggered because of the presence of Indigenous Peoples (IPs)
                         within the project’s area of influence. The overwhelming majority (over 90 percent) of the
                         beneficiaries and affected peoples in the Project influence area are IPs and, therefore, a separate

                                                                    Page 7 of 11
                           Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) has not been prepared, but relevant elements of the policy have
                           been integrated into project design and summarized in the PAD. In line with OP 4.10
                           requirements, this includes continued consultation to be carried out during the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation , including the technical assistance and support for the rural electrification
                           program in the 3 IP villages in the Project’s area of influence.

                           Broad community support (BCS) based on a process of free, prior and informed consultation has
                           been documented in the SA. Access to electricity is one of the main priorities of local IPs, as 85
                           percent of households are not electrified, 73 percent of which cannot afford the connection fee.
                           There are expectations that the project will help increase access to electricity in the three villages
                           considered to be within the zone of influence of the project.

                           The Bank will provide technical assistance and support to the government to prepare and
                           accelerate rural electrification in the three IP villages in the Project area of influence. Furthermore,
                           the affected communities will benefit from significantly reduced noise and pollution in the project
                           area. Also, communal facilities, such as schools and hospitals which are connected to the grid, will
                           be provided with more reliable power supply. The improved power supply in the region will result
                           in considerable indirect benefits, which will include increased economic activities and job
                           creation.
                           These measures will be included in the ESMP.

                           A culturally appropriate grievance redress mechanism will be established in consultation with
                           potentially affected IPs to address grievances by the affected Indigenous Peoples' communities and
                           to ensure that any project related complaints are promptly addressed. A first instance of dispute
                           handling where IPs are represented will be set up with the aim of settling any disputes amicably.
                           If necessary, the project will establish a committee which will include IP representatives and
                           project management. Court cases will be time consuming and expensive and are likely to be
                           beyond the reach of local IP stakeholders and should be considered a last resort. It is therefore
                           critical to establish first and second tier grievance management mechanisms. Each case should be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           carefully documented and the nature of grievance, agreed actions to be taken and subsequent
                           monitoring recorded.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             No irreversible and long term adverse indirect impacts are anticipated from the project activities.
                           The control measures that will be developed and implemented under the proposed certified
                           Environmental, Health and Safety Management System will support proper management of waste
                           and wastewater, as well as workers health and safety (including the introduction and routine
                           application of safety working procedures; inspection; training; emergency plan; and personal
                           protection equipment to prevent injuries, hearing damage, etc.).
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             The choice of this project was based on minimizing environmental and social impacts. Different
                           sites were considered and reviewed.

                           The operational replacement of the existing gas turbines with modern equipment will substantially
                           reduce noise generation and air emission levels. During project preparation and in addition to the
                           impacts directly related to the investments, the current poor management of non-production waste,



                                                                       Page 8 of 11
                            wastewater and workers’ health and safety were reviewed. The ESMP will include measures for
                         4. substantial improvements
                             Describe measures    taken to   the issues.
                                                           these
                                                          by     borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                            assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             International reputable consultants have supported the client with the preparation of the ESA and
                            will support the client in the preparation of the ESMP.

                           The ESMP will include environmental monitoring programs for both construction and operation
                           phases.

                           The implementation of the mitigation measures, including environmental, health and safety
                           obligations during construction, will be monitored in accordance with a program of monitoring
                           activities that will developed as part of the ESMP. Control and mitigating measures and
                           monitoring tasks of the ESMP related to the new investments during construction will be the
                           responsibility of the contractor for the new CCGT installations and will be made part of the
                           Engineering-Procurement-Construction (EPC) contract for these services.

                           A substantial part of the operational measures in the ESMP will be incorporated into the certified
                           Environmental, Health and Safety Management System and will be under the responsibility of the
                           plant management after commissioning of the new facilities. The EPC contractor will support the
                           development of the Environmental, Health and Safety Management System , which will be
                           certified and audited by an independent and internationally authorized certifying agency. The
                           Project under its TA Component will also support the development of environment, health and
                           safety system at the site and at MEPE to build capacities in this field and support monitoring of
                           ESMP implementation, also beyond project closing, and the development and functioning of the
                           Environmental, Health and Safety Management System at the Thaton location. The project
                           progress reports furnished by MEPE will include a section for ESMP implementation and related
                           environmental monitoring reports.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental and social safeguards capacities and regulations in Myanmar does not meet
                           international good practice. This applies to screening and reviewing of economic activities and
                           new investments for potential environmental and social adverse impacts as well as regulating,
                           monitoring and enforcing compliance to adequate standards. Technical assistance related to the
                           capacity building for project implementation includes environmental and social safeguards and the
                           implementation of environmental and social management plan at the project site.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key Project beneficiaries and potentially affected peoples in the Project influence area are the
                           three IP villages that are located in the project influence area, and the project beneficiaries at the
                           Mon State and national level.

                           Public consultations for the project affected area took place throughout the project preparation.
                           The ESA, which includes the SA, contains the details of this process, concerns expressed by the
                           affected people and how they were taken into account during the project preparation. This includes
                           a stakeholder workshop following the completion of the social assessment a stakeholder workshop
                           with about 50 participants was convened in Thaton. Participants included representatives from
                           government, civil society and local stakeholders.

                           For national stakeholder an NGO meeting took place in Yangon in May 2013. Also, several

                                                                      Page 9 of 11
                           government entities were consulted throughout the project preparation.

                           During the public hearing in Thaton and the NGO meeting in Yangon in May 2013 the Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           interventions and the results of the impact analysis of the ESA were presented and discussed. The
                           Executive Summary of the ESA was disclosed in local language to the NGOs and the local
                           stakeholders including the local communities in the Project area in July 2013 and published on
                           MEPE’s website on July 9, 2013. The integrated ESA report was published in the Infoshop on July
                           10, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      13-Jun-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Jul-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Myanmar                                                          09-Jul-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Jul-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Myanmar                                                          09-Jul-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?


                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Dejan R. Ostojic
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                             Date: 05-Aug-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Julia M. Fraser (SM)                            Date: 10-Aug-2013




                                                                      Page 11 of 11
