                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA936
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Aug-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Peru                                    Project ID:                       P122194
                              Project Name:                  Higher Education Quality Assurance (P122194)
                              Task Team Leader:              Marcelo Becerra
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 03-Sep-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:             20-Nov-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 LCSHE                                   Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        Tertiary education (100%)
                              Theme:                         Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                 27.17
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                    25.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                    52.17
                              Environmental Category:        C - Not Required
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The objective of the Project is to strengthen Peru’s higher education quality assurance system by promoting evaluation and quality enhancements
                              and the dissemination of information.

                              3. Project Description

                              Component 1: Development of methods, instruments, norms and capacity for evaluation and accreditation (estimated total cost: US$7.92 million;
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Bank: US$3.80 million). This
                              Component would strengthen the capacity of COSUSINEACE, HEIs and EEFAs to handle their respective responsibilities within the quality
                              assurance system. It would finance the development of technical, methodological, and procedural capacity in the quality assurance system.
                              COSUSINEACE would be responsible for the implementation of Component 1. By reinforcing the foundations of the quality assurance system and
                              strengthening the capacity and legitimacy of COSUSINEACE as the central player in it, Component 1 plays a key role in the achievement of the
                              PDO. This Component would include three subcomponents:

                              (a)        Subcomponent 1.1: Development of management, planning and evaluation capacity of CONEAU and CONEACES (estimated total cost:
                              US$1.41 million; Bank: US$0.68 million). This subcomponent would enhance CONEAU’s and CONEACES’ management, planning and evaluation
                              capacity. It would finance the development of standards, norms and procedures for evaluation and accreditation, including for the supervision of
                              EEFAs. Expected outputs would include the production and dissemination of methodological guides, technical protocols, and other instruments as
                              needed. It would provide targeted technical assistance from national, regional, and international experts in the field of evaluation and accreditation
                              of higher education institutions and programs.

                              (b)        Subcomponent 1.2: Development of self-evaluation and external evaluation capacity (estimated total cost: US$1.91 million; Bank: US
                              $0.91 million). This subcomponent would strengthen the capacity of (i) HEIs to engage in both internal and external evaluation processes, and (ii)
                              EEFAs to undertake external evaluations, including by learning from other experiences at the regional and international level, including regional
                              networks such as RIACES (Red Iberoamericana para la Acreditación de la Calidad en la Educación Superior, i.e. Iberoamerican Network for
                              Quality Accreditation in Higher Education) and ENQA (European Association for Quality Assurance in Higher Education). This subcomponent
                              would finance:
                              a.         The development of coaching capacities at COSUSINEACE so that it can encourage and incubate the formation of evaluation teams
                              within HEIs.
                              b.         The training of evaluation teams within HEIs, so that their capacity to engage with, and take advantage from, evaluation processes can
                              be maximized.
                              c.         The development of regional and national knowledge exchange, including workshops and other networking platforms, so that inter-
                              institutional synergies and learning from evaluation are encouraged.
                              d.         The development of groups of experts within CONEACES and CONEAU for providing ad hoc, demand-driven technical assistance to
                              HEI evaluation teams as they encounter issues throughout the evaluation process.
                              e.         The provision of technical assistance to EEFAs, including the training of academic peers and other specialists in evaluation.
                              f.         The provision of training and technical assistance to CONEACES and CONEAU on the supervision of EEFAs, so that EEFAs are held
                              accountable and thus gain and retain the legitimacy necessary for a sustainable quality assurance system.


                                                                                                                                                                         Page 1 of 5
                         (c)       Subcomponent 1.3: Support to Project implementation (estimated total cost: US$4.61 million; Bank: US$2.21 million). T his
                         subcomponent would enhance COSUSINEACE’s human, technical, and organizational capacity for the implementation of the Project. It would
                         finance human resources, training, and technical assistance for a number of units dedicated to Project implementation, namely the Project
                         Steering Council, the Project Executive Directorate, and the Project Coordination Unit, and the Technical Commission and the Technical
                         Secretariat of the Fund for Quality Enhancement.

                         Component 2: Development and consolidation of a Quality Assurance Information System (SIAC) (estimated total cost: US$5.19 million; Bank: US
Public Disclosure Copy




                         $2.49 million). This Component would develop and consolidate a higher education Quality Assurance Information System (SIAC, Sistema de
                         Información del Aseguramiento de la Calidad). Specifically, it would provide both resources and technical assistance for the systematic gathering,
                         processing, and dissemination of reliable data regarding higher education quality assurance, and graduates’ performance in the labor market. By
                         setting up, developing, and consolidating a centralized, comprehensive information system on higher education quality assurance, this component
                         would provide all stakeholders with relevant, high-quality information about quality of higher education and its links to the labor market. The
                         development and consolidation of SIAC is expected to yield the following benefits: (i) enhance COSUSINEACE’s management and supervision
                         capacity; (ii) improve decision making by HEIs in terms of management and investment, thus increasing the quality and relevance of programs
                         offered; (iii) improve decision making by parents and prospective students in terms of career decisions, leading to an improvement in employment
                         opportunities and in the external efficiency of the higher education system; and (iv) allow better public scrutiny of higher education quality by civil
                         society, policy makers, and society at large. In order to incentivize HEIs’ participation in SIAC and to increase its coverage, the allocation of
                         Component 3 funds would be linked to the release of key data by HEIs into the SIAC, on top of the standard data from the evaluation process that
                         would feed the SIAC databases. Component 2 plays a central role in the pursuit of the PDO, since reliable and well-communicated information
                         constitutes a fundamental component of a quality assurance system. This system would be composed of three subcomponents.

                         (a)       Subcomponent 2.1: Development and consolidation of an observatory of the accreditation of Peru’s higher education (Acredita Perú)
                         (estimated total cost: US$1.65 million; Bank: US$0.79 million). This Subcomponent would develop a key component of SIAC, Acredita Perú, which
                         would organize and disseminate information on standards, criteria, indicators, EEFAs, and evaluation and accreditation procedures by degrees
                         and HEIs. It would finance data entry and data management regarding the accreditation of universities and IESNUs, on the basis of the information
                         collected by CONEAU and CONEACES, respectively, including information received through evaluation. It would also finance making that
                         information available online and disseminated through a communications campaign.

                         (b)        Subcomponent 2.2: Establishment of an observatory of higher education graduates (Futuro Profesional) (estimated total cost: US$3.13
                         million; Bank: US$1.50 million). This Subcomponent would systematically collect, process and disseminate statistical information about the relative
                         performance of higher education graduates in the labor market. This would provide information about employability and salaries of graduates from
                         different programs and HEIs. Futuro Profesional would develop and disseminate regularly its analyses of the supply of skills in the labor market.
                         This Subcomponent would finance two major activities: (i) a Mega Household Survey , which would measure graduates’ performance in the labor
                         market by program and institution ; and (ii) the observatory of graduates, which will systematically process and disseminate such statistical
                         information .

                         (c)        Subcomponent 2.3: Elaboration of sector studies (estimated total cost: US$0.41 million; Bank: US$0.19 million). This Subcomponent
                         would support a number of studies that lead to a better understanding of Peru’s higher education, thus building more reliable information. Studies
                         to be financed under this Subcomponent would include: (i) the development of a methodology and initial data collection to carry out an impact
                         evaluation on the long term effects of the introduction of a quality assurance system, analyzing variables such as wage premia, employability, and
                         students’ and employers’ satisfaction; (ii) an in-depth socio-cultural assessment, in the framework of the Project’s Indigenous Peoples Planning
                         Framework (IPPF); (iii) a study of the role of information in the choice of post-secondary education; and (iv) at least one sectoral study about
Public Disclosure Copy




                         accreditation in Peru’s higher education system.

                         Component 3: Fund for Quality Enhancement (estimated total cost: US$39.06 million; Bank: US$18.72 million). This component would promote
                         external evaluation and accreditation by supporting the establishment of a Fund for Quality Enhancement (FEC, Fondo para el Estímulo de la
                         Calidad), designed to promote the improvement of the quality and relevance of academic programs and higher education institutions. The FEC
                         would finance two types of activities: (i) external evaluation for IESNUs, given their capacity is significantly more limited than that of universities ;
                         and (ii) improvement plans at the program or HEI level for both IESNUs and universities, based on the results of previous self- and external
                         evaluation financed outside of the Project (except for those IESNUs that receive funding for their external evaluation). The FEC would constitute a
                         central tool for strengthening the quality assurance system for higher education, particularly by encouraging HEIs to conduct self- and external
                         evaluation so they can access its funds. Its specific goals would be: (i) to foster the quality and relevance of higher education in Peru, encouraging
                         processes of evaluation, accreditation, and quality improvement in HEIs; (ii) to support subprojects that contribute to capacity building in HEIs,
                         including teaching and management; (iii) to promote a holistic approach to the activity of HEIs, encouraging them to develop links with their
                         national and international context; (iv) to stimulate the improvement of human resources, particularly faculty’s human capital; and (v) to support the
                         investment in equipment for the modernization and improvement of teaching. The FEC would create financial incentives to support quality
                         improvement through two Subcomponents:

                         (a)         Subcomponent 3.1: External Evaluation of IESNUs (estimated total cost: US$0.59 million; Bank: US$0.28 million). This Subcomponent
                         would finance external evaluation of IESNUs, institution-wide and for programs (technical programs in education and health only ) by the EEFA of
                         their choice among those authorized by CONEACES. To access this fund, the IESNUs (both public and private ones, recognized by CONEACES)
                         would first need to complete their self-evaluation.
                         (b)         Subcomponent 3.2: Support to Improvement Plans (estimated total cost: US$38.46 million; Bank: US$18.43 million). This
                         Subcomponent would finance strategic improvement plans for both IESNUs and universities and for programs within them. Improvement plans
                         must be based on the results of the self- and external evaluation. Only institutions or programs that have completed an external evaluation process
                         would be eligible to access FEC funding. Institutional Improvement Plans (PMI, Planes de Mejora Institucional) must have established objectives,
                         activities and indicators for mid-term improvements, addressing at the same time the weaknesses identified in self-evaluation and external
                         evaluation. Program Improvement Plans (PMC, Planes de Mejora de Carreras) would select subprojects for strengthening or reforming existing
                         programs or establishing new programs, only in the key disciplines defined above. In order to avoid that high-quality institutions crowd out those
                         where improvement is most needed, Subcomponent 3.2 will operate with two sorts of calls for proposals, one for “top? and one for “non-top? HEIs.

                         (i)      Calls for proposals for the promotion of institutional excellence, which would be addressed at HEIs and/or programs that have received a
                         recommendation of accreditation from the corresponding EEFA. These calls for proposals would operate on a competitive basis. They will
                         concentrate between 40 and 50 percent of the FEC funds for any given fiscal year.

                                                                                                                                                                      Page 2 of 5
                         (ii)Calls for proposals for initiating institutional change, which would be addressed at HEIs and/or programs that, in their external evaluation, have
                         not received the recommendation for accreditation. These would operate not only on a competitive basis but also with views on the need to
                         engage the low-quality HEIs in the quality assurance system, as per criteria specified in the Operational Manual. These calls for proposals will
                         concentrate between 50 and 60 percent of FEC funds for any given fiscal year.
                         Eligible expenses to be financed under Subcomponent 3.2 are expected to be: (i) stimuli for training (externships, professors training, workshops);
                         (ii) technical assistance to improve programs, curricula, institutional strengthening, capacity building, development of learning materials, etc.
                         (through consulting services, visiting professorships, in-house training); (iii) equipment for teaching (such as equipment for workshops, laboratories
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and libraries; multimedia equipment; goods for the improvement of management, such as software and computing equipment) and small
                         improvements in educational infrastructure; and (iv) institutional strengthening (goods and services necessary to developing academic and
                         management improvement processes, such as standardizations, certifications, auditing and implementation of academic improvements).
                         An Indigenous Peoples Plan will be prepared for those HEIs that have an indigenous population of more than 5% of their total student body.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The implementing agency, COSUSINEACE, is located in Lima but the project will be implemented nationally. Many of the higher education
                         institutions that will benefit from project investments are located in areas in which there are significant numbers of indigenous peoples.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Kristyna Bishop (LCSSO)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             No               The Project is not expected to environmental impact since it will not be supporting
                                                                                          any civil works. Therefore, the Project's environmental rating is a Category C.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                     No               The Natural Habitats policy is not triggered since the Project will not finance
                                                                                          activities in these areas. Most if not all Project activities will take place in urban
                                                                                          areas.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                              No               The Forest policy is not triggered as the Project will not finance any activities that
                                                                                          could affect the health and quality of forests, the rights and welfare of the people
                                                                                          that depend on them, or changes in their management or utilization.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                         No               This policy is not triggered since, given that the Project is not in the agriculture
                                                                                          sector, it will not procure pesticides or lead to their increased use.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11          No               The Physical Cultural Resources policy is not triggered since no major civil works
                                                                                          will be financed under the Project and therefore it is not expected.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                                        Page 3 of 5
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  Yes              The Project's overall approach to strengthening the quality assurance system for
                                                                                               higher education in Peru involves targeted actions at the level of related systems,
                                                                                               institutions, and accreditation and evaluation processes. OP 4.10 has been
                                                                                               triggered as this is a national project in a country with a significant indigenous
                                                                                               population.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               In order to ensure that indigenous peoples derive the maximum benefit possible
                                                                                               from the investments made under this Project and that their interests and concerns
                                                                                               are reflected in the programs, curricula, and pedagogic materials that are targeted
                                                                                               for improvement under the FEC, a rapid social assessment was conducted to
                                                                                               analyze the various legal, sociological and institutional variables that are relevant
                                                                                               for Project design. On the basis of this assessment, an Indigenous Peoples
                                                                                               Planning Framework (IPPF) has been prepared. The objective of the IPPF is to: (i)
                                                                                               ensure that indigenous peoples benefit from the activities financed by this Project
                                                                                               to the greatest degree possible; and (ii) mitigate any potential adverse impact that
                                                                                               the Project may have on indigenous peoples.

                                                                                               The IPPF was shared with national indigenous leaders in Lima and indigenous
                                                                                               students in Cusco, Iquitos and Lima that currently attend higher education
                                                                                               institutions with populations of more than 10% of indigenous students. During this
                                                                                               dialogue process, indigenous peoples were consulted on their perspectives
                                                                                               regarding the social barriers to access to higher education, the matrix of options,
                                                                                               and the draft IPPF. As summary of the discussion, specific comments and
                                                                                               recommendations have been incorporated into the final version of the IPPF.
                                                                                               Importantly and as a result of the consultations, the threshold for the elaboration of
                                                                                               IPPs was lowered from 10 to 5% of indigenous students.

                                                                                               The IPPF is being translated into Quechua, and a summary will be translated into
                                                                                               Aimara, shipibo, awajun, and 7 other indigenous languages. The IPPF and the
                                                                                               translated versions will be disseminated by the Borrower via their institutional
                                                                                               website and on Infoshop per the requirements of OP 4.10.

                                                                                               During implementation, IPPs will be prepared by the borrower for those HEIs that
                                                                                               are selected for the implementation of an Institutional Improvement Plan (PMI) and
                                                                                               where at least 5% of their student population is indigenous. The IPPF contains a
                                                                                               matrix with optional activities that HEIs can choose from when developing their
                                                                                               IPPs. These options include actions relating to social assessment, intervention,
                                                                                               and monitoring, on the following areas: (i) improvement of higher education quality;
                                                                                               (ii) increased insertion into the labor market (urban and rural); and/or (iii) inclusion
                                                                                               of intercultural issues into higher education curricula. In order to comply with OP
                                                                                               4.10, the IPPs developed by the HEIs will require free, prior and informed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               consultations with: (i) indigenous student body at the institution, (ii) representatives
                                                                                               of indigenous student unions, and/or (iii) representatives of the local indigenous
                                                                                               community. These representatives will provide a proxy broad community support
                                                                                               on behalf of their institutions.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            No               No civil works will be financed by the Project.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No               The Project will neither construct nor use water from any dams.
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP      No               No Project activities will take place on or affect International Waterways.
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No               No Project activities will take place in Disputed Areas.


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any potential l arge scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                   The Project represents an important opportunity to promote the effective inclusion of indigenous students in higher education institutions and
                                 programs and improve their academic performance at HEIs. As a result, the potential social impacts of the Project are expected to be positive.
                                 However, there is a risk that the Project will fail to benefit indigenous peoples if specific measures and considerations are not included in the
                                 project design. For this reason, an IPPF has been prepared, consulted and disclosed as part of Project preparation and IPPs will be prepared
                                 for institutions with more than 5% of indigenous students that implement an Institutional Improvement Plan under Component 3.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                   Concerns have been raised during the preparation of similar projects that improved educational facilities will promote outmigration from
                                 indigenous communities to urban areas or possibly out of the country and while this Project does not directly address this concern, this issue
                                 has been discussed with the Government.
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                   The Team considered developing an Indigenous Peoples Plan for the whole Project. However, given that many activities are still undefined
                                 and many of the activities in Component 1 and 2 are administrative in nature, it was decided to prepare an IPPF for Component 3 and to have
                                 institutions only above a certain threshold – 5% of total student population is indigenous - develop an IPP for the implementation of Institutional
                                                                                                                                                                           Page 4 of 5
                              Improvement Plans. It is felt that this approach will maximize ownership by institutions and ensure that better targeted and more comprehensive
                              consultations will be held and will result in more relevant IPPs.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                               and implement the measures described.
                                The implementing agency has limited experience with the Bank’s safeguard policies. As a result, Project activities include training and on-
                              going support for the implementation of the IPPF and compliance with OP 4.10. The Borrower will be supported by the Bank team to undertake
                              the following important safeguard activities: (i) prepare, consult, disseminate and implement the IPPF; (ii) support HEIs with significant
Public Disclosure Copy




                              indigenous populations to develop their IPPs; and (iii) monitor the implementation of the approved IPPs.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                               on potentially affected people.
                                Key stakeholders, as identified by the social assessment, are the following indigenous peoples organizations, national leaders and youth
                              leaders: Asociación Interétnica de Desarrollo de la Selva Peruana (AIDESEP); Confederación de Nacionalidades Amazónicas del Perú
                              (CONAP); Confederación Campesina del Perú (CCP); Confederación Nacional Agraria (CNA); Confederación Nacional de Comunidades del
                              Perú Afectadas por la Minería (CONACAMI); Organización Nacional de Mujeres Indígenas Andinas y Amazónicas del Perú (ONAMIAP); Unión
                              de Comunidades Aimara (UNCA); Federación Nacional de Mujeres Campesinas, Artesanas, Indígenas Nativas y Asalariadas
                              (FEMUCARINAP); and Pacto de Unidad Indígena. These organizations were formally invited to free, prior, and informed consultation of the
                              IPPF at the COSUSINEACE’s office in Lima. Moreover, consultations were held in the field with youth leaders of Hatun Nan (Cusco), AENIAP
                              and OEPIAP (Iquitos).

                            B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                             Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              17-Jun-2012
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          31-Aug-2012
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           30-Aug-2012
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                              If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language       Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for    Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same         Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Marcelo Becerra
                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Reema Nayar (SM)                                                       Date: 31-Aug-2012




                                                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 5
