                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC4375

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nepal                            Project ID:       P143036
                            Project Name:      Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Improvement Project (P143036)
                            Task Team          William D. Kingdom
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          02-Dec-2013                      Estimated         18-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDU                            Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Water supply (80%), Sanitation (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (80%), Decentralization (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         70.00                Total Bank Financing:         52.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                 0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            11.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   52.00
                              Local Communities                                                              7.00
                              Total                                                                         70.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objectives of the project are to: (i) increase access to improved water and sanitation
                           services in rural areas; and (ii) promote sustainability of community managed water supply schemes
                           by implementation of a long-term support mechanism in selected Districts.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project will build on the lessons learnt from the earlier projects (Rural Water Supply
                         and Sanitation Project, 1997-2004 and Second Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project,
                         2005-2012) and the results from a study on the various modalities of delivering RWSS services in the
                         country. The study identifies options for sector improvement and better integration among
Public Disclosure Copy




                         stakeholders. The study found that service delivery has evolved significantly and is now based on
                         demand driven approach regardless of modalities, with similar characteristic in design and
                         implementation approach. Results from the study indicate that regardless of implementation
                         modality, all RWSS projects are completed with limited attention to post implementation support to
                         the CBOs. The proposed project will address this critical issue and will provide support for
                         institutional strengthening that improves sustainability of the investment and ensure long term
                         access. This will include improving the sector monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system and a
                         implementing a well-functioning “backstopping” support system to improve long term sustainability.

                         The project comprises three components:
                         •      Component 1 – Increasing Access to Improved Water Supply and Sanitation
                         •      Component 2 – Promoting Sustainability of Community Managed Schemes
                         •      Component 3 – Technical Assistance/Capacity Building and Project Management

                         Component 1 – This will include: (i) physical new investment in water supply systems, (ii) improved
                         sanitation units for individual households and at community level (health facilities, schools, etc.), and
                         (iii) hygiene education and awareness building to complement the physical infrastructure. Schemes
                         will be selected on the basis of request for WASH services through the District’s planning process
                         and meet the criteria for financing under the Board’s approach.

                         Component 2 – This will support technical assistance and capacity building to improve the
                         institutional arrangements and strengthen the linkages among the key agencies during the planning,
                         implementation and post construction period. The focus will be on a limited number of Districts
                         which will be selected using an objective and transparent process agreed between the Government of
                         Nepal (GoN) and the Bank. This approach will develop and test a long term backstopping support
                         model that can later be expanded nationwide. The project will make use of existing Government
Public Disclosure Copy




                         structures to provide effective and continuous “technical” and “administrative” backstopping
                         supports in post-implementation phase
                         Component 3 – This will finance incremental project management costs and any capacity building
                         and technical assistance activities identified during project preparation.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Based on a demand driven approach, component 1 of the project is expected to reach all the 75
                         districts of the country, in the mountain, hills and the terai regions of Nepal. For component 2,
                         districts will be selected in which the activities relating to “technical” and “administrative”
                         backstopping support during post-implementation phase, can be piloted. The selection of the districts
                         for activities under component 2 will be based on certain criteria agreed with the Government of
                         Nepal during preparation phase. It is expected that criteria will be determined based on (but not
                         limited to) indicators such as water supply and sanitation coverage, level of poverty, remoteness,
                         where actions are already underway for coordination, capacity of district level government structures.

                         The schemes to be funded under the project will be community-based, demand driven and small in
                         nature, and they will be scattered in large geographical areas across the country. Experiences have
                         shown that the adverse environmental and social impacts of such schemes would be minor/simple
                         that can be easily addressed through planning, design and managed by the users/ community. No
                           involuntary resettlement is expected under the project. Further, by virtue of its design, the project
                           will provide significant benefits to women, indigenous people, and other vulnerable groups.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Fund Development Board is an autonomous agency
                           responsible for the execution of the Component 1 of the Project. An Environmental Assessment (EA)
                           was carried out for the previous project, and environmental management and mitigation was an
                           integral part of the scheme planning and implementation. The Fund Board is familiar with the World
                           Bank environmental requirements through the implementation of the two previous RWSS projects,
                           and has been exercising due diligence by reviewing environment and water quality reports from SOs
                           and SAs, and implemented site specific mitigation measures when required. It conducted regular
                           reviews of environmental safeguards with a focus on water quality management to identify good
                           practice and emerging issues. Previous projects EA, lessons learned during RWSSP II
                           implementation, and different frameworks on Environment Management and Social Management
                           being used in the sector will be reviewed. Based on which, environmental and social management
                           system will be updated for the proposed project taking into account the learning from the previous
                           projects and new developments in the sector: an Environmental and Social Management Framework
                           (ESMF) will be prepared. At the national level, Ministry of Urban Development, which is
                           responsible for water supply and sanitation sector, is being supported by the Asian Development
                           Bank for the establishment and capacity building of the Gender and Social Inclusion Unit which will
                           be important for mainstreaming environment and social issues across the sector.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)
                           Bandita Sijapati (SASDS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project supports small scale demand driven
                           BP 4.01                                               water supply schemes using surface sources
                                                                                 such as small spring or stream or ground water.
                                                                                 Typically these schemes serve 50 to 100
                                                                                 households (through public taps or tube-wells/
                                                                                 wells). The project will also support rural
                                                                                 sanitation such as latrines.

                                                                                 The table below presents, examples of potential
                                                                                 issues and mitigation measures that could apply
                                                                                 to sub-projects. ESMF will assess the potential
                                                                                 risks/ issues and provide guidance for
                                                                                 mitigation.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes              As location of specific sub-projects is unknown
                                                                                 prior project implementation, the possibility of
                                                                                 these being located in a critical or natural habitat
                                                                                 must be assessed. The ESMF will have
                                                                                 screening provision for natural habitat and
                                                                 provide guidance for avoiding/mitigation of
                                                                 adverse impacts per the policy requirements.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    There will be no commercial logging and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 clearing of forests. Some springs located in
                                                                 community forest may be used as a source: in
                                                                 which case impacts will be assessed and
                                                                 mitigation measured employed (under EA OP/
                                                                 BP 4.01).
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    Project will not use pesticides

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    Small scale activities in rural areas. Physical
                         BP 4.11                                 cultural resources are unlikely to be impacted.
                                                                 Previous project also did not encounter this.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The precise location for each schemes are not
                                                                 known, but given that indigenous peoples are
                                                                 interspersed throughout the country, this policy
                                                                 has been triggered to ensure that there are no
                                                                 negative impacts on IPs. Besides mitigating the
                                                                 negative effects, the project seeks to specifically
                                                                 benefit disadvantaged groups, including the IPs.
                                                                 Since the precise locations of the projects is not
                                                                 known, the ESMF developed for the project will
                                                                 include an Indigenous Peoples Planning
                                                                 Framework (IPPF) which will specifically
                                                                 consider the ways of mitigating negative effects,
                                                                 if any, and enhancing project benefits to the IPs.
                                                                 The IPPF will be in line with the government
                                                                 and World Bank’s policies on indigenous
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 groups, and will include measures to ensure
                                                                 broad community support through culturally-
                                                                 appropriate consultation.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No    There were no cases of involuntary resettlement
                         4.12                                    in RWSSP I and II and none are expected in the
                                                                 current project.. In cases where land is required
                                                                 for water supply and sanitation schemes, it will
                                                                 be done on a voluntary basis. As done in
                                                                 RWSSP II, such land donations and their
                                                                 voluntary nature will be recorded in a
                                                                 memorandum of understanding. Also, a
                                                                 negative list of projects will be developed in the
                                                                 ESMF to ensure that land donation does not
                                                                 cause adverse impacts including loss of
                                                                 livelihood to the donating households.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No    No dam construction will be supported nor any
                                                                 investments dependent on the operation of a
                                                                 dam.
                                 Projects on International                                         TBD                           The applicability of this policy will be assessed
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            during preparation based on the expected
                                                                                                                                 locations of the sub-projects and waterways
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 affected, including groundwater sources.
                                                                                                                                 Small quantities of water from local sources will
                                                                                                                                 be used which is unlikely to affect quantity and
                                                                                                                                 quality of water in the downstream riparian
                                                                                                                                 country.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             No activities will be supported in disputed areas.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 03-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      •      Initiate the review of the existing Environment Framework and Indigenous Peoples
                                      Planning Framework-July 15, 2013
                                      •      Complete the updating of the Environment Framework and Indigenous Peoples Planning
                                      Framework-October 15, 2013
                                      •      Disclose the approved EnvironmentFramework and Indigenous Peoples Planning
                                      Framework-November 25, 2013
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: William D. Kingdom

                                 Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Ming Zhang (SM)                                                                                                      Date: 05-Aug-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
