                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA2692
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Senegal                           Project ID:    P125506
                            Project Name:      SN:Casamance Development Pole Project (P125506)
                            Task Team          Demba Balde
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          01-Jul-2013                       Estimated   26-Sep-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTCS                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (55%), Agro-industry, marketing,
                                              and trade (12%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and H ighways (33%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Conflict prevention and post-conflict
                                              reconstruction (50%), Infrastructure services for pri vate sector development
                                              (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      46.00           Total Bank Financing:                 40.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                         0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         6.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               40.00
                              Total                                                                                     46.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to: (i) enhance the agricultural productivity of youth
                           and female farmers for selected crops; and (ii) improve transport linkages in isolated rural
                           communities in targeted areas of the Casamance region.

                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                          3. Project Description
                         The proposed operation is a commercial agriculture and value chain project focusing on:
                         (i)     Key agriculture products (rice, horticulture) which have considerable potential to raise
Public Disclosure Copy




                         incomes and diversify the rural economy of Casamance; and
                         (ii)The development of economic platforms and rural roads to facilitate the links between production
                         basins and small producers (especially youth and women) and markets.

                         The project will have three components that are summarized below and further detailed in Annex 2
                         of the PAD.

                         Component 1: Support to agricultural production, post-harvest, and marketing for selected value-
                         chains (US$24.0 million, out of which IDA finances US$22.0 million) includes three subcomponents
                         focusing on key areas of production, post-harvest and marketing: (a) rehabilitation of rice valleys and
                         horticulture perimeters, and provision of small basic post-harvest infrastructure including small
                         commercial/logistics platforms (US$8.0 million); (b) provision of productive assets in support of
                         production and productivity for rice, horticulture and oysters including the purchase of machinery
                         and inputs and capacity building (US$7.0 million); and (c) improvement of market linkages through
                         the development of the IEPB (US$ 7.0 million).

                         Component 2: Rural Accessibility (US$15.0 million, out of which IDA finances US$13.0 million).
                         This component will aim to improve accessibility of isolated rural communities and transport
                         linkages to local markets. It includes three subcomponents: (i) improvement of basic motorized
                         access in the poorest Rural Communities (CRs) through spot improvement of about 350 km of local
                         roads linking CRs to the classified network or to their district centers,(US$3.5 million); (ii)
                         rehabilitation/periodic maintenance of about 200 km of rural roads to improve access to commercial
                         infrastructure and to areas with high agricultural potential (US$10.2 million, out of which IDA
                         finances US$8.2 million); (iii) pilot labor-based road maintenance initiative (US$500,000) and (iv)
                         capacity building of ARDs and CRs in the area of basic road maintenance planning, implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and supervision (US$800,000).

                         Component 3: Project implementation and capacity building (US$7.0 million, out of which IDA
                         finances US$5.0 million). This component includes four sub-components: (i) Capacity building of
                         key actors, including the Agence Nationale pour la Reconstruction de la Casamance (ANRAC) in
                         broader peace building processes and the basics of Disarmament Demobilization and Reintegration
                         (DDR) (US$600,000). (ii) Three strategic studies (US$600,000); the first to produce a
                         comprehensive cadaster and a mapping (geo-reference) of activities in Casamance; the second at
                         defining a fiscal framework in the context of decentralization; and the third to define a national
                         framework for the development pole and strategy for the Government; (iii) Support to project
                         management, monitoring and evaluation, detailed in Section IV (US$3.8 million); (iv) Construction
                         and equipment of offices for the 3 ARDs (US$2.0 million, financed by the GoS).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The operation triggers safeguard policies in the areas of environment (OP/BP 4. 01), involuntary
                         resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), natural habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11),
                         and pest management (OP 4.09), despite the fact that the specific activities to be financed under the
                         project have not yet been defined. Therefore, the project is classified environmental category B.
                         Because the exact sites are not yet known, it is suggested the project prepare an Environmental and


                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), as well as a Pest
                         and Pesticides Management Plan (PMP). A framework approach will be followed for some (not all)
                         project activities. Once siting is known, an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (and,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         possibly a RAP) will be prepared. In addition, stakeholder consultations in planning, implementation,
                         and monitoring will be mainstreamed throughout the project processes.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Salamata Bal (AFTCS)
                         Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               Infrastructure works and sub-projects could
                         BP 4.01                                             trigger site-specific impacts. Potential impacts
                                                                             include noise by machineries and dust during
                                                                             construction and rehabilitation works. An ESMF
                                                                             is prepared, consulted upon and disclosed before
                                                                             appraisal. In addition, an Environmental and
                                                                             Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for the
                                                                             Bignona Platform has been prepared, consulted
                                                                             upon, and disclosed. During project
                                                                             implementation, ESIAs/ESMPs for other sub-
                                                                             projects will be prepared, consulted upon and
                                                                             disclosed, as required.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes               The project would not also support or lead to the
                                                                             conversion of natural habitats. Rather, it would
                                                                             help to rehabilitate, restore, and protect degraded
                                                                             riparian forests which are important to preserve
                                                                             local biodiversity and the quality of water
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             resources
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No                The project is not expected to have an impact on
                                                                             forest resources, although the cutting of some
                                                                             trees may be involved.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09             Yes               It is expected that Bank supported sub-projects
                                                                             will involve the controlling of pests through
                                                                             biological and cultural practices. However, the
                                                                             purchase of pesticides when their use is justified
                                                                             may be done based on an IPM. A separate PMP
                                                                             has been prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes               E&S screening tool will include the
                         BP 4.11                                             identification of chance finds. To address this
                                                                             issue a Physical/Cultural management plan and
                                                                             “Chance Find” procedures will be included in the
                                                                             contract documents
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No                There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                             area.




                                                                     Page 3 of 8
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes              Infrastructure works may lead to displacement
                            4.12                                                of people, loss of assets and land, and restriction
                                                                                of access to sources of livelihood. Land
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement
                                                                                will likely be minimal. A Resettlement Policy
                                                                                Framework (RPF) has been prepared, consulted
                                                                                upon, and disclosed, and includes measures for
                                                                                mitigating any displacement. Resettlement Action
                                                                                Plans (RAPs) will be prepared as necessary
                                                                                during implementation.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               N/A

                            Projects on International        No                   N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The project is classified category B, and regarding the nature and small-size of the eligible
                              subprojects/activities, five Bank safeguard policies are triggered: OP 4.01 on Environmental
                              Assessment; OP 4.04 on Natural Habitats; OP 4.09 on Pest Management; OP 4.11 on Physical
                              Cultural Resources; and OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.
                              The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the Platform of Bignona raised no
Public Disclosure Copy




                              adverse significant or irreversible impact to deal with; impacts are related to: deforestation and
                              modification of landscape, pollution and nuisances arising from wastes mishandling, safety and
                              occupational health risks during the construction phase, worsening of sanitation and health
                              situation in case of hygiene deficiency during the exploitation phase of the platform. The positive
                              impacts, such as employment and economic growth and social peace recovering, improvement of
                              livelihoods, increasing of the contribution to food security even at national, are largely
                              outweighing the negative impacts.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                The expansion of rice cultivation schemes and surfaces may in the long run, if not adequately
                              accompanied by the agricultural institutions in collaboration with environmental and land planning
                              departments, result in water resources pollution by inadequate use of chemicals and the
                              degradation of natural habitat like wetlands/mangrove ecosystems which support fisheries and
                              provide other services
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                not applicable.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.


                                                                        Page 4 of 8
                           An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the Platform of Bignona has been
                          prepared, while the following other safeguard instruments are completed: the Environmental and
                          Social Management Framework (ESMF), the Pest Management Plan (PMP), the Resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Policy Framework (RPF).

                          The Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) of the Bignona Platform provisioned
                          appropriate mitigation measures to the main negative impacts identified during the environmental
                          analysis, which cover: (i) vegetation compensation; (ii) wastes management system to prevent
                          pollution during the construction and the exploitation phases; (iii) (health and occupational risks
                          prevention measures; (iv) road traffic safety measures; and (v) sensitization on communicable
                          diseases including HIV.

                          Regarding the ESMF, it provides a screening mechanism for the mainstreaming of environmental
                          and social sustainability aspects from the identification of the subprojects to their implementation
                          phase. Prior to its commencement, as soon as the implementation site is identified, each
                          subprojects/activities will systematically be processed through the environmental and social
                          screening procedure detailed in the ESMF. The screening is executed by environmental and social
                          safeguard specialist of the Regional Development Agency (ARD). This process will result in the
                          environmental classification of the subprojects in category B or C; category A subproject will not
                          be eligible to financing. The results of the screening are processed according to the national
                          regulations under the control of the ‘’Direction de l’Environnement et des Etablissements
                          Classés’’.

                          The environmental and social mitigation measures summarized in the Bignona ESMPs and the
                          ESMF, as well as the specific mitigation measures approved for the subprojects, will be executed,
                          monitored and reported in: (i) a specific Safeguard Monitoring Report; and (ii) the Environmental
                          and Social Safeguards section of the overall project periodic report. The responsibility of the
                          follow up is with the ARDs, while the DEEC will be copied to all related reports.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The “Agences Régionales de Développement – ARDs” have experience in implementing Bank
                           projects. The ARD of Ziguinchor in particular has an environmental and social specialist who will
                           be responsible for following up all safeguards concerns and would also ensure that responsibilities
                           for applying the safeguard screening and mitigation requirements to each subproject are
                           implemented.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The project will benefit youth, women, ex-combatants and small holder producers (groups,
                           cooperatives, individuals), particularly those involved in fruit production or picking, rice and
                           vegetable production, animal production (poultry, aquaculture, sea products). Other direct
                           beneficiaries will include staff members working at the “Agence Régionale de Développement-
                           ARD” in the three regions and numbers of workers at the platform and all participants who will
                           receive training using project funds. Finally, in terms of implementing activities, the entire
                           population of the three regions, or 1.5 million people will benefit as actors in the conflict in the
                           social dialogue, including locally elected officials from the regions of Ziguinchor, Kolda, and
                           Sédhiou; local media experienced in advocacy; civil society organizations (APAC, CONGAD,
                           women and youth associations, traditional and religious leaders, private sector organizations and
                           peace building cells) and teachers and students from the University of Ziguinchor.



                                                                      Page 5 of 8
                           Indirect beneficiaries include all farmers in Casamance, Community Based Organizations and
                           Civil Society organizations. Casamance producers and operators in agri-business will benefit from
                           improved techniques of production and marketing of agriculture products, while value chain
Public Disclosure Copy




                           stakeholders will profit from increased agricultural production and improved access to markets.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   30-Jul-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Senegal                                                          29-Jul-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   30-Jul-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Senegal                                                          29-Jul-2013
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   30-Jul-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Senegal                                                          29-Jul-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector       Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats



                                                                    Page 6 of 8
                             Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of critical natural habitats?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                             Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Demba Balde

                                                                        Page 7 of 8
                         Approved By
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 29-Jul-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Advisor:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Ian Bannon (SM)               Date: 29-Jul-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              Page 8 of 8
