                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA2939
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Africa                            Project ID:    P075941
                            Project Name:     Regional Rusumo Falls Hydroelectric Project (P075941)
                            Task Team         Paul Baringanire
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         27-May-2013                       Estimated   06-Aug-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTN2                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Hydropower (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (15%), Regional
                                              integration (75%), Other social development (5%), Other rural development
                                              (5%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     469.00           Total Bank Financing:               340.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                        0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     13.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                           340.00
                              African Development Fund                                                               88.24
                              Bilateral Agencies (unidentified)                                                      27.76
                              Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified)                                       0.00
                              Total                                                                                 469.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                                                     Page 1 of 13
                         The development objective of the Regional Rusumo Falls Hydroelectric Project is to increase the
                         supply of electricity to the national grids of Rwanda, Tanzania and Burundi.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will develop renewable hydroelectric power and regional transmission connecting
                         Burundi, Rwanda and Northwest Tanzania, and support local area development and benefit sharing
                         activities in the area of the dam, reservoir and transmission lines. The installed capacity will be
                         around 80 MW. The feasibility study for the project indicated that firm energy production per year is
                         estimated at around 294 GWh with average annual energy production of 448 GWh. With the
                         construction of new transmission lines, power would be delivered to off-take points in each country
                         and sold to the three state power utilities, i.e. REGIDESO, EWSA, and TANESCO.

                         The project is expected to contribute to regional stability and integration by developing a joint
                         hydropower generation / transmission system. The project provides for important transmission
                         interconnections, which will help form the transmission backbone between Burundi, Rwanda, and
                         Tanzania, advancing the medium and long term goals of regional transmission inter-connection in the
                         East African Power Pool (EAPP). Adequate and reliable power supply is critical to meeting the
                         social and economic development objectives of these three countries. Power demand is increasing
                         rapidly and the limited availability of electricity is constraining development in the region. The three
                         countries are characterized by constrained power systems where demand exceeds present generation
                         capacity. The costs of meeting peak loads on national power systems are high as these loads are
                         supplied from expensive thermal plants. Investments in power generation facilities will increase the
                         reliability and lower the cost of electricity, thus contributing to the achievement of the countries’
                         economic development. Therefore, the project would support the Bank's greater focus on regional
                         integration in Africa. By increasing electrification, reducing power generation costs and increased
                         power interchanges, the proposed project will enhance competitiveness and employment in the
                         region. The project will also provide measures for local area development and livelihood
                         improvement in the affected areas including rural electrification; rural water supply for people,
                         livestock and irrigation; rural sanitation, catchment /environmental conservation, fishing, etc.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Country ownership

                         The three governments have demonstrated strong commitment to the Project for addressing the
                         energy crisis, expanding electricity access, and supporting economic development to break out of a
                         downward spiral of land degradation, unsustainable use of natural resources, low access to public
                         infrastructure and services, and constraints to private sector development in the region. Following
                         completion of the regional power needs assessment and investment prioritization, on March 22,
                         2005, the Ministers in charge of energy of Burundi, Rwanda and Tanzania pledged in a joint
                         communiqué to implement the Rusumo Falls Project within the context hydroelectricity, and
                         generating in turn multi-purpose and public goods benefits. On March 31, 2006, the beneficiary
                         countries; Rwanda, Burundi and Tanzania; signed a Joint Project Development Agreement (JPDG) in
                         2006 for the development of the proposed project. The JPDG recognizes the importance of
                         international cooperation in sharing the benefits for riparian states.

                         The Rusumo Falls hydropower project is one of the key power generation schemes identified and
                         promoted under the framework of the Nile Basin Initiative. The project is a priority in the regional
                         power strategic development plans. The project is ranked as a high priority project in the 2005 study
                         of options for regional power development. It is also a priority in the Comprehensive Basin Wide
                         Study of Power Development Options and Trade Opportunities in the Nile Basin (2011) and Eastern

                                                                      Page 2 of 13
                         African Power Pool Regional Power System Master Plan (2011).

                         The proposed project components are defined as:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component A1: Civil Works (US$155.0 million). This component comprises all excavation/earth
                         works, tunneling and concrete for the power plant complex structures, including a barrage and gated
                         spillway, intake works and diversion/power canal, surface powerhouse, access roads and construction
                         site facilities such as offices and housing.

                         Component A2: Mechanical and Electrical Works (US$ 126.0 million). This component will include
                         supply, installation, testing and commissioning of: (i) hydro-mechanical equipment; (ii) turbine-
                         generator sets and auxiliaries; (iii) generation substation; and (iv) power complex control and
                         communications equipment.

                         Component A3: Social and Environmental Impacts mitigation (US$ 22.0 million). This component
                         will finance Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and the Resettlement Action Plan
                         (RAP) including management and supervision of the implementation.

                         Component A4: Owner’s Engineer and Project supervision (US$37.0 million) - This component will
                         finance activities related to overall project management, supervision and coordination of the
                         procurement, design, construction, interface management and preparation for operation and
                         maintenance of the power plant complex and transmission lines.

                         Component B: Transmission Lines (U$$129.0 million) with parallel financing from AFDB and
                         others. This component will consist of three transmission lines from Rusumo to (i) Gitega, Burundi
                         (161 km); (ii) Kigali, Rwand a (109 km); and (iii) Nyakanazi, Tanzania (98 km).
                         The total investment cost including transmission lines is estimated at around US$ 469.0 million.
                         The project will develop renewable hydroelectric power and regional transmission connecting
                         Burundi, Rwanda and Northwest Tanzania, and support local area development and benefit sharing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities in the area of the dam, reservoir and transmission lines. The installed capacity will be
                         around 80 MW.With the construction of new transmission lines, power would be delivered to off-
                         take points in each country and sold to the three state power utilities, i.e. REGIDESO, EWSA, and
                         TANESCO.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The dam and power station will be situated at the Rusumo Falls where the Kagera River forms the
                         boundary between Tanzania and Rwanda, and about 2 km downstream of the river's confluence with
                         the Ruvubu River. The preferred development alternative will be run-of-river (RoR) with no
                         reservoir (no storage), but hydrological changes are estimated reach up to 15 km upstream of the dam
                         on the Kagera River and 40 km on the Ruvubu River. With the dam, the water level will be
                         maintained at 1,320 masl, creating a stretch of the two river valleys that will no longer dry out during
                         the dry season as before, and will be under permanent shallow inundation (with open water and
                         vegetation forming a mosaic) with water levels increased by up to 0.4 m for Kagera and up to 0.3 m
                         for Ruvubu compared to the pre-project wet season baseline.

                         Three transmission lines routes under an associated AfDB project will go from Rusumo to: (i)
                         Gitega, Burundi (161 km); (ii) Kigali, Rwanda (109 km); and (iii) Nyakanazi, Tanzania (98 km).



                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                         Local development activities will take place both in the project reservoir area and along the
                         transmission line corridors.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Zarafshan H. Khawaja (AFTCS)
                         Martin Fodor (AFTN3)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes               TThe power plant complex may have potentially
                         BP 4.01                                              significant biophysical and socioeconomic
                                                                              impacts at the Rusumo Falls site as well as
                                                                              upstream and downstream. During construction,
                                                                              these would include vegetation clearing, noise
                                                                              and air pollution from vehicular emissions, soil
                                                                              erosion, water pollution and changes to hydrology
                                                                              at the construction site, impacts from disposal of
                                                                              construction and residential waste, social impacts
                                                                              from resettlement of people and movement of
                                                                              construction workers, workers health and safety
                                                                              impacts, disease patterns, etc.

                                                                               During plant operation, the impacts include
                                                                              inundation of land and marshes of Kagera and
                                                                              Ruvubu Rivers, changes in water quality and
                                                                              hydrology including downstream, dewatering of a
                                                                              500 m stretch of Kagera River (except for the
                                                                              environmental flow), changes to sedimentation
                                                                              patters, slight increase in greenhouse gas
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              emissions, impacts on fauna and flora, visual
                                                                              impacts, changes to microclimate, impacts from
                                                                              induced development in the area, etc.

                                                                              The associated transmission lines are expected to
                                                                              have a narrower range of significant impacts.
                                                                              During construction, these include the clearing of
                                                                              vegetation including tree removal, soil erosion,
                                                                              noise and pollution, resettlement, etc. During
                                                                              operation, the impacts include bird and bat
                                                                              strikes, visual impacts, emissions from
                                                                              maintenance vehicles, etc.

                                                                              Resettlement and development activities in the
                                                                              project area may have their own environmental
                                                                              and social affects, e.g. through intensification of
                                                                              agriculture, social impacts associated with
                                                                              resettlement, etc.




                                                                      Page 4 of 13
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes             TThe project will affect a range of non-critical
                                                                         natural habitats, such as marshlands, forests, and
                                                                         rivers. In addition, it is likely to have an
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         insignificant impact on the downstream Akagera
                                                                         National Park in Rwanda by altering the flow
                                                                         regime within the naturally occurring variation of
                                                                         flows and water levels (by 2 – 3 centimeters) and
                                                                         possibly affecting sediment transport (to be
                                                                         further studied).
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes             The transmission line associated with the project
                                                                         will affect forested areas and cause removal of
                                                                         trees from the corridor. A plan for replacement
                                                                         planting has been prepared is included in the T-
                                                                         line RAP.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes             The project does not support pest or pesticide
                                                                         management. It will, however, include under
                                                                         RAP agricultural enhancement among the
                                                                         livelihood support activities through ongoing
                                                                         programs. These will be reviewed prior to RAP
                                                                         implementation for adherence to principles of
                                                                         integrated pest management (IPM) as per OP
                                                                         4.09, and guidance to strengthen IPM in these
                                                                         programs will be added in case they are not
                                                                         sufficient.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             Based on the field surveys carried out as a part
                         BP 4.11                                         of the ESIA in 2004 and 2011, the results show
                                                                         there are no known physical cultural resources in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         the project area. However, the contract for
                                                                         earthworks and civil works for the project will
                                                                         include procedures for chance finds (e.g. handling
                                                                         of burial sites, archeological artifacts, etc).
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              Socio-economic surveys, completed in 2006 and
                                                                         2008, indicated that there were no indigenous
                                                                         peoples in the project area. The Local Area
                                                                         Development Plan (LADP) places a specific
                                                                         focus on vulnerable groups and has allocated
                                                                         resources to assist them with appropriate
                                                                         livelihood support.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             Efforts were made to minimize adverse social
                         4.12                                            impacts. As a result, a total of 664 households
                                                                         are affected by project activities related to the
                                                                         dam and power plant components. Of this
                                                                         number 244 households, 90 in Rwanda and 133 in
                                                                         Tanzania, will be affected by loss of agricultural
                                                                         land, natural vegetation, and residential and
                                                                         business structures from the construction of the



                                                                 Page 5 of 13
                                 dam. A total of 60.8 ha of land will be required
                                 by the project. The operation of the dam will also
                                 result in the flooding of arable marshland in an
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 area up to 5km upstream of the dam site along the
                                 banks of the Kagera River. In Rwanda loss of
                                 107.6 ha of arable land will affect 351
                                 households. In Tanzania loss of 79.6 ha of arable
                                 marshland will be affect 90 households. The total
                                 number of households affected by loss of arable
                                 marshland is 441.

                                 A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), consistent
                                 with the Bank’s policy on Involuntary
                                 Resettlement, OP 4.12, has been prepared to
                                 ensure that all affected people will be
                                 compensated for their losses and provided with
                                 rehabilitation measures to assist them to improve
                                 or at least maintain their pre-project standard of
                                 living. Compensation for lost land, houses and
                                 other assets will be at replacement value and
                                 include provision for land of equivalent
                                 productive value and a house or cash
                                 compensation. A Local Area Development Plan
                                 (LADP) has been prepared to promote benefits
                                 sharing through community-based integrated
                                 watershed development, to improve the
                                 diversification of community livelihood and
                                 strengthen their organizational capacities. A
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 separate Public Consultation and Disclosure Plan
                                 (PCDP) has been prepared which details the
                                 extensive consultation process and guides the
                                 ongoing consultative process through the
                                 implementation of the project.

                                 Resettlement and land use issues along the
                                 transmission lines are being addressed in a
                                 separate, associated project funded by the AfDB.
                                 Key social impacts include the acquisition of 22.5
                                 ha of agricultural land and 22.12 ha of land from
                                 people residing within the transmission line
                                 corridor. An ESIA was prepared and reviewed
                                 by the Bank. A RAP for the transmission lines
                                 consistent with AfDB’s policy on involuntary
                                 resettlement and OP 4.12 has also been prepared,
                                 consulted upon. Upon final review by AfDB and
                                 the Bank it will be disclosed in-country by July
                                 31, 2013.



                         Page 6 of 13
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            Yes               Although the original dam design (15.3 m in
                                                                                  height and 230 million m3 in reservoir capacity)
                                                                                  envisioned PCN stage has changed to a Run-of-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  River design with a small dam (14.3 m in height
                                                                                  and 135 m in crest length), the policy is
                                                                                  maintained as triggered. The dam safety POE has
                                                                                  been established and provided review of the dam
                                                                                  design.
                            Projects on International            Yes               The project directly involves three countries,
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                  and downstream riparians of Lake Victoria and
                                                                                  the Nile River. Notification will be through
                                                                                  standard procedure per OP 7.50 as well as
                                                                                  consultative mechanism of the Nile Basin
                                                                                  Initiative.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                    There are no disputed areas in the project area.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                Environmental impacts of the dam and power complex construction and operation include a
                              broad range of biophysical impacts on Kagera River Valley hydrology, water quality, soils and
                              land uses, fauna and flora both terrestrial and aquatic, air quality and microclimate, noise and
                              waste generation. These impacts were substantially minimized and reduced in geographic scope
                              through analysis of several alternative dam heights and selection of the RoR option as the
Public Disclosure Copy




                              preferred alternative with water level at 1,320 masl, which is similar to natural water levels, and
                              which entails no storage reservoir. The flooded area, the number of affected households and the
                              number of affected villages is about ten times smaller than for the originally considered full
                              development alternative, while the reduction in power generation is only 14% smaller.
                              Environmental impacts of the T-lines associated with the hydropower project include vegetation
                              clearing, localized soil erosion and pollution of streams, potential for bird strikes on the T-lines,
                              and visual impacts on the landscape along the 368 km of T-line corridors.

                              In addition, cumulative impacts of the project and its interaction with other development projects
                              in the project area were studied. These include (i) 6 % diversion of Kagera flow at Nyabarongo II
                              dam for irrigation that may be offset be increase precipitation and river flows due to climate
                              change; (ii) proposed Isaka - Kigali / Keza - Gitega - Musongati Railway which may interact with
                              dam and power plant construction amplifying construction impacts if scheduled for the same
                              construction period (TBD); (iii) Rusumo One Stop Border Post (OSBP) construction last 9 months
                              of which will coincide with the start of the dam and power plant construction, amplifying noice,
                              air quality, road safety, services demand, and spontaneous settlement impacts; and (iv) possible
                              reduced sediment transport to downstream protected areas of Akagera NP (Rwanda) and Kimisi
                              Game Reserve (Tanzania).

                                      The inundation of agricultural and marsh lands along the river will result in change in land


                                                                          Page 7 of 13
                           use patterns and affect the livelihood people. A total of 664 households are affected by project
                           activities related to the dam and power plant components, a substantial reduction in the population
                           that would have been affected by other design alternatives considered. Of this number 223
Public Disclosure Copy




                           households, 90 in Rwanda and 133 in Tanzania, will be affected by loss of agricultural land,
                           natural vegetation, and residential and business structures from the construction of the dam. A
                           total of 60.8 ha of land will be required by the project. The operation of the dam will also result in
                           the flooding of arable marshland in an area up to 5 km upstream of the dam site along the banks of
                           the Kagera River. In Rwanda, the loss of 107.6 ha of arable land will affect 351 households. In
                           Tanzania, the loss of 79.6 ha of arable marshland will be affect 90 households. The total number
                           of households affected by loss of arable marshland is 441.

                           Key social impacts associated with the T-lines include the acquisition of 22.5 ha of agricultural
                           land. In addition, 22.12 ha of land (9.86 ha in Rwanda, 7.06 ha in Tanzania, and 5.2 ha in
                           Burundi) will need to be acquired from people residing within the T-lines corridor. This will
                           affect a total of 382 households, 134 in Rwanda, 88 in Tanzania and 166 in Burundi. The total
                           number of buildings affected is 640 which include houses, stables and other auxiliary buildings.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             Potential environmental impacts during construction will affect an area of about 30 ha around
                           Rusumo Falls, 1.7 ha in Rwanda, the rest in Tanzania. Construction will require that the Kagera
                           River is temporarily diverted, and it will bypass the Falls and rapids downstream of the Falls.
                           Potential impacts that may affect the surrounding environments and livelihoods during dam
                           operation stem from eliminating seasonal changes in inundation of the existing (now seasonally
                           flooded) marshland in along the Kagera and Ruvubu Rivers upstream of Rusumo Falls. With the
                           dam, the water level will be maintained at 1,320 masl, creating a stretch of the two river valleys up
                           to 15 km long for Kagera and up to 40 km long for Ruvubu that will no longer dry out during the
                           dry season, and will be under permanent shallow inundation with water levels increased by up to
                           0.4 m for Kagera and up to 0.3 m for Ruvubu compared to the pre-project wet season baseline,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           creating a mosaic of wetland vegetation (primarily papyrus) and open water. Social impacts from
                           the acquisition of land required for the construction of the dam as well as the inundation of
                           agricultural land and marsh land along the Kagera River will result in change in land use and
                           potentially affect the livelihood of people.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             The project completed an extensive review of potential environment and social impacts,
                           including careful design of mitigation measures, for three alternative options – Full Development
                           Scheme (FDS); Intermediate Development Scheme (IDS); and Run-of-River (RoR). The FDS was
                           initially selected by the participating countries of Rwanda, Tanzania and Burundi in 2009 since it
                           maximized the power generation. Subsequently, the IDS and RoR alternatives were re-examined
                           from environmental and social impacts perspective due to growing concerns over FDS
                           implications for the large number of people that would be displaced as well as the extent of
                           farmland, marshland, and forests that would be affected, and the associated mitigation costs. In
                           particular significant attention was paid to minimize the magnitude and scope of adverse social
                           impacts, especially those associated with the involuntary resettlement of people. Based on the
                           analysis of alternatives (see table below), the RoR alternative was finally selected as the preferred
                           one.

                                   R-o-R IDS        FDS

                                                                      Page 8 of 13
                           Maximum normal upper level (m.a.s.l.) 1,320 1,323.50           1,325
                           Incremental difference (m)        0       3.50   5
                           Area flooded by the reservoir excluding Lake Rweru (ha)        977 (a) 17,118 28,053
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Incremental difference (ha)       0       16,141 27,076
                           Area of marsh flooded (ha)        977 (b) 10,817 18,280
                           Incremental difference (ha)       0       9,840 17,303
                           Terrestrial forested and shrub land flooded (ha) 0 (b) 575     837
                           Incremental difference (ha)       0       570    832
                           Total loss of agricultural land (ha)      187    2,228 9,152
                           Incremental difference (ha)       0       2,041 8,965 -
                           Number of households affected by construction and reservoir impoundment        664     7,330
                           17,450
                           Incremental difference (nb)       0       6,645 16,765
                           Infrastructure (roads) affected (km)      0      14     18
                           Incremental difference (km)       0       14     18
                           Number of villages impacted 88            167    263
                           Incremental difference (nb)       0       144    240
                           Average annual power generation (GWh)            448    497    507
                           Incremental difference (GWh) 0            51     61
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            Safeguards policy issues will be addressed through implementation of measures designed in the
                           safeguards instruments, particularly the ESIA/ESMP and RAP -- separate for the power station
                           and for the T-lines.

                          The power station ESMP consists of 44 specific environmental and social action plans organized
                          in (i) pre-construction, (ii) construction, and (iii) operational phase action programs. In pre-
                          construction phase, they include plans for communications, contractor E&S specifications, Panel
Public Disclosure Copy




                          of Experts, sediment transport study, interactions with adjacent projects, management of
                          spontaneous settlements, HIV/AIDS and STD prevention, etc. In construction phase, they include
                          plans for management of waste, borrow and spoil areas, hazmat, spills, erosion, site flora and
                          fauna, re-vegetation and rehabilitation, camps, public health, air quality, traffic safety, chance
                          finds, E&S training, quarries, water, biodiversity and hydrology monitoring, etc. In the operation
                          phase, they include monitoring of water quality, biodiversity, fish, hydrology, sediment deposition
                          and river morphology, disease vectors, etc. Generic E&S procedures for communications,
                          permitting, grievances, etc. are also included in the ESMP. Implementation of the ESMP will also
                          ensure compliance with OP 4.04 Natural Habitats and OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources.

                                    A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), consistent with the Bank’s policy on Involuntary
                          Resettlement, OP 4.12, has been prepared for the dam and power plant component to ensure that
                          all affected people will be compensated for their losses and provided with rehabilitation measures
                          to assist them to improve or at least maintain their pre-project standard of living. Compensation
                          for lost land, houses and other assets will be at replacement value and include provision for land of
                          equivalent productive value and a house, or cash compensation. In addition all affected households
                          will be entitled to participate in a livelihood restoration program which will include financial
                          training for the sustainable utilization of cash compensation, agricultural training for
                          intensification of production and business skill training. A Local Area Development Plan (LADP)
                          has also been prepared for the broader social and economic uplift of the project area in all three


                                                                    Page 9 of 13
                          countries. It aims to promote benefits sharing through community-based integrated watershed
                          development, to improve the diversification of community livelihood and strengthen their
                          organizational capacities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  An ESIA and a RAP has been prepared for the T-lines consistent with provisions of the
                          Bank Operational Policy 4.12, AfDB’s policy on involuntary resettlement and the national laws
                          and legislation of the three participating countries. The ESIA was prepared and reviewed by the
                          Bank. The RAP for the T-lines has been consulted upon and will be disclosed in-country by July
                          31, 2013, upon its final review and endorsement by AfDB and the Bank.

                           The overall responsibility for implementation will rest with the Rusumo PIU (RPIU). The RPIU
                           will establish an Environmental and Social Management Unit (ESMU) reporting to the RPIU
                           manager and ensuring ESMP implementation. The ESMU will be established as soon as decision
                           to proceed with the project is made, and its composition will be adapted during different stages of
                           project pre-construction, construction and operation. In addition to supervising implementation of
                           ESMP, the ESMU will be responsible for implementation of RAP and LADP.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             KKey stakeholders include Governments of Burundi, Rwanda and Tanzania as well as NELSAP
                           representing them, communities in the project area as well as public and industries expecting to
                           benefit from improved power supply, local and international NGOs such as Nile Basin Discourse
                           Forum,

                          Extensive public consultations were carried out for preparation of the ESIA, RAP and LADP.
                          Consultations involved local and national government authorities, members of cooperatives and
                          associations, youth, church members, representatives of service, health and education sectors,
                          tradesmen, NGOs and other stakeholders of the project. Consultations took place mainly in the
                          project area, and focused on resettlement and other sensitive aspects of the project, such as village
Public Disclosure Copy




                          level livelihood restoration strategies, environment protection measures, public health and
                          employment maximization. During the preliminary studies 2007 – 2008, 270 individual and group
                          interviews across the stakeholder spectrum were carried out in 11 survey areas in the three
                          participating countries. These were supplemented by additional 75 interviews in Tanzania. In
                          2011–2012, second phase of consultation on socio-economic and environmental impacts and their
                          mitigation took place at national and sub-national levels in the project affected area. They included
                          263 villages (80 in Burundi, 148 in Rwanda, and 35 in Tanzania) that would be affected by the full
                          development option (now abandoned in favor of the RoR option) in which village community
                          meetings were held, and village surveys were carried out after dissemination of illustrated posters,
                          radio broadcasts and project notices ensuring that information about the project and its impacts
                          was available to stakeholders. Key environment related issues raised by the villagers were
                          concerns over spread of hippos and crocodiles, interest in developing the fishing potential, loss of
                          farmland, access to electricity, and loss of access to clay and papyrus resources. Key issues raised
                          by local government authorities were interest in modernizing farming in lowlands and
                          implementing reforestation and erosion control measures. Key issues raised by the civil society
                          were concerns about water pollution due to agricultural intensification stemming from RAP, soil
                          erosion and sedimentation impacts on the dam, disruption of downstream flows, and climatic
                          changes. These were taken into account in preparation and revisions of ESIA, RAP and LADP as
                          well as the final choice of development alternative for the project (RoR). For consultations during
                          implementation, a Public Consultation and Disclosure Plan (PCDP) was prepared.


                                                                     Page 10 of 13
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     20-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  27-Feb-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive     15-Mar-2013
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Burundi                                                         28-Feb-2013
                           Comments:
                           Rwanda                                                          28-Feb-2013
                           Comments:
                           Tanzania                                                        28-Feb-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     20-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  12-Mar-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Burundi                                                         14-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                           Rwanda                                                          13-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                           Tanzania                                                        14-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     21-May-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  NA
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?



                                                                   Page 11 of 13
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways


                                                                    Page 12 of 13
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader: Paul Baringanire
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                     Date: 21-Jun-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (SM)                     Date: 08-Jul-2013




                                                                      Page 13 of 13
