                                                                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                              APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA750
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Jun-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                         Ghana                                 Project ID:                      P129381
                              Project Name:                    Ghana Education For All GPEF (P129381)
                              Task Team Leader:                Deborah Newitter Mikesell
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 10-May-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:            02-Aug-2012
                              Managing Unit:                   AFTED                                 Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                          Primary education (80%), General education sector (20%)
                              Theme:                           Education for all (100%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                  0.00
                                   Education for All - Fast Track Initiative                                                                                75.50
                                   Total                                                                                                                    75.50
                              Environmental Category:          B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The PDO of the Ghana Partnership for Education Grant is to improve the planning, monitoring and delivery of basic education services in deprived
                              districts.

                              Under the grant, specific mechanisms such as district and school grants, are supported to improve the delivery of basic education services. These
                              grant mechanisms build on previous experience decentralizing funding to the district and school levels and provide a next generation of support
Public Disclosure Copy




                              with enhancements and improvements to how education services are delivered and monitored as well as a means for coordinating interventions
                              among government and development partners. The grant will be implemented over 3 years.

                              The GPEG's objective is an intermediate outcome of the Education Sector Plan framework. Therefore, the strengthened capacities of key
                              education stakeholders to improve the effectiveness and accountability of resource allocations aim to ultimately impact on higher order objectives
                              of access, equity, quality and education management. And they aim to target those areas where the poorest children reside. However, it will be
                              difficult to attribute results solely to the GPEG for longer term objectives, although all of these ESP indicators will continue to be monitored and
                              tracked.

                              The design of the GPEG incorporates significant engagement and harmonized funding from the lead education development partners in Ghana.
                              This alignment is critical to the aid effectiveness principles of the Accra and Paris harmonization agreements and to ensuring that, where possible,
                              common systems, reporting, and FM arrangements are used.

                              3. Project Description

                              The notional allocation for the GPEF grant is US$75.5million. The Bank is the supervising entity and as such Bank procedures apply to
                              preparation and implementation of the project.

                              The GPEF grant is based on the Education Strategic Plan 2010-2020 (ESP) and informed by the 2011 Ghana Education Report Improving Equity,
                              Efficiency and Accountability of Education Service Delivery, the Joint Review of Public Expenditure and Financial Management 2011, the National
                              Education Sector Annual Review (June 2011), the lessons learned from the EFA-FTI Catalytic Fund Grants and Education Sector Development
                              Project (IDA Cr.), Education Strategic Objective Assistance to Ghana (SOAG, USAID Ghana), Support to Education Strategic Plan (DFID),
                              Country Programme Action Plan (CPAP, UNICEF Ghana), Support to Education Implementation (JICA) and the school feeding program supported
                              by WFP.

                              The GPEF grant is being developed as part of a larger program of donor support to the Ghana education sector. The program supports areas that
                              complement the government’s expenditures as well as other sources of financing to the sector. Despite the large education budget, investments
                              are inadequate to sustain a dynamic and equitable quality education system. Salary expenditures crowd out investment in learning materials,
                              infrastructure and pedagogic support. The models for increasing investments through district planning and expenditures were implemented under
                              the previous Bank supported program and other donor sponsored district interventions (e.g., PPS, DFID budget support to districts).

                              Component 1: Grants to Deprived Districts to support key education objectives


                                                                                                                                                                        Page 1 of 5
                         The objective of the district grant is to provide supplemental non-salary resources to those districts identified as most deprived in the country
                         (measured through key social and education indicators and poverty level) using transparent and agreed criteria. The grant would focus on
                         allocation of resources to districts based on their annual programs of work (APW) and government strategic priorities identified under the ESP and
                         AESOP. A comprehensive set of guidelines is being developed to guide the district planning process (e.g., implementation manual), procedures
                         and monitoring requirements and reporting. These guidelines will include an evidence-based menu of activities corresponding to the ESP strategic
                         priorities of access, equity, quality and management. These priorities are summarized in a policy matrix.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The expected outcome of the district grant is a more reliable mechanism to channel funds to decentralized structures; to create a favorable
                         environment for MOE, GES and its implementing agencies to take direct responsibility for the funding and monitoring of basic education services;
                         and generate increased accountability and participation by districts, schools and communities. In addition, the grants will monitor indicators
                         capturing data and impact of activities on access, equity, quality and education management.

                         Sub-Component 1.1: District Grants

                         The district grant will be provided annually to approximately 57 districts to implement their annual programs of work (APW) which will be focused
                         on local priorities at improving access, equity, quality and management of basic education. The criteria for district selection include both Ghana's
                         district-level poverty index (share of population below the poverty line) as well as education indicators . The amount of the grant would average US
                         $4.5 per student/ per year, and given current enrollments in the selected districts, the average annual grant would be GHcs 238,374 (US$140,220
                         equivalent), with exact amounts determined by the size of the district. Many of these districts have had experience in grant operations through the
                         provision of district grants under the EDSEP project, DFID-supported budget support and government budgeting under the ADEOP.

                         Building on these experiences, and lessons learned, enhancements to strengthen the district grant would include: (a) earmarked funding to
                         support teachers participation in upgrading their qualifications through the UTDBE (sub-component 1.2); (b) mandatory strategic in-service training
                         for teachers (basic literacy, numeracy, science and activity based learning); (c) more strategic and regular capacity building for Regional Education
                         Offices, District Education Offices, District Assemblies, School Management Committees, head teachers, circuit supervisors, GES,etc.; (d) more
                         facilitation and knowledge sharing by central and regional government for targeted policy implementation and results focus; (e) routine funding of
                         robust and relevant monitoring and evaluation- including impact evaluation; and (f) continuous sensitization and supervision activities to maintain
                         social accountability. A negative list will be detailed in the PIM.

                         The Ghana Education Service (GES) will lead the planning and budgeting process. The annual activity cycle of the district grant consists of APW
                         planning, validation, execution and feedback-gathering. The Annual Programs of Work are to be based on assessment of local education needs,
                         feasible, cost effective activities with appropriate outputs and targets. The development of the district strategy would entail specific alignment with
                         the ESP objectives, yet allow for maximum flexibility to address local challenges and priorities. Regional Education Offices will also play a role in
                         monitoring and evaluation and held accountable by GES to ensure reporting is timely and thorough.

                         Targeted support would focus on the four pillars corresponding to the policy areas identified in the ESP and AESOP: equi table access and
                         participation in quality education; bridging the gender gap; improving quality of teaching and learning; and improving management of education
                         service delivery. Interventions proposed will be based on the district work program and would correspond to the ESP focus areas as detailed in
                         the policy matrix in Annex 2. DFID would provide additional district grant funding for mandatory girls’ education packages to the 17 lowest Gender
                         Parity Index (GPI) districts. This sub-component would finance: (i) training of district and school personnel, teachers, SMCs, DA staff, (ii) district
                         grants; and (iii) goods, minor works, non-consultant services and consultant services, operational costs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 1.2 Teacher Development and upgrading

                         While the ESP envisages that not more than 5% of teachers should be unqualified, the proportion of trained teachers in primary schools has
                         deteriorated since 2003/04, when 65% of male teachers and 91% of female teachers were trained, to 61% and 69% respectively in 2010/11.
                         Deprived districts have a proportion of untrained teachers significantly higher than the national average. The UTDBE program introduced by
                         Government aimed to address this by training teachers already working in deprived schools, using distance education methods at a fraction of the
                         cost of pre-service programs. The upgrading improves learning during the training period and is a more efficient way to keep trained teachers in
                         the more remote/deprived schools. There is also a higher likelihood that teachers would remain in these schools after graduation. However, the
                         number of teachers being upgraded, including through the UTDBE, will have to be increased if the target of 95% trained teachers is to be achieved
                         by 2015 or soon thereafter.

                         Therefore, one of the objectives of this component is to support the upgrading through UTDBE of at least 8,000 untrained teachers, (applying
                         transparent criteria to identify eligible candidates), in deprived districts. It is equally important that attention be paid to increasing the proportion of
                         female trainees especially given the evidence of their impact on girls’ enrolment and learning. Most of the teachers to be selected would be based
                         in primary schools, with some KG teachers also included. The GPEF would also support some capacity strengthening of the institutions delivering
                         the courses. This component will include an impact evaluation of models of teacher training to rigorously measure the impact of different
                         pedagogical approaches on student learning outcomes in the Ghanaian context. This sub-component would finance: (i) the training of UTDBE
                         teachers, UTDBE tutors; and (ii) goods (e.g., teaching materials), non-consultant services and consultant services for UTDBE participating
                         teachers.

                         Component 2: School Grants

                         The elimination of school fees in 1992 and additional reforms in 1996 contributed to the dramatic basic education enrollment increase of 50% over
                         the last decade. However, during this period, in the context of flagging public expenditures on education beyond salaries, many schools were
                         forced to impose indirect fees to cover a range of schooling expenditures including lunch, uniforms, textbooks, examination fees and
                         transportation. In response, the government introduced a capitation grant for public primary and junior high schools in 40 deprived districts in 2004
                         and in 2005 extended this grant to the whole country. This grant amounts to GH¢4.50 (US$2.78) per student per academic year with a view to
                         encourage enrollment and empower local schools management. Access was further improved as a result of the capitation grants, but quality
                         continues to present challenges. Reviews of the Ghana capitation program have often pointed out the limitations of the small capitation resources,
                         particularly for schools with lower enrollment, many of which are situated in the more remote and deprived areas of the country.

                         Therefore the objective of this component is to provide a supplement to the above described capitation grant with an explicit focus on improving
                         access to and quality of education services as priority needs are defined at the school level. Grants will be provided annually to all public basic
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 2 of 5
                         education schools (6,600 KG, primary and JHS) in the 57 districts to augment schools’ operating costs and non-salary expenditures to ensure that
                         key policies aligned with the ESP can be implemented. The amount of the grant would average GHc1,836 (US$1,100)/year based on a GHc7.65
                         (US$4) per capita formula. Although a per capita expenditure formula is used for planning purposes, the grant is a base grant in addition to the
                         ongoing capitation grant already received annually through the Government of Ghana.

                         Although international evidence is mixed with regard to impact from school grants, experience in Ghana has been promising, as demonstrated by
                         significant improvements in access. GPEF aims to make greater headway towards improving the quality of education and focusing on improved
Public Disclosure Copy




                         teaching and learning. Such focus would require strengthening the strategic objectives of the grants (increasing the menu of options, using data to
                         determine activities and using evaluation to understand what is working (and what is not). Furthermore, the GPE is promoting improvements in the
                         scope of the grants (new formula for allocation), better targeting of resources (to redress inequities), more reliable timing of resources, and
                         stronger information feedback loops through School Report Cards (SRCs), School Performance Appraisal Meetings (SPAMs), increased
                         monitoring by circuit supervisors, etc.. Given the lack of rigorous evaluation of the ongoing capitation grant, this component would finance an
                         evaluation/assessment to better understand the impact of the grant and cost effectiveness of interventions. Qualitative reviews of the school
                         grants will also be conducted annually with support provided under component 3.

                         The grants are expected to finance school development activities (KG, primary and JHS) identified in the School Performance Improvement Plan
                         (SPIP) which is prepared jointly by parents, teachers and school principals. The challenge is getting the grant activities linked to the SPIP. The
                         GPEF supported school grant would fund such activities and could include: (a) instructional materials and learning inputs; (b) school furniture; (c)
                         mentoring/coaching opportunities; (d) training related to identified local skills needs, i.e., math and science, special needs assessments; (e)
                         guidance and counseling system for girls; (f) school based In-Service Education and Training (INSET) on child-centered activity based learning; (g)
                         library materials; (h) equipment or tools (ICT) to improve teaching and learning; (i) minor works to refurbish classrooms, build latrines; and (j)
                         school-level reading or and/or math competitions. To access the grants, a prerequisite is the training and capacity building of SMCs which would
                         be funded by district grants, to prepare school development plans to improve teaching, learning and participation of their schools in this program.

                         Training will be provided on record keeping and use of school report cards, to ensure school grant receipt and expenditure is communicated to
                         parents and communities (by posting this information on school bulletin boards, in SRCs and through other dissemination strategies depending on
                         the local context). The SRCs will be required to access the second tranche of school grant. Support for School Report Cards will also be made
                         available through USAID project. This is expected to improve the school grant use, teacher attendance and punctuality, and help create a culture
                         of transparency, accountability, and greater parental and community participation in school management.

                         Component 3: Program Management and Monitoring and Evaluation

                         Effective implementation of the GPEF grant will rely upon good management and monitoring mechanisms, timely implementation and proper
                         evaluation of project activities and outcomes. This component will provide the necessary resources for management, monitoring and evaluation of
                         GPEF activities at the central, district and school levels. The objective of this component is to strengthen government systems for the
                         implementation and supervision of decentralized education services in the deprived districts.

                         Significant technical assistance is already being provided through established TA programs supported by USAID, DFID and JICA. GPEF would
                         complement these activities and where necessary scale up identified interventions (e.g., School Report Cards, EGRA/EGMA). A key lesson from
                         previous decentralized programs/projects is the need for a robust monitoring and evaluation system that supports both the routine detailed
                         supervision and broader periodic assessments to improve the knowledge and functioning of the system. Without the data to validate progress,
                         challenges and deficits, the anecdotal and superficial reporting becomes a burden without much meaning for the beneficiaries (students,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         communities, educators). The data empowers the implementers at all levels to be more accountable for their roles and responsibilities and to
                         better allocate limited resources. In addition to supervision support, financial audits, qualitative audits and impact evaluations, funding will be
                         provided for technical assistance to support the Ministry of Education, National Inspectorate Board, Regional Education Offices and District
                         Education Offices to undertake M&E activities and/or carry out supplemental data collection and analysis necessary to measure implementation
                         performance and impact of grant activities (e.g., comprehensive surveys, qualitative grant audits, etc.). Creating the incentives for proper school
                         supervision, in addition to mentoring and coaching of teachers would impact both teacher absenteeism and learning outcomes. Therefore, this
                         component would support technical assistance needed to improve school supervision and delivery of INSET; the incorporation of School Report
                         Cards, School-based Education Assessments and EMIS reporting for school improvement planning; support to Colleges of Education for UTDBE
                         implementation, and to TED for monitoring and consulting support. This component may also include key capacity building activities to coordinate
                         development partner activities, undertake specialized studies and finance key trainings for decentralized financial management, procurement and
                         M&E.

                         This component will finance: (i) Consultancy services for supporting independent monitoring and evaluation; (ii) Technical assistance for improved
                         school supervision, oversampling of EGRA/EGMA and INSET; (iii) Training materials and costs related to providing the training programs; (iv)
                         Operational costs for project management and training programs.

                         Program Management and Institutional Arrangements

                         The GPEF grant will have the oversight of the Ministry of Education but will be implemented by the Ghana Education Service at the headquarte rs,
                         regional, district and school levels in close collaboration with all relevant education sector agencies (e.g., GES, NIB, TED) and district authorities.
                         The project will be supported by the development partners operating in the education sector, including DFID, UNICEF, JICA, USAID and WFP. A
                         project steering committee will be established comprising key officials from the MOE, GES and Ministry of Local Government and Rural
                         Development (MLGRD) to provide project implementation oversight. Coordination will be led by the GES with support for monitoring from the MOE,
                         PBME to ensure continued streamlined coordination and management of all donor-financed activities in Ghana.

                         The Ghana Education Service (GES) will manage the three components of the project. The Project Coordinator will be appointed by the GES to
                         work across all implementing agencies, reporting to the Director General of the GES. The Director Basic Education and the Financial Controller of
                         the GES will jointly report on the project’s implementation, and be responsible for the operational and the financial management reporting on the
                         project respectively. The Director Teacher Education Department (TED) will be responsible for management and reporting on UTDBE. To ensure
                         smooth implementation at the sub-national level, the GES will organize regular practical training sessions to ensure that districts (i) understand the
                         guidelines for planning their programs; (ii) implement activities that will achieve set targets; (iii) access and report on funding provided for district
                         and school grants; and (iv) monitor and evaluate activities being implemented. Significant technical support is likely to be provided directly through

                                                                                                                                                                      Page 3 of 5
                               established TA programs supported by USAID, DFID and JICA.

                               4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                               The project will be implemented in deprived districts identified by Ministry of Education using specific education and poverty data. The main
                               assumption for these districts is that many if not most, would be located in the Northern regions. Most of the planned activities would be located at
                               the district and school level.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                               Moses Yao Duphey (AFTN1)
                               Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS)

                               6. Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes             Grants to districts and schools might involve minor rehabilitation of existing
                                                                                                buildings or construction of new buildings on existing sites- work that will be guided
                                                                                                by applicable local and national laws and regulations. The project will also finance
                                                                                                goods, training, and consulting services. The project will not finance projects that
                                                                                                require involuntary land acquisition nor will it deprive people of access to their
                                                                                                usual means of livelihood. No significant adverse environmental or social impacts
                                                                                                are anticipated. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                                                                                                prepared for a similar project in the MOE was revised and re-disclosed in-country
                                                                                                on May 5, 2012 and submitted to the infoshop on May 31 2012.
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      No
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                               No
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                          No
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11           No
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                    No
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              No              The involuntary resettlement policy is not triggered. The project does not involve
                                                                                                activities that will require land take, impacts on livelihoods or restriction of access
                                                                                                and disturbances that may lead to resettlement or relocation. Minor works on
                                                                                                existing schoolstructures may be required but these are very much contained
                                                                                                within the school compounds and are not likely to lead to displacement or any form
                                                                                                of resettlement and disturbances. The project does not envisage a change in this
                                                                                                level of minor works. A screening process will be in place to ensure compliance
                                                                                                with this.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        No
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60            No


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any potential l arge scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                    The proposed project does not envisage any large scale irreversible impacts.
                                  The overall impact of this should be positive since no large scale impacts are envisaged. All impacts can be avoided or adequately mitigated
                                  through development and implementation of ESMPs for site-specific activities.

                                  The project would not result in restriction of access and would not be expected to result in resettlement since there is no land take or restriction
                                  of access to sources of livelihood. Minor works and rehabilitation are confined to school compounds and will not have any impact on
                                  communities. These activities would be minimal and localized. From environmental perspective, mitigation measures can readily be applied or
                                  impacts could be completely avoided through effective consultations and negotiations with community members.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                   There are no indirect or long term impacts in the project area
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                   N/A
                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                                  and implement the measures described.
                                   An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) originally prepared for a similar project in the Ministry of Education was
                                  revised. The ESMF sets forth the basic principles and operational guidelines to be followed in the GPEF. The updated ESMF has been
                                  reviewed and cleared by the World Bank and has been disclosed in-country on May 9, 2012 and at the infoshop on May 25, 2012.

                                  The borrower's capacity is strong as the Ministry is familiar with World Bank safeguards policies and their requirements. The Ministry of
                                  Education is implementing an ongoing IDA project for the Education Sector which is being guided by the original ESMF which was updated for

                                                                                                                                                                           Page 4 of 5
                              this current operation. The EPA of Ghana also has a lot of competencies working in close collaboration with the World Bank and can check on
                              compliance issues. In addition to normal World Bank support on safeguards, the borrower should be able to fully comply with safeguards
                              policies triggered whilst ensuring due diligence for safeguards in general.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                               on potentially affected people.
                               The key stakeholders include school management, the Ministry of Education, Ghana Education Service, District Education Offices, District
                              Assemblies, community-based organizations (CBOs) and communities in which beneficiary schools are located. The original ESMF was
Public Disclosure Copy




                              conducted through a consultative process. The re-disclosure of the Updated ESMF also covered these institutions and in selected District
                              Assemblies. Disclosure activities have included meetings with stakeholders, website and newspaper adverts.

                            B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              04-May-2012
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          05-May-2012
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           31-May-2012
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                              Directors
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            N/A

                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language       Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for    Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same         Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Deborah Newitter Mikesell
                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Peter Nicolas Materu (SM)                                              Date: 05-Jun-2012




                                                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 5
