                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC615

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Jun-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                            Project ID:      P127775
                            Project Name:      China-Guangdong Non-Point Pollution Control (P127775)
                            Task Team          Jiang Ru
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          20-Mar-2013                      Estimated        15-Oct-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector:            Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (20%), Animal production (20%), Solid
                                               waste management (20%), Agricultural extension and research (20%), Crops
                                               (20%)
                            Theme:             Pollution management and environmental health (70%), Climate change (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       100.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                             5.10
                              Total                                                                       205.10
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed development objective is to reduce water pollutant releases from targeted rural non-
                           point sources by demonstrating improved agricultural, and waste and wastewater management
                           practices in select project areas in the East, West, North and Pearl River Deltas of Guangdong
                           Province. As such the project will contribute to improved water supply in downstream areas and
                           reduced land based pollution to the South China Sea.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project is designed as a fully blended IBRD and GEF project. The total project cost is
                         expected to be US$205.1 million, of which US$100.0 million will be financed through an IBRD
                         loan, US$5.1 million through a GEF grant, and the remaining US$100.0 million from provincial,
                         municipal, and county government counterpart funds and project beneficiaries. The GEF project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         concept was approved by the GEF Council in November 2011 as part of a Regional Program 
                         Scaling Up Partnership Investments for Sustainable Development of the Large Marine Ecosystems of
                         East Asia and their Coasts (GEF ID# 4635). The proposed project has four components: (1)
                         Environmentally Friendly Crop Production; (2) Livestock Waste Management; (3) Monitoring and
                         Evaluation (M&E), Capacity Building and Knowledge Management; and (4) project management.

                         Component 1: Environmentally Friendly Crop Production. Component 1 will support
                         environmentally friendly agricultural techniques and practices, including (i) promotion of sound soil
                         and plant nutrient management; (ii) point and trickle irrigation of intensive vegetable and fruit crops
                         with water containing liquid fertilizer; (iii) scale-up of integrated pest management practices; (iv)
                         pilot and scale up of conservation agriculture practices; and (v) development of technical guidelines
                         for large-scale applications of demonstrated techniques and practices. All the project sites under
                         Component 1 would be known by appraisal.

                         Component 2: Livestock Waste Management. Component 2 will support the following activities (a)
                         development of livestock waste management plan for 300-400 large commercial livestock farms; (b)
                         construction and proper operations of 300-400 livestock waste management facilities to collect and
                         treat livestock wastes; and (c) proper uses of treated solids and liquids. Wastewater discharged from
                         the project financed farms, if any, should meet related national and local discharge standards. About
                         50% livestock farms would be known by appraisal, the rest would be decided at late stage of project
                         preparation.

                         Component 3: Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), Capacity Building and Knowledge Management.
                         Component 3 will support three sets of activities:
                         (a) M&E. The project's M&E activities will include (a) monitoring and evaluation of results and
                         effectiveness of project-financed pollution reduction activities, including the use and release of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         nutrient and pesticides from project sites, local water environmental quality, and biogas generation
                         and utilization; (b) incorporation of M&E data into DEP's water quality monitoring system; and (c)
                         routine monitoring and evaluation activities on project implementation.
                         (b) Capacity building activities. DOA will propose activities based on the final design of project
                         activities and needs assessment of project stakeholders.
                         (c) Knowledge management activities to support dissemination activities in the province, in China
                         and internationally.

                         Component 4: Project Management. This component supports operating costs associated with project
                         management activities.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the              safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         In selection of project sites, priority is given to the Dongjiang River, Xijiang River, Beijiang River
                         and Pearl River Delta areas where advanced intensive agricultural activities are located. There are11
                         municipalities, e.g., Guangzhou, Huizhou, Foshan, Zhongshan, Heyuan, Qingyuan, Jiangmen,
                         Yangjiang, Zhaoqing, Meizhou, and Shaoguan, may be involved in the area where the project
                         activities may be implemented.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Guangdong has successfully implemented a GEF supported livestock waste management project.
                           Based on the successful and positive results of the GEF project, this project was proposed to expand
                           from scaling up of demonstrated livestock waste management technologies and practices to piloting
Public Disclosure Copy




                           technical measures to control pollution from crop production. The key project agency is Guangdong
                           Agriculture Department, which is familiar with Bank safeguard policies and requirements. There are
                           several EA institutes and social consultants in Guangdong who are qualified and experienced with
                           Bank safeguards requirements as well.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Chongwu Sun (EASCS)
                           Songling Yao (EASCS)
                           Yiren Feng (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project is designed to reduce agricultural
                           BP 4.01                                             pollution and improve the environment of the
                                                                               project areas thus bring environmental benefit
                                                                               overall. Specifically, proposed investments
                                                                               under Component 1 will reduce non-point
                                                                               pollution from agriculture production through
                                                                               source reduction techniques and practices. And
                                                                               the proposed activities under Component 2 will
                                                                               improve rural environmental conditions through
                                                                               construction of livestock waste management
                                                                               facilities to collect and treat livestock wastes,
                                                                               for which various small size facilities will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               constructed. Therefore, OP 401 is triggered.

                                                                               The Project is proposed as a "Category B"
                                                                               project based on types, locations, sensitivity and
                                                                               scales of the proposed activities as well as the
                                                                               nature and magnitude of positive and negative
                                                                               environmental impacts associated with these
                                                                               project activities. As noted, Component 1 will
                                                                               support activities to reduce the use, improve the
                                                                               utilization, and reduce releases of excessive
                                                                               pesticides and nutrients from agricultural lands.
                                                                               In addition, Component 2 will support
                                                                               construction of biogas facilities at existing
                                                                               commercial livestock farms that have licenses
                                                                               and permits issued by EPBs and other relevant
                                                                               government agencies. Therefore, for both
                                                                               components, no sensitive locations and
                                                                               environmental issues are expected. Instead, by
                                                                               reducing pollution from these sites, these
                                                                               activities are expected to generate significant
                                                             and positive environmental benefits. The
                                                             adverse environmental impacts of this project
                                                             will relate to the construction of biogas
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             facilities, which is expected to be small in scale.
                                                             Such impacts will be short-term, temporary and
                                                             site specific. With mitigation measures
                                                             implemented, the adverse impacts will be
                                                             avoided, eliminated entirely or mitigated to an
                                                             acceptable level.

                                                             EA instrument: the EA approach includes:
                                                             - ECOP (Environmental Codes of Practice) as
                                                             standardized mitigation measures for each types
                                                             of investments and interventions and
                                                             interventions under Component 1;

                                                             For Component 2, by appraisal,
                                                             - Environmental Management Framework
                                                             (EMF) prepared for the livestock farms which
                                                             may not be identified until late stage of project
                                                             preparation, or in project implementation stage;
                                                             - A set of design standards for livestock waste
                                                             management facilities;
                                                             - A livestock waste management plan for each
                                                             type of livestock waste management facilities
                                                             - Supervision/monitoring programs.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No    Since the proposed project activities are located
                                                             in rural areas with intensive agricultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             activities, and all the participating livestock
                                                             farms are the existing farms approved by local
                                                             authorities (including EPBs), no sensitive
                                                             locations and environmental issues are
                                                             expected, and the policy is not triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    The Project doesn't involve forests resources.
                                                             This policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes   One of the proposed activities under Component
                                                             1 is to scale-up of integrated pest management
                                                             practices including the promotion and use of
                                                             biological and/or low toxicity low residual
                                                             pesticides and safe pesticide application
                                                             equipment. Therefore, this policy is triggered. A
                                                             Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be prepared
                                                             to describe range of pest and disease control and
                                                             management methods, emphasizing integrated
                                                             pest management (IPM) approaches, and the
                                                             scope of the recommended application under
                                                             various conditions. The PMP also should
                                                                 provide a list of pesticides and herbicides that
                                                                 may be required under the project in compliance
                                                                 with World Health Organization's recommended
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 categories. The PMP should include detailed
                                                                 provisions for training for project stakeholders
                                                                 and a monitoring program. Implementation of
                                                                 the training and monitoring programs should be
                                                                 budgeted in the project cost.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    Component 1 will support activities on
                         BP 4.11                                 agricultural lands, while component 2 will
                                                                 support construction of small size biogas
                                                                 facilities at existing commercial livestock farms
                                                                 that have licenses and permits issued by EPBs
                                                                 and other relevant government agencies. The
                                                                 PCR policy is not triggered. Chance finds
                                                                 during construction may occur and relevant
                                                                 clauses will be included in all bidding
                                                                 documents and construction contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   IP Screening was conducted based on project
                                                                 proposal. Guangdong is a provinces with all 55
                                                                 ethnic minority nationalities, 1.27 million
                                                                 minority people (in 2000). Yao, Zhuang, Tujia,
                                                                 Miao and Dong nationalities take up more than
                                                                 a million. There are 3 autonomy counties and 7
                                                                 minority townships mainly in the western and
                                                                 northern part of the province. Currently at
                                                                 project concept stage, some counties in 11 cities
                                                                 proposed as the project areas, and 400 farms
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 provided as a data base for potential financing,
                                                                 are primarily proposed by provincial PMO, but
                                                                 specific project sites of villages/companies/
                                                                 farms were not determined yet, which are to be
                                                                 gradually identified via further PFI consultation
                                                                 with local governments and potential
                                                                 participants during the project preparation stage,
                                                                 prior to project appraisal.

                                                                 The TT will conduct further screening along
                                                                 with the project activities identification process
                                                                 prior to project appraisal. If the policy is found
                                                                 triggered, then an IPPF and/or an IPP, as
                                                                 required by the policy, will be prepared prior to
                                                                 appraisal.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Component 1 and especially Component 2 will
                         4.12                                    possibly include physical construction activities,
                                                                 which may entail land acquisition. However, the
                                                                 proposed project activities will be mostly small
                                                                                                                                 in scale and their locations can be very flexible
                                                                                                                                 around villages/farms, or in farmland. So it is
                                                                                                                                 expected that house/structure demolition be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 avoided and the land acquisition impact on the
                                                                                                                                 local population be quite limited.

                                                                                                                                 The OP 4.12 is triggered. A RPF for the entire
                                                                                                                                 project is needed. A RP will be prepared before
                                                                                                                                 appraisal if it is confirmed that there is any
                                                                                                                                 subproject found to involve land acquisition and
                                                                                                                                 resettlement activities.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         TBD                           Since the project is at identification stage, there
                                                                                                                                 is no sufficient information to determine
                                                                                                                                 whether the policy triggered or not. Once more
                                                                                                                                 information available in project preparation,
                                                                                                                                 triggering of the policy will be determined. If
                                                                                                                                 the policy is triggered, damsafety evaluation
                                                                                                                                 will be conducted by an independent dam safety
                                                                                                                                 expert.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project will not involve trans-boundary
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            rivers. The policy is not triggered.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project will not involve trans-boundary
                                 7.60                                                                                            rivers. The policy is not triggered.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Mar-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      03/31/2013
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Jiang Ru

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA) Date: 21-Jun-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                  Date: 16-Jun-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
