                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA3854
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Mar-2013, 18-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          China                              Project ID:    P132154
                            Project Name:     China: Nanchang Urban Rail Project (P132154)
                            Task Team         Gerald Paul Ollivier
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         19-Mar-2013                        Estimated   20-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    EASCS                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Urban Transport (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Other urban development (90%), Municipal governance and institution building
                                              (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    2571.23           Total Bank Financing:                250.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                         0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                              2321.23
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                  250.00
                              Total                                                                                 2571.23
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to provide an effective urban mass rapid
                           transit system of appropriate quality along the Line 2 corridor from ZhanQianNanDaDao Station to
                           XinJiaAn Station.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 10
                         Component 1: Construction of Line 2. This component includes all construction activities for the
                         Urban Rail Line 2 (about 23.78km). Line 2 will connect western and eastern Nanchang. It will start
                         from the Line 2 depot, go through the ZhanQianNanDaDao Station in southwest Nanchang, run
Public Disclosure Copy




                         along the west bank of the Gan River, up to Chunhui Road, then move east under the Gan River onto
                         Yangming Road and turn south to XinJiaAn Station in southeast Nanchang. Line 2 includes 21
                         stations, which will all be located underground and connected by tunnels. The Line 2 depot for
                         maintenance and stabling will be located above ground at the end of Line 2 in southwest Nanchang.
                         The project contributes partially to the cost of a command and control center for the urban rail
                         network. Six interchange stations will provide convenient interchange with other urban rail lines.

                         The Bank loan is expected to be fully used under this component. It will support the construction of
                         eight stations and eight tunnels in between. All are located on the east side of the Gan River. These
                         civil works will take place in the densest part of the city and are expected to be among the most
                         complex. Those stations include interchange stations with the planned Line 3 and future Line 4, and
                         an interchange with Nanchang east railway station.

                         Component 2: Equipment for Line 2. This component includes all the equipment necessary to the
                         successful operation of Line 2 such as rolling stock, power supply, control system, signaling system,
                         communication system, monitoring system, fare collection system, safety and security system,
                         ventilation and air conditioning system, water supply, sewerage and fire protection system, and
                         station auxiliary equipment.

                         Component 3: Design, Construction Management and Technical Assistance. This component
                         includes (i) activities for design and preparation of the project; (ii) activities for construction
                         management and quality assurance; and (iii) technical assistance and capacity building to relevant
                         staff in Nanchang Municipality (NM) and the Urban Rail Company (URC) to take steps to improve
                         ridership levels (ridership modeling, scenario testing, fare integration), to increase land value around
                         stations, and to improve financial management and internal audit functions for the Nanchang URC.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         These consulting services are expected to be funded by the URC, under terms of reference discussed
                         with the Bank.

                         Component 4: Safeguards and Other Construction Costs. This component will include the land
                         acquisition and resettlement costs, construction site preparation (environmental mitigation measures)
                         as well as other project related cost such as engineering insurance, work safety assurance, inspection
                         and acceptance, and project cost estimation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in Nanchang City, capital city of Jiangxi Province. The proposed Nanchang
                         Urban Rail Line 2 is located in the urban build up area of Nanchang, crossing the Gan River and
                         connecting the older part of the city and its newly developed zone together. The project crossing area
                         is mainly the first and secondary terraces of the Gan River. The stratigraphic structure and
                         distribution of Nanchang is diversified. According to its geological characteristics, the project area
                         can be divided into three categories: ZoneⅠ(from start point to AK22+800) belong to low-medium
                         compressed soil with good mechanical properties; ZoneⅡ(from AK22+800 to AK35+400) belong to
                         recently deposited soil with poor mechanical properties; and Zone Ⅲ(from AK35+400 to AK43
                         +821) is the worst part of the three because the upper part of soil is composed of miscellaneous fill
                         and plain fill with poor uniformity and mechanical properties. Nanchang belongs to the subtropical
                         monsoon climate zone with warm temperature, sufficient rainfall and enjoys four distinct seasons.

                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                           The annual mean temperature is 17.8 ºC with a maximum high temperature of 43.2 ºC. Average
                           annual precipitation is 1,611 mm.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Yiren Feng (EASCS)
                           Jun Zeng (EASCS)

                            6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    Yes
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               As a public transport oriented project, the project will bring significant net positive
                              environmental and social impacts by promoting mass public transportation, and reducing traffic
                              congestion, consequently reducing vehicle emissions and improving the overall quality of life in
                              the Nanchang Metropolitan Area. It will improve accessibility for vulnerable groups including
                              gender considerations when applicable

                             The potential negative environmental and social impacts related to the project will occur mainly
                             during the construction phase. These potential impacts include: disruption to urban traffic,
                             business and utilities caused by construction sites; reduced walkability and accessibility to
                             businesses around construction sites; noise, vibration, dust and air pollution nuisance during
                             construction; damage to surrounding buildings and physical cultural sites; disturbance to the
                             groundwater regime; risk of construction related accidents; and impacts from transportation and
                             disposal of spoil material. Other impacts during operation include noise and vibration,


                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                          electromagnetic radiations near substations, impacts on land use and urban planning, and waste
                          management from rail operation facilities. The relevant mitigation measures were incorporated
                          into the EIA/ESMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project also has social impacts related to the need for land acquisition and involuntary
                           resettlement. The project will require the acquisition of 746 mu of village land (including 259mu
                           of cultivated land) which will affect 142 people from 31 families. The project would require the
                           demolition of 83,817 m2 of existing structures owned by1043 families and affecting 4,001 people.
                           201 shops, 22 enterprises and organizations will be demolished as well.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            The proposed project supports the development of a major line in the Nanchang urban rail
                           network. The future development of the rail network will have significant impacts on Nanchang
                           city, leading to a compact and transit-oriented urban development and land use change.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            The project has been subject to intense analysis of alternative options including the project-no
                           project scenarios, various options for rail line alignments, location of stations and construction
                           methods.

                          The older part of Nanchang is over populated. Saturation level of traffic around the main streets
                          and intersections has reached 1.0 with an average driving speed of 11 km per hour in rush hours.
                          Rapid development forces the city to expand to its newly developed western part. However, the
                          land for road is very limited (8 square meters per person). The city is also fragmented by the Gan
                          River and a number of stream and lakes. As part of the city development plan and urban transport
                          strategy, the city has planned its rail transit development on corridors that are expected to become
                          the busiest in the city. They will provide a high capacity mass transit solution as part of an
                          integrated public transport network that also includes bus rapid transit system and an extensive bus
Public Disclosure Copy




                          network. Compared with an elevated rail transit, an underground metro line saves valuable land,
                          minimizes potential traffic noise, improves the city’s esthetics and landscape and avoids many
                          existing obstacles like flyover bridges.

                          Seven alignments have been intensively studied for the following three sections: International
                          Sport Center Station–QianHuDaDao Station, DiTieDaSha Station– YangMingGongYuan Station,
                          and YongShuLu Station – DingGongLuNan Station. For each section, at least two optional
                          alignments were compared considering engineering feasibility, socio-economic impact,
                          environmental impact and cost benefit.

                          Three alternative locations for QingShanLuKou Station were studied because this station is not
                          only serving Line 2 in a very developed area, but also will be an interchange station connecting
                          Line 2 with Line 3. On the top of that, a connection line between Line 2 and Line 3 will be built
                          nearby so that Line 3 can access and share the depot in HongJiaoZhou. The alternative analysis
                          result supports the T shape interchange station scheme located at the intersection of YangMingLu
                          and QingShanLu. The T shape interchange station scheme was selected due to better ridership,
                          easy transfer with future Line 3, and reduced environmental impact and resettlement.

                          Two methods have also been considered for the construction of tunnels between metro stations:
                          mining excavation and shield tunneling. Given the urban context, the need to cross the Gan River,

                                                                    Page 4 of 10
                          as well as the groundwater hydrological characteristics, the shield tunneling method was selected
                          due to its high automation, quality of work and reduced disturbance to adjacent structures and
                          environment for most sections, with half cut-and-cover and open cut methods used selectively for
Public Disclosure Copy




                          a few tunnels. For the construction of stations, the following three methods will be applied
                          depending on construction conditions, social and environmental impacts at each station: open cut
                          method, half cut-and-cover excavation method and subsurface excavation method.

                          Adequate engineering measures have been designed to mitigate the expected impacts, including
                          noise barriers, vibration reduction equipment, intensive greening plan, and landscape design for
                          stations, and parking/depot site.

                          As the result, the alignment, station location and construction method were optimized so as to
                          reduce the land acquisition, decrease construction risks, minimize resettlement, avoid
                          environmental and cultural sensitive sites, reduce disruption of traffic and increase the
                          accessibility and convenience of public transport transfer, integrate with the overall public
                          transport plan, and with less cost. Further optimization will be conducted during preliminary
                          design and detailed design.

                           During project design and planning stage, in order to decrease the social and economic impacts
                           brought by the construction of this project, the Project Management Office organized several joint
                           meetings with the design and consultation institutions to discuss about the optimization of project
                           design and the minimization of social and economic impacts of resettlement.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The project is classified as a Category A project as per OP4.01 due to the scale of tunnel
                           construction, waste disposal and potential environmental and social impact from construction and
                           operation in an urban context. Environment Assessment (EA) reports were prepared by
                           Environmental Protection Center (EPC) of Ministry of Transportation (MOT) in accordance with
Public Disclosure Copy




                           relevant national laws, regulations, and technical guidelines and standards applicable to the
                           project, as well as the World Bank Safeguards Policies. The reports include an (i) EA Executive
                           Summary, (ii) EIA, and (iii) Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The EA
                           Report has been prepared, incorporating the Bank’s comments, and found to be satisfactory.

                          The potential environmental and social impacts of the proposed project are thoroughly addressed
                          in the EIA report, and necessary mitigation measures have been developed in the ESMP. It is
                          concluded that these adverse environmental and social impact can be adequately avoided,
                          minimized and mitigated with good management practice and mitigation measures as developed in
                          EIA/ESMP. The main conclusions of impact and mitigation measures are summarized as follows:

                          Project Feasibility Study and Design phase. The EA identified, evaluated and compared various
                          options for alignment selection, station location selection, and construction method selection, and
                          optimal alternatives were selected based on the avoidance of (or least adverse) social and
                          environmental impacts, as well as other engineering technology, and financial considerations for
                          least cost solutions. A “no project? scenario was also considered as an alternative. Adequate
                          engineering measures have been designed to mitigate the expected impacts, including noise
                          barriers, vibration reduction equipment, intensive greening plan, and landscape design for stations,
                          and parking/depot site.



                                                                     Page 5 of 10
                         Construction phase. To address the potential adverse impacts as mentioned above, preventive and
                         mitigation measures during the construction phase have been developed in the ESMP to
                         adequately avoid, minimize and mitigate these adverse environmental and social impacts. These
Public Disclosure Copy




                         impacts will be avoided, minimized or mitigated by the following measures, which include
                         without being limited to implementation of traffic diversion plan and utility relocation,
                         coordination with police department, and prior notice through public media; fending of
                         construction sites for safety; setup of temporary access roads; public consultation throughout the
                         construction period to address public concerns and improve construction activities; proper
                         management of spoil wastes; use of low noise equipment and construction technologies; careful
                         scheduling of construction activities near sensitive sites; installation of temporary noise reduction
                         facility at sensitive sites; restriction on night-time construction; and required prior public notice, as
                         well as night-time construction permit from city Environmental Protection Bureau (EPB), for
                         activities that need continuous construction during the night; measures for air and wastewater
                         pollutant control, risks assessment and Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS) Shield tunneling
                         and cover-and-cut method will be used for the tunnel and most of the stations to minimize noise
                         and vibration impact.

                         Operation phase. To address potential impacts during operation phase, a number of mitigation
                         measures were adopted. Some of the critical measures follow. For land use change, Nanchang city
                         has mature institutions and procedures to manage land development to ensure that land
                         development induced by the rail network is in line with the urban master plan, and conducted in an
                         orderly and legal process. For noise sensitive sites, noise barrier and ventilation shafts will be
                         installed with low noise equipment and silencer, and ventilation shafts will be located at least 15 m
                         from nearby residential areas. For vibration sensitive sites, vibration-reduction facilities will be
                         installed. Measures for air quality, wastewater and solid wastes have also been formulated.

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11. The proposed line 2 rail project will pass nearby some
                         cultural relics including the August First Uprising Cenotaph, Jiangxi Provincial Library Site, Mao
                         Zedong Memorial Hall among others. Therefore there is a potential risk of impact from tunnel
Public Disclosure Copy




                         excavation during construction and vibration during operation. The Physical Cultural Resources
                         (PCR) policy is therefore triggered.

                         Adequate site survey and consultation with relevant cultural relic bureau were conducted during
                         EA preparation to ensure all the relevant cultural relics along the rail were identified. These
                         potential impacts were carefully addressed through mitigation measures in project design,
                         alignment optimization and construction technologies, construction management approach
                         including monitoring of settlement. Chance-find procedures will be included in bidding documents
                         and contracts and will include provisions and procedures stipulated in the Cultural Property Law.
                         A PCR Management Plan was prepared as part of the EIA/ESMP to address any possible impacts
                         during the project implementation given the proposed works in areas of identified cultural
                         significance.

                         A stand-alone ESMP has been developed which details the policy basis, applicable environmental
                         standards, environmental management organization and responsibilities, sufficient mitigation
                         measures, capacity training plan, environmental supervision of construction, environmental
                         monitoring program, and budget estimates of ESMP implementation. The ESMP measures were
                         developed in consistency with IFC’s EHS Guidelines. The ESMP also include procedures and
                         mitigation measures to deal with any project site that is not determined at the time of preparation.
                         The ESMP measures will be incorporated into bidding documents and contracts in order to ensure

                                                                     Page 6 of 10
                         effective implementation.

                         Environmental management responsibility will be built into the relevant divisions of the overall
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project management structure, with dedicated management staff. Dedicated environmental staff
                         will also be assigned to Supervision Engineers and Contractors to ensure effective ESMP
                         implementation. A training plan will be implemented prior to/and during construction for project
                         management staff, Supervision Engineers and Contractors.

                         A two tier monitoring program has been developed for this project: daily and regular monitoring to
                         be carried out by contractors and construction supervision companies, and periodical compliance
                         monitoring by professional monitoring specialists. Comprehensive environmental monitoring
                         programs have been designed for both construction and operation phases of the project.
                         Monitoring parameters during construction include environmental quality of air, noise, vibration,
                         surface water and groundwater in the project affect areas. Environmental monitoring during
                         operation phase will focus on noise, vibration, electromagnetic radiation and wastewater from the
                         metro depot in HongJiaoZhou. Environmental monitoring report will provide key and timely
                         information, especially on environmental impacts and mitigation, to the borrower and the Bank to
                         evaluate the success of environmental management.

                         The Nanchang Urban Rail Company has been established for management of the construction and
                         operation of the proposed rail system in Nanchang. Environmental management is built into the
                         overall management setup in the company, and the construction of line 1 has demonstrated strong
                         and successful environmental management performance in terms of construction site management,
                         traffic diversion, and provision of access to public, safety, dust control, spoil material disposal,
                         information disclosure and public consultation. Training will be provided to the project staff.
                         Following the relevant Chinese laws, regulations and World Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary
                         Resettlement, the Nanchang PMO has prepared a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) to address
                         involuntary resettlement impact caused by project construction. A Resettlement Policy
                         Framework (RPF) was also prepared for components that might change their locations during
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project implementation. The resettlement planning work was carried out by the line agencies under
                         the guidance of a team from Wuhan University with prior experience in resettlement planning for
                         World Bank financed Projects. Planning work included project impact inventory surveys, social
                         economic surveys and consultations over resettlement and livelihood rehabilitation strategies. The
                         assessment covers all land to be permanently or temporarily acquired, buildings to be demolished,
                         attachment to this land, affected public utilities, affected people and communities to meet the
                         project development objective. From a resettlement point of view, the project boundaries have
                         been defined as including transfer stations and four real estate development the URC expects to
                         carry out in parallel to the project to support land use and mass transit integration for Line 2. The
                         RAP and RPF, as well as the related monitoring requirements apply to any land acquisition or
                         involuntary resettlement taking place prior to project effectiveness. The resettlement work is
                         anticipated to start in April 2013.

                         The following guiding principles have been applied when developing the RAP/RPF: (a) the
                         original living standards of all affected people should be improved or at least be restored; (b)
                         resettlement plans, sites of new houses, standards and building areas should be determined after
                         consultation with the affected people; (c)         for all affected buildings, the compensation
                         should be calculated on the basis of current replacement cost; (d) compensation rates, location of
                         new residential sites and areas should be formulated after consultation with the affected people; (e)
                         all compensation funds should be paid before any demolition of house or land taking; (f) shop

                                                                   Page 7 of 10
                           owners and operators will get cash compensation as replacement cost for shops demolished and
                           business losses will be compensated; and (f) special assistance should be provided to the
                           vulnerable households identified during the detailed planning and implementation process. A
Public Disclosure Copy




                           mechanism has been established for grievance redress. Both internal and external monitoring is
                           planned for resettlement implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Two rounds of public consultation were conducted during EA preparation. The first round was
                           conducted from June 2009 to August 2012 through meetings, field interviews and questionnaire
                           surveys among project-affected people, local residential and village committees, schools and
                           hospitals, and through a telephone hotline. The main concerns raised by the public are resettlement
                           compensation, information disclosure, disturbance of traffic, night time construction noise etc. All
                           these concerns were addressed in the RAP and EIA/ESMPs.

                           The second round of public consultation was conducted in Sept-Dec 2012 after the draft EIA
                           reports had been prepared. During the consultation, the key findings of draft EIA report and
                           proposed mitigation measures were explained, as well as the responses to the questions raised
                           from the first round consultation. The majority of those consulted expressed strong support for the
                           project.

                           Information about the project was disclosed following both the domestic and Bank requirements.
                           The availability of the EA reports, and how to access to them, was announced in a major local
                           newspaper, Nanchang Daily, on February 9, 2013. The EA Executive Summary was disclosed on
                           February 5, 2013 in the World Bank’s Infoshop. The EIA report and ESMP were disclosed in
                           Infoshop on February 7, 2013. The EA reports were disclosed at the PMO and on the website of
                           the URC, on February 8, 2013. A final EIA and ESMP were disclosed on April 9, 2013 in
                           Infoshop and on April 19, 2013 at the URC.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The RAP and RPF were disclosed to local people via Nanchang Daily and other local newspapers
                           as well as on internet on January 30, 2013 and the English version of the documents were
                           disclosed in Infoshop on February 5, 2013. A final RAP and RPF were disclosed on April 3, 2013
                           in Infoshop and April 17, 2013 at the URC.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        05-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     07-Feb-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        11-Feb-2013
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                              09-Feb-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        20-Jan-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     05-Feb-2013



                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            30-Jan-2013
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?




                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Gerald Paul Ollivier
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                          Date: 16-May-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                         Date: 18-May-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
