                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA824
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-May-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Brazil                                   Project ID:                       P126343
                              Project Name:                   Parana Multi-Sector Development Project (P126343)
                              Task Team Leader:               Tarsila Ortenzio Velloso
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 09-May-2012                                    Estimated Board Date:             26-Jul-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  LCSPS                                    Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Sub-national government administration (40%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%), General
                                                              education sector (20%) , Health (20%)
                              Theme:                          Managing for development results (40%), Other rural development (20%), Education for all (20%), Health system
                                                              performance (10%), Gen der (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                         Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                   552.38
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                      350.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                      902.38
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The Project Development Objective is to make access to economic and human development opportunities more equitable and environmentally
                              sustainable in the state of Paraná through the modernization of public sector management with special emphasis on revenue management.

                              3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              There are two project components, the first of which would co-finance selected programs that structure the government’s integrated approach to
                              promote social and economic development; and the second of which would provide technical assistance to strengthen publicsector management.
                              In line with the government’s integrated strategy, the project activities are organized around three broad axes and involve five sectors: (i) public
                              sector management; (ii) sustainable rural development; (iii) environmental and disaster risk management; (iv) health; and (v) education.

                              Component 1: Fostering equitable and environmentally sustainable economic and human development (Estimated total cost: US$867 million;
                              Bank: US$314.125 million). This component would co-finance selected programs (the Eligible Expenditure Programs - EEPs) that structure the
                              Government’s integrated approach to promote social and economic development in Paraná, in an equitable and environmentally sustainable
                              manner.

                              Subcomponent 1.1: Sustainable Rural Development. The main challenge to be addressed by this subcomponent is the need for small rural
                              producers to engage more effectively in profitable businesses, while also fostering a transition towards more sustainable agricultural practices
                              throughout the State of Paraná. The project would support the Government’s rural development strategy by co-financing two EEPs.

                              EEP 1: Territorial Economic Development – Proterritorios. This program aims at improving the competitiveness of small family farmers in the 8
                              territories of the lagging Central Region. Specific activities would include the following: (i) capacity building of approximately 20,000 small rural
                              producers in the Central Region, including vulnerable groups such as indigenous people and quilombolas; (ii) strengthening public support
                              services and infrastructure (research and innovation, land regularization, and rural roads rehabilitation and maintenance), and (iii) support for
                              sustainable business initiatives of groups of small producers to foster their greater integration with remunerative value-chains.

                              EEP 2: Integrated Natural Resource Management in Micro-catchments. This program aims at fostering sustainable agriculture in those micro-
                              catchment areas most susceptible to environmental degradation. Specific activities would include the following: (i) modernization of SEAB and
                              EMATER’s tools and approaches for the management of the rural space, (ii) environmental education, and (iii) the promotion of the adoption of
                              sustainable agricultural and natural resource management practices by small rural producers.

                              Subcomponent 1.2: Environmental and Disaster Risk Management. This subcomponent will focus on tackling challenges in these two related
                              areas: environmental and DRM management. Regarding environmental management, the key goal is to strengthen overall environmental
                              compliance and monitoring by improving the Government’s capacity for delivering environmental registering, licensing, and oversight services. In
                              the case of DRM, the challenges are to improve the response capacity and identification of risk in short/medium term while developing an
                              integrated disaster risk management policy in a medium/long term. The Government’s strategies to tackle these issues translate into two Eligible
                              Expenditure Programs to be supported by this Project.

                                                                                                                                                                            Page 1 of 6
                         EEP 3: Modernization of the Environmental Licensing System. This program aims to revise the state procedures for environmental licensing and
                         build capacity in the state environmental agencies in order to strengthen environmental compliance and monitoring. The modernized
                         Environmental Licensing System would ensure that responsibilities for ensuring compliance with environmental legislation are properly allocated
                         and that the necessary data and systems are updated. It will be used to monitor and control productive landscapes, vegetation cover in private
                         landholdings, logging concessions and water rights management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         EEP 4: Natural and Man-Made Disaster Risk Management. The State is looking for better understanding and monitoring of risk, as well as for
                         improved response capacity to disasters. In order to do so, it has developed a program focused on improving the current data, risk models and
                         infrastructure technology currently used in the State; and also on building response capacity.

                         Subcomponent 1.3: Education. The government’s overall objective for the education sector is to ensure that all children in Paraná have access to
                         good quality education. This subcomponent would support three EEPs.

                         EEP 5: Learning Assessment System. This program seeks to establish a student evaluation system in order to carry out standardized evaluations
                         of learning outcomes of students in State schools. Progressively the standardized evaluations would cover all the grades of the final cycle of
                         fundamental and secondary education in several subject matters.

                         EEP 6: Teacher Development Program. This program aims to develop and implement a new strategy of in-service training developed at local level
                         (i.e.: cluster of schools) with groups of 40 teachers (oficinas).

                         EEP 7: Upgrading of school facilities (Renova Escola). Around 60 percent of State schools are in need of renovation or repair, with problems
                         varying from lack of water and electricity to physical dilapidation. 1,500 schools were identified by the Civil Defense as being potentially dangerous.
                         The project would support the rehabilitation and repairs of existing State schools. For the latter, SEED would include the construction of new
                         classrooms and accommodations for science laboratories, libraries and computer laboratories. In addition, the project would finance new school
                         furniture and some equipment.

                         Subcomponent 1.4: Health. In light of the main challenges faced by Paraná in the health area, the government designed a strategy to improve the
                         quality of service provision and insure adequate access to specialized treatment in the whole state, on a network basis. The strategy aims to
                         introduce changes the healthcare mode by integrating the state health system through the implementation of Healthcare Networks in the 22 health
                         administrative regions of the state. Two EEPs will be supported by this Project.

                         EEP 8: Urgent Care and Emergency Network. This program aims to support the healthcare network designed to establish adequate access to
                         emergency care through the implementation of a pre-hospital urgency and emergency system in the 22 State Health Administrative Regions. The
                         program would foster: i) in-service management training, improving management capacity for referral hospitals/facilities with focus on scaling-up,
                         care deliveries flows, logistics and managerial processes; ii) technical care training, developing and implementing care guidelines grounded on
                         scientific evidence; iii) investment in pre-hospital facilities focusing safe patient access to referral hospitals and including the expansion of trauma
                         care, aero medical transport and specialized teams for treating multiple trauma, myocardial infarction and stroke; and v) results-based contracts
                         with providers to ensure the implementation and maintenance of quality staff in agreement with the emergency regulatory framework.

                         EEP 9: Mãe Paranaense Network (Infant and Maternal Healthcare Network). This program aims to support the establishment of an infant and
                         maternal healthcare network in order to improve primary healthcare in the state with a special focus on reducing maternal and child mortality
Public Disclosure Copy




                         indicators.

                         Component 2: Technical Assistance for more efficient and effective public management (Estimated total cost: US$35 million; Bank: US$35 million).
                         This component would provide technical and financial support to public sector modernization activities and also to the design and initial
                         implementation of key elements of the government’s strategy across sectors included in the project.

                         Subcomponent 2.1: Fiscal Quality. This set of activities is aimed at improving the efficiency of revenue collecti on, with a focus on overdue tax. The
                         foreseen activities would support a revision of the collection process of overdue tax and formalization of new procedures that would allow for
                         greater cost-efficiency.

                         Subcomponent 2.2: Institutional Modernization. One of the main objectives of the government strategy is to increase the effectiveness and
                         efficiency of the state’s public administration.

                         Subcomponent 2.3: More Strategic and Efficient Human Resources Management. A more effective and efficient government will require
                         strengthening the State’s workforce more strategically by focusing on attracting and retaining professional personnel, in particular in the center-of-
                         government institutions.

                         Subcomponent 2.4: Support to the Modernization of the Environmental Licensing System. This subcomponent would support the following
                         activities: (i) carrying out studies and analyses related to environmental requirements, process flow, register and licensing and water rights
                         procedures, mapping audiences/users, customers; (ii) designing and development of web-based application, (iii) training to address environmental
                         laws, standardization, and web-based multi model approach.

                         Subcomponent 2.5: Support to the Development of a State Disaster Risk Management System. This subcomponent would focus on supporting the
                         development of the State’s Disaster Risk Management policy, developing the State DRM plan, and activities to improve the understanding of risk,
                         such as (i) Future environmental and economic Paraná 2030 planning exercise; (ii) development of risk assessment methodologies; (iii)
                         development of rain/flow models; (iv) early warning systems; and (v) development of state level risk analysis would be supported.

                         Subcomponent 2.6: Education. The Project would provide technical assistance to: (i) plan the design of the new state student evaluation system;
                         (ii) set up an information system on educational infrastructure in order to obtain real on-time information on needs for new rehabilitation, repairs
                         and maintenance;; (iii) undertake an impact evaluation of the Education Development Program; (iv) design and pilot the Municipal Education
                         Quality Index to capture information on school performance; and (v) design of SEED plan for developing the use information and communication
                         technology (ICT) in State schools.

                                                                                                                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                         Subcomponent 2.7: Health. The State Health Secretariat (SESA) intends to develop a results-based financing system to stimulate performance of
                         participating municipalities and providers through formal management contracts including expecting indicators and implementation plans. The TA
                         component would support the design and structuring of a robust information system to monitor the healthcare networks implementation, including
                         planning, budgeting, epidemiological indicators and M&E modules as well as carrying out two patient satisfaction surveys to evaluate the quality of
                         services provided by the participating referral hospitals in the first and last years of project’s implementation facing the following dimensions:
                         humaneness, facilities, overall quality, outcomes, competence, bureaucracy, access, continuity, cost and attention to psychosocial problems.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will support activities to improve services delivery in all municipalities of the Paraná State.

                         Paraná State, with a surface area of about 200.000 km2, is formed by different phytogeographical regions resulting from geomorphological and
                         climate peculiarities of each region. The floristic composition is composed by the Atlantic Forest biome, which corresponds to different ecosystems,
                         such as ombrophilous dense atlantic forest (auraucaria forest), mixed ombrophilous forest, semideciduous seasonal forest, steppe (fields),
                         herbaceous vegetation, mangroves, “várzea? and rupestrian vegetation. There is also a remnant of the “cerrado? with savanna vegetation.

                         The Atlantic Forest biome originally corresponded to 97% of the State’s territory. Currently this threatened biome it has been reduced to 18% of its
                         original area (well-preserved native areas comprise less than 3-5% of Paraná). Of special interest is the critically endangered Araucaria Forest,
                         which once covered more than one third of the State’s territory, and the coastal Atlantic Rainforest, Brazil’s most threatened forest ecosystem.
                         The climatic conditions in Paraná range from tropical to sub-tropical and temperate zones, with temperatures ranging from 30°F to 80°F. The sub-
                         tropical and temperate zones in Paraná get frost in the winter season (June-September).

                         The state is well supplied by hydrological resources. A well-distributed river basin network, makes Paraná one of the country’s main hydroelectric
                         supplier. Parana’s topography consists of a narrow coastal plain separated from the interior of the state by an abrupt wall: the Serra do Mar
                         mountain range to the west of which are 3 successive plateaus. More than half of the state is above 2000 feet in altitude.

                         Historically, land use in the State of Paraná has been agricultural based activities. The traditional crops have been corn, soy, sugar cane, wheat
                         cultivars and pasture areas. The intensive use of land for these crops contributed to soil and forest degradation. This unsustainable land use,
                         especially along riparian forests have affected not only ecosystems but also led to the loss of biodiversity, increased carbon emissions and others
                         ecological and socioeconomic impacts.

                         The soils are generally fertile, although prone to erosion. Expansion of the agricultural frontier over the past decades has reduced the native
                         vegetation. Poor management of fragile soils has led to their degradation and threatens farm productivity, especially in the rugged Central Region
                         where steep slopes have been continuously cultivated.

                         Bank-supported projects (Land Management Project, 1989-1997, Rural Poverty Alleviation and Natural Resources Management Project,
                         1998-2006; GEF grant for biodiversity 2003-2008) helped introduce environmentally sound agricultural practices and promote environmental
                         awareness. Nevertheless, the natural resource-base, especially in the Central Region (target area for the Sustainable Rural Development
                         subcomponent), remains fragile with the need for continued mainstreaming of sound land and water management practices into agricultural
                         systems and for protection of remnant natural vegetation.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Judith M. Lisansky (LCSSO)
                         Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN)
                         Maria Bernadete Ribas Lange (LCSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                             Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01               Yes              The project is Category “B? as the impact is limited in scope, localized, temporary
                                                                                            and reversible. The Borrower has carried out an Environmental Management
                                                                                            Framework (EMF).
                                                                                            Despite the positive or neutral impacts foreseen, some small-scale investments
                                                                                            could potentially have adverse environmental impacts. Illustrative types of small-
                                                                                            scale investments that might include some adverse effects are: (i) rehabilitation of
                                                                                            schools; (ii) rehabilitation or maintenance of municipal feeder roads; (iii)
                                                                                            improvement of agriculture (and other) production technologies (e.g., product
                                                                                            diversification and/or value-added products), and (iv) improvements to small
                                                                                            producers’ farm and off-farm infrastructure. Any environmental impacts are
                                                                                            expected to be localized and preventable through responsive mitigation measures.
                                                                                            The EMF assessed the most common types of intervention expected, and
                                                                                            proposed mitigation measures a priori. The EMF also includes protocols for
                                                                                            construction workers; waste disposal measures; construction site management
                                                                                            criteria for any school and hospital works; dust and waste control; and the
                                                                                            institutional arrangement for supervision and oversight of environmental and social
                                                                                            measures.
                                                                                            The EMF was submitted to the Bank on February 9, 2012, is available on the
                                                                                            Client’s website (www.sepl.pr.gov.br) and has been disseminated via the Bank’s
                                                                                            InfoShop.




                                                                                                                                                                     Page 3 of 6
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                 Yes    This policy is triggered given the importance of the Sustainable Rural Development
                                                                                  subcomponent for rural production and land use planning.
                                                                                  It would promote the use of better land and water management practices including
                                                                                  the protection of remnant natural vegetation within rural landscapes.
                                                                                  Subcomponent activities will not take place in protected areas and are not
                                                                                  expected to significantly modify or degrade natural habitats.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  The EMF includes screening criteria to ensure that no significant degradation or
                                                                                  conversion of critical natural habitats occurs.
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                          Yes    The project is not expected to have negative impacts on native forests rather
                                                                                  impacts are expected to be positive. The Integrated Regional Development sector
                                                                                  is expected to test models of sustainable, non-timber use of remnant native forest
                                                                                  areas in small rural properties (less than 50 ha), and these will be carried out in
                                                                                  accordance with addendum 2166-67 to Federal Law 4771/65, which allows for
                                                                                  sustainable agro-forestry activities in small rural properties as long as they do not
                                                                                  change the overall character of the forest cover and do not alter ecosystem
                                                                                  functions in the area. The consistency of the legislation and practice in Paraná
                                                                                  State with the Bank safeguards principles for small-scale and/or community-based
                                                                                  forestry will be reviewed in the ESMF.
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                     Yes    While the activities under proposed Sustainable Rural Development sector will not
                                                                                  finance the procurement of any pesticides or other chemical amendments, it
                                                                                  should be noted that minor amounts of pesticides would probably continue to be
                                                                                  used by some farmers in targeted micro-catchments for which disposal containers
                                                                                  may be requested by communities to reduce health and environmental risks
                                                                                  associated with pesticide use. The ESMF prepared by the client has included
                                                                                  guidance on pest management following OP4.09 for the safe handling, storage,
                                                                                  use and disposal of pesticides as well as for Integrated Pest and Plant
                                                                                  Management (IPPM).
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11      Yes    It is not expected that project implementation activities would have any negative
                                                                                  impact on physical cultural resources. Despite this, #chance finds# during
                                                                                  implementation activities are a possibility. Under Brazilian legislation provisions for
                                                                                  the protection of cultural property are part of the environmental licensing
                                                                                  procedures. The National Institute for Historical and Cultural Heritage (IPHAN) is
                                                                                  the Brazilian institution responsible for handling archaeological and cultural
                                                                                  property issues. Whenever #chance findings# occur it is mandatory, under federal
                                                                                  and state law, for Brazilian Government agencies to seek the support of IPHAN to
                                                                                  address chance finding issues. The state government agencies have proven
                                                                                  experience and appropriate procedures to recover #chance find# and these
                                                                                  procedures would be in all bidding documents and contracts for civil works.
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10               Yes    Activities under the subcomponents on Sustainable Rural Development, Education
                                                                                  and Health will involve indigenous beneficiaries primarily in positive ways although
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  subproject sites will be selected during implementation. The indigenous population
                                                                                  of the State is approximately13,000, divided into three ethnic groups: Kaingang
                                                                                  (75%), Guarani (24%) and Xetá (2%). The client formulated a Strategy for the
                                                                                  Participation of Indigenous Populations in the project equivalent to an Indigenous
                                                                                  Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) which was consulted with state-wide
                                                                                  indigenous representatives and other stakeholders in August, 2011, leading to
                                                                                  broad community support. A satisfactory IPPF was submitted to the Bank on April
                                                                                  19, 2012, it is available on the Client’s website (www.sepl.pr.gov.br) and has been
                                                                                  disseminated via the Bank’s InfoShop.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12         Yes    It appears unlikely that the activities under the project will cause physical or non-
                                                                                  physical displacement or land acquisition. For the subcomponents on Education
                                                                                  and Health, any upgrading of school or health facilities under the project will be
                                                                                  done on public land where the client will provide evidence that the land is public
                                                                                  and there are no existing conflicts or claims prior to any site specific financing.
                                                                                  Specific sites will be selected during implementation.
                                                                                  Since there is a small chance that the rural roads rehabilitation to be financed
                                                                                  under the subcomponent Sustainable Rural Development, could cause some
                                                                                  minor displacement or land acquisition, and that the site selections will be done
                                                                                  during implementation, the client prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                                  (RPF). A satisfactory RPF was provided to the Bank on April 19, 2012, and has
                                                                                  been publicly disseminated on the Government’s website (www.sepl.pr.gov.br) and
                                                                                  the Bank InfoShop.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                   No
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP   No
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60       No


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                                                                                                                                                             Page 4 of 6
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                            significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                            The project does not entail any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative impacts.

                           An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was prepared due to: (i) the multi-sector nature of the Project which will require engagement
                           on safeguards management with multiple actors and counterparts with varying levels of capacity; and (ii) the range of activities which will
                           require the preparation and review of multiple safeguards instruments.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Project implementation procedures will adopt strict environmental "screens" to ensure that subcomponents activities demonstrate low
                           potential for negative impact. The EMF assessed the most common types of intervention expected, in order to propose mitigation measures a
                           priori.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                             The Environmental and Disaster Risk Management component will strengthen the State environmental licensing and an integrated disaster
                           risk management policy and early warning and response system.

                           The implementation of a robust web-based environmental system should lead to improve environmental performance, including better and
                           more consistent legal compliance and environmental safeguard policies.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                            N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                            The Paraná State has advanced environmental laws, reflecting a political culture of strong environmental protection. The State has prepared
                           an Environmental Management Framework for the Project which will provide overall guidance as to how to proceed during implementation. The
                           Borrower has prepared an EMF, an IPPF and an IRF. Site-specific assessments will be conducted and impact mitigation plans drawn up, as
                           needed, during subcomponents implementation which complies with the overall project safeguard framework. To ensure safeguards
                           compliance, focal points (one at each Subcomponent) will be in charge o f overseeing the implementation of the EMF procedures set out for the
                           respective subcomponents. Moreover, SEPL will oversee the compliance with the requirements detailed in the EMPs, IPPs and IRF, providing
                           additional training where necessary.

                           The Bank will carry out formal supervision missions semi-annually, focusing on compliance with EMF, IPPF, IRF and overall safeguards
                           policies.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                            In accordance with Bank policy, several rounds of consultations were held with a wide range of stakeholder. Their views and
                           recommendations were taken into account in the design of the subcomponents. No major issues were raised, and the proposed project
                           received strong support from the groups consulted. (colegiados territoriais, Grupo Gestor das Microbacias, civil society entities, government
                           representatives, Grupos Gestors dos Estabelecimentos Assistenciais de Saude)
                           Prior and informed consultations were carried out with indigenous peoples during 2009-2010, and additional consultations in August 2011. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                           EMF has been disseminated in Brazil through the website (http://www.sepl.pr.gov.br), and contains a more detailed description of possible
                           positive and negative environmental impacts of the project supported subcomponents.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                 09-Feb-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                             02-Mar-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                              07-Mar-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                 19-Apr-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                             20-Apr-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                              24-Apr-2012
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                 19-Apr-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                             20-Apr-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                              24-Apr-2012
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                              NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                 NA
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                             NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                              NA

                                                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 6
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                              If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                              If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are                   Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                              Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                              Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on               Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                              If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by           Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the             Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                              Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                     Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language             Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for          Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                     Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard           Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same               Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                     Tarsila Ortenzio Velloso
                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                       Name Arturo Herrera Gutierrez (SM)                                             Date: 17-May-2012




                                                                                                                                                                      Page 6 of 6
