                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC449
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-May-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Kenya                                    Project ID:                      P126321
                              Project Name:                  KENYA: NATIONAL URBAN TRANSPORT IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P126321)
                              Task Team Leader:              Josphat O. Sasia
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 14-May-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:            21-Jun-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 AFTTR                                    Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (85%), General transportation sector (10%), Railways (5%)
                              Theme:                         Infrastructure services for private sector development (80%), Other urban development (10%), City-wide
                                                             Infrastructure and Service De livery (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                         0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                              300.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                    300.00
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The Project Development Objectives are to: (a) improve the efficiency of road transport along the Northern Corridor through Nairobi; (b) improve
                              public transport in Nairobi; and (c) strengthen the institutional capacity in the urban transport sub sector. This will be achieved by supporting the
                              expansion of road infrastructure, improving missing road links, improving major junctions and traffic management interventions (as provided for in
                              the RSIP), thus reduce traffic congestion, reduce transport costs, travel time, air pollution and improve service delivery to citizens.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              C. Project Description

                              Component A: Upgrading Urban Road Transport Infrastructure along the Northern Corridor. This component will be implemented by KeNHA, and
                              will comprise:

                              (a)       Expansion and improvement of the northern corridor road section through Nairobi starting from JKIA turnoff-Westlands-Rironi including
                              the associated service roads and access roads to JKIA and improvement of the major junctions;
                              (b)       Construction of the Kisumu northern bypass along the northern corridor;
                              (c)       Construction and rehabilitation of sidewalks, pedestrian walk ways, and pedestrian bridges;
                              (d)       Carrying out feasibility and detailed engineering designs and studies for improvement of traffic flow along sections of roads and
                              bypasses, if any, adjoining major towns including Nakuru, Embu, Eldoret, Kakamega and Mombasa;
                              (e)       Strengthening KeNHA’s capacity through: development of management information systems and related operational capacities;
                              development of safeguards framework for the road sector to enhance delivery of services; and developing capacity within KeNHA to promote
                              private sector participation in financing road investments;
                              (f)       Capacity building and technical assistance and provision of advisory services to enhance KeNHA’s operational capacity including
                              contract management, monitoring and evaluation;
                              (g)       Training of KeNHA’s staff; and
                              (h)       Supervision of construction works.

                              The upgrading works will include: (a) provision of roadside facilities and enhancement of road safety through improvement of hazardous locations,
                              service roads, traffic calming measures, pedestrian crossings, improvement of major junctions, and so forth; and (b) provision of measures to
                              address Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (HIV/AIDS); and (c) access roads to public facilities.


                              Component B: Support to the development of selected Mass Transit Corridors

                              The activities under this project will form the foundation for follow on interventions to improve urban public transport through the implementation of
                              an integrated Mass Rapid Transit system. The component will comprise two sub components, B1 and B2 as follows:

                              Sub component B1. Preparation of the development of selected Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) corridors. The sub component will be implemented by
                              KURA, and will include:
                         (a)       Carrying out feasibility and detailed engineering designs and related studies for the selected Bus Rapid Transit corridor (BRT), including
                         Mombasa road in Nairobi, among others. The services to be provided cover the economic and financial analysis and detailed designs of separated
                         bus lanes, stops and stations, terminals, depots and control center. The designs include provisions that will facilitate passenger mobility and
                         access to BRT facilities through walkways and safe pedestrian crossings among others. The services also include preparation of bidding
                         documents for the construction of the selected first phase of the BRT system; Terms of Reference (TORs) for an ESIA and a RAP (which will be
                         developed as part of this subcomponent design) have been prepared and will be disclosed prior to project appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (b)         Provision of technical assistance and advisory services related to the selection of BRT private sector operators and associated services
                         including preparation of (i) a public transport development plan for Nairobi based on the MRTS Study as the foundation for implementing a
                         comprehensive BRT system; (ii) passenger and revenue forecasting framework; (iii) detailed operational designs for the management and delivery
                         planning for a BRT system including financial and economic appraisal; environmental/social impact assessments; and (iv) bidding documents for
                         operational BRT services including draft contracts for (i) BRT operator(s) including the type of services expected (including the specifications for
                         the highcapacity buses);
                         (ii) the Fare Collector, including technical specifications for fare collection system; and (iii) the Fund Manager who will provide fund management
                         services for revenues/expenses generated by the BRT system;

                         (c)         Support to the implementation of regulatory reforms to rationalize the provision of public transport services and strengthen management
                         of public transport operations;

                         (d)       Enhancing traffic management systems though the acquisition of goods and services such as control centers and traffic management
                         ICT solutions; traffic lights and traffic signaling;

                         (e)       Construction of Meru bypasses to decongest the town;

                         (f)    Feasibility and design studies of missing road links in selected major towns and carrying out an urban transport master plan for
                         Mombasa;

                         (g)       Strengthening of KURA’s capacity through modernizing of management information systems and acquisition of ICT software, planning,
                         contract management and other related operational capacities; and

                         (h)       Support capacity building, technical assistance and training of manpower in traffic planning, regulation and management; and private
                         sector participation in the financing, management and provision of public transport services.

                         Sub component B2. Preparation of the improvement of selected Commuter Rail System in Nairobi. The sub component will be implemented by
                         KRC and will comprise:

                         (a)          Carrying out feasibility and detailed engineering designs and studies for selected high density commuter rail line routes and associated
                         facilities, demand and revenue forecasts and related options such as either doubling of tracks; using one meter gauge vis a vis upgrading of the
                         commuter network to standard gauge or a combination; and preparation of the associated bidding documents;
                         (b)          Provision of technical assistance and advisory services related to selection of private sector operators and associated services including
                         among others (i) preparation of an implementation plan for commuter rail operations consisting of business model, financing options for rolling
Public Disclosure Copy




                         stock, preparation of bidding documents for operator(s), preparation of fare collection and fund manager systems; (ii) preparation of the bidding
                         package for rail commuter service operator, including a concession agreement with clear services expected and the compensations (financial or
                         other) expected to be offered by GoK; and (iii) prepare staff training needs assessment to fulfill its role as PPP contractor of commuter rail services;
                         (c)          Institutional strengthening and capacity building particularly in areas of modernization of management information systems, planning,
                         and contract management; and
                         (d)          Support to training of KRC’s staff on management of concessions and private sector involvement in the provision of railway services.

                         Draft TORs for an ESIA and a RAP for the Commuter Rail System have been developed and will be disclosed prior to project appraisal.

                         Component C: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building in the Urban Transport Sector: This component will support and deepen the
                         implementation of reforms in the transport sector with a major focus on urban transport and will involve two sub components:

                         Sub component C1. Support to MoT. This sub component will be implemented by MoT and will include:

                         (a)        Support the development and implementation of an integrated public transport policy for all modes and including regulatory and policy
                         framework, its administration, operation, monitoring and control;
                         (b)        Support the implementation of the Integrated National Transport Policy including urban transport reforms on separation of roles of
                         owner, regulator, manager and operator of the transport systems;
                         (c)        Strengthening the capacity of the proposed Road Safety Authority and support the implementation of the National Road Safety Program
                         including transport regulations, monitoring and evaluation capacity, oversight function; and support of the implementation of road safety
                         interventions;
                         (d)        Strengthening the capacity of the proposed NMTA including its capacity for regulating, licensing of operators and routing through the
                         provision of goods, technical assistance and advisory services;
                         (e)        Promotion of private sector participation in aviation sub sector including strengthening the capacity and preparing the East Africa School
                         of Aviation for delinking from Kenya Civil Aviation Authority;
                         (f)        Carrying out urban transport sub sector studies and provision of technical assistance and advisory services; and
                         (g)        Capacity building and training of staff.

                         Sub component C2. Support to MoR. This sub component will be implemented by MoR and will include:

                         (a)       Conducting monitoring and evaluation of the performance of the project and sector coordination;
                         (b)       Support the strengthening of the oversight function in the construction industry through providing assistance toward implementation of
                           the National Construction Authority Act (2011) and the Engineers Act (2012); and
                           (c)       Capacity building and training of sector staff.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           The project sites will be located in Nairobi and its environs and in Nyanza and Eastern Provinces.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           The Kenya National Highway Authority (KeNHA), Kenya Urban Roads Authority (KURA), Kenya Railways Corporation (KRC), the Ministry of
                           Transport (MoT) and the Ministry of Roads (MoR) will be responsible for implementing the project. KeNHA is responsible for the management of
                           all national roads in Kenya; KURA is responsible for all urban roads, KRC is responsible for the development of railways, MoR is responsible for
                           policy and technical standards pertaining to roads sub sector issues; and MoT is responsible for other transport matters. A significant scope of the
                           project covers the road sub sector comprising mainly of road rehabilitation and improvement. KeNHA, KURA, and KRC, parastatals with
                           independent Boards of Directors outside the central government, will implement 95 percent (in terms of cost) of the project and the balance (three
                           percent) will be implemented by MoR and MoT. KenHA -- and to a lesser extent, KURA - have significant experience in preparing, implementing,
                           and monitoring environmental and social safeguard documentation in compliance with World Bank safeguard policies and National Environmental
                           Management Authority (NEMA) regulations. Although there are no civil works investments envisioned under the responsibility of the KRC in this
                           project, environmental and social staff have been working with the KRC to enhance their familiarity with World Bank safeguard policies. The
                           overall training program for the project will incorporate capacity building module for environmental and social safeguards.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Gibwa A. Kajubi (AFTCS)
                           Noreen Beg (AFTEN)
                           Svetlana Khvostova (AFTSG)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                              Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             Yes                The bulk of the works anticipated are for rehabilitation of existing facilities.
                                                                                             Although there will be some new construction ( the Kisumu bypass, for example)
                                                                                             all new construction will have limited and reversible environmental impact. No
                                                                                             protected areas or forest reserves are traversed by the civil works planned under
                                                                                             this project.

                                                                                             Appropriate measures to ensure occupational health and safety to workers and
                                                                                             safety of the general public will be included in all contracts for civil works. Draft
                                                                                             EIAs will be prepared, approved and disclosed prior to appraisal, and finalized
                                                                                             prior to commencement of civil works.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                     No                 This policy is not triggered as none of the proposed works have potential to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             cause significant conversion or degradation of natural habitats, whether directly
                                                                                             or indirectly. Although a short section of the road expansion from JKIA to Nyayo
                                                                                             Stadium (2km) runs parallel to the Nairobi National Park, there is a buffer
                                                                                             provided by an industrial estate between the road and the boundaries of the
                                                                                             Park. Therefore the roadworks will not impose additional stress on wildlife,
                                                                                             though ESIA includes provisions to avoid construction waste disposal in the
                                                                                             vicinity of the National Park. In addition, by widening the existing highway from
                                                                                             the airport, and providing feeder routes, thereby lessening traffic congestion, it
                                                                                             will be easier to deter commuters from the current practice of taking detours
                                                                                             through the roads of the Nairobi National Park.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                              No                 Although the Meru Bypass is in the vicinity of the Imenti forest, an elephant
                                                                                             breeding area, a site visit has confirmed that the Imenti Forest is fenced off, and
                                                                                             wildlife will not be able to access the road, and enough of a buffer is in place to
                                                                                             ensure that elephants will not be impacted by noise or air pollution. Construction
                                                                                             crews will be closely monitored at campsites and worksites to prevent poaching.
                                                                                             All construction waste will be properly disposed of in borrow pits, which will be
                                                                                             rehabilitated upon the completion of the project. KURA will keep KWS and KFS
                                                                                             informed of construction schedules.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                         No                Land clearing for road preparation is not pf a scale to necessitate a pest
                                                                                             management plan.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11          Yes               Guidelines for chance finds procedure will be integrated into the contracts for
                                                                                             construction. These include development of a cultural property management
                                                                                             plan (CPMP) if physical cultural resources are found.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                   No                The policy is not triggered as the proposed route of the BRT and roads
                                                                                             rehabilitation are in urban areas or peri-urban areas.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             Yes               Although most of the proposed works are for rehabilitation of existing facilities
                                                                                             and all will be carried out within the existing Right of Way there is significant
                                                                                             encroachment around some parts of the proposed roads and there is landtaking
                                                                                                                        for proposed expansion for the expansion of some roads, e.g. Meru bypass,
                                                                                                                        which will require a RAP. given the numbers of hawkers and small temporary
                                                                                                                        stall owners who may be affected.
                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No

                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                7.50
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No



                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 16-Apr-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    Draft EAs and RAPs, together with draft TORs for environmental and social studies for Component B activities, will be cleared and disclosed
                                    prior to project appraisal.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: Josphat O. Sasia
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                     Date: 15-May-2012
                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (SM)                                                                       Date: 16-May-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
