                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC1297

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Oct-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nepal                            Project ID:      P132289
                            Project Name:      Kali Gandaki A Hydropower Plant Rehabilitation Project (KGAHPRP)
                                               (P132289)
                            Task Team          Pravin Karki
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       14-Jan-2013                         Estimated        16-Apr-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: SASDE                                Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector:         Hydropower (100%)
                            Theme:          Other economic management (70%), Water resource management (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            3.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  25.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                        28.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the proposed KGAHRP is to improve the reliability of power supply and safety of
                           the hydropower plant that provides nearly a quarter of Nepal’s annual electricity generation.
                           C. Project Description
                           Background
                           Kali Gandaki A HPP is a 144 MW run-of-river plant, located on Kali Gandaki river in Syangja, three
                           hours drive from Pokhara. The dam is located below the confluence of Kali Gandaki and Andhi
                           Khola rivers. The plant was largely funded by the Asian Development Bank and commissioned in
                           2002 at a cost of 453 MUSD. Today it is the largest hydroelectric power station in Nepal, and it
                           supplies nearly 50% of NEA’s total annual electricity generation which represents a quarter of the
                           country’s total annual electricity generation. This important plant is facing the following problems:
                         Severe Damages to Power Generation Equipment. Severe damages were found at critical plant
                         equipment, including the main inlet valve (MIV), guide vane, and turbine runners caused by both
Public Disclosure Copy




                         erosion and cavitation due to reduced efficiency of the sediment handling facilities and increased
                         sediment concentration in the water passing through these parts of power generation units. The
                         damages are increasing, reducing generation efficiency and reliability, and threatening the safety of
                         the plant.

                         An international consultant was hired under the Bank-funded Power Development Project to assess
                         the damages and prepare the design of the rehabilitation work. The assessment concluded that the
                         electro-mechanical equipment has to be retrofitted to avoid more severe damage and to enhance the
                         performance of the equipment against erosion and cavitation.

                         Low Availability of Generation Capacity. Although the plant was designed to generate about 842
                         GWh of electricity annually, the plant availability was lesser than expected, generating only about
                         700-760 GWh annually. Indeed, severe sedimentation conditions affect the plant operation and force
                         extended shutdown of power generation units to repair erosion damages.

                         During the monsoon season, rivers Kali Gandaki carry increased sediments and floating debris to the
                         plant. The mineralogical composition of the sediments is dominated by Quartz, a highly abrasive
                         material capable of damaging machinery in a power plant. Poor control of the floating debris chokes
                         the intake screen and reduces the efficiency of the sediment settling basins. Instead of settling, the
                         highly abrasive sediment particles in high concentrations (above permitted limits) are transported
                         into the flow passage of the power generation units, causing severe damage to the hydro machinery.
                         Unless this problem is addressed, there will be perpetual wear and tear of the machinery and needs
                         for shutting down the power generation units for repairs, and subsequently further reduce availability
                         of this critical plant.

                         Lowering sediment concentration of the water within the limits through proper settling before the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         water passing through the power generation equipment is the key to keep the damages to the
                         equipment withinacceptable range. Nepal HydroLab was hired to assess the performance of
                         headworks and sedimentation handling facilities. Based on physical model tests, HydroLab proposed
                         options for modification of the headworks and the sedimentation handling facilities to improve the
                         performance of sediment settling. Detailed design and preparation of bidding documents are to be
                         completed.

                         Safety risk. The severe damage to the MIV that functions as a safety device is already posing serious
                         safety threat to the plant and need urgent repairs. There are also dam safety issues consisting mainly
                         of improper maintenance and negligence of dam safety instrumentation. There is no dam safety plan
                         including an emergency preparedness plan.

                         The proposed project consists of three components:

                         Component A: Civil Works (US$8.5 million IDA, US$1.0 million Cofinancing) will consist of
                         headworks modifications to address the floating debris problem and increase the effectiveness of the
                         settling basins. This will lead to improved operating conditions of the plant and increased availability
                         of plant capacity. Laser based real time sediment monitoring instruments will be installed to assist
                         the plant operators with improved sediment guided operations to increase plant availability.
                         Component B: Electro-Mechanical Works (US$15.5 million IDA, US$2.0 million Cofinancing) will
                         consist of repairs or installations of various equipment. This will lead to increased availability of the
                         equipment for power generation and mitigation of safety risks. The MIV will be retrofitted with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         special seals to ensure proper opening and closing of the valves, improving safety of the plant. Other
                         items will include special hard coating to resist Quartz abrasion, repairing damaged runners by
                         welding and gridding, adding one new spare runner, installing turbine air admission system to
                         prevent cavitations, modifying the cooling water supply into a closed loop system, repairing the dam
                         stoplog seat plates, and purchasing spare parts and a new trash rack cleaning machine.

                         Component C: Technical Assistance for Safeguard Management (US$1.0 million IDA). Though no
                         major social issues a re anticipated since most of the physical activities will be carried out within the
                         existing plant facilities, this component will provide support should any issue emerge during
                         implementation. This component will support implementation of the EMP, including mon itoring and
                         evaluation, capacity-building and training of the project management staff working on the
                         environmental and safeguard issues. A dam safety plan including an emergency preparedness plan
                         and an asset management plan will be developed and adopted to en sure long-term safety of Kali
                         Gandaki.
                         Total initial project cost (excluding taxes, duties and VAT, at about US$ 3.0 million) is estimated at
                         US$ 25.0 million. With the increased availability of plant capacity for power generation, initial
                         economic and financi al analysis indicate an EIRR of about 15% and a FIRR of about 6% , without
                         considering the saved investment cost due to reduced damages in the future and benefits from
                         avoided potential destruction of the plant due to power generation equipment and dam failures.

                         Safeguards Assessment

                         The Project is not expected to cause any significant environmental and social safeguard impacts.
                         Consisting largely of rehabilitation work, the proposed project consist of physical activities that will
                         be mostly restricted to the existing plant facilities and its immediate surroundings. There will be no
                         land acquisition and involuntary resettlement expected as a result of the civil works proposed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Possible social impacts could be more related to contractor construction operations, such as noise,
                         dust and public health issues. There are indigenous communities in the project areas. They may be
                         affected with these impacts. Broad consultations will be carried out with them to understand their
                         attitude towards the proposed project, assess possible impacts and designing necessary mitigation
                         measures.

                         The Seti Beni Bazaar and the Holy Stone at about 5 km upstream of the plant are of cultural
                         importance to the local villagers. Initial consultation with them revealed their concerns about the
                         impacts of the rehabilitation works in the Seti Beni Bazaar and the Holy Stone. The possible impacts
                         will be assessed including numerical model studies to determine the flood profile along the Kali
                         Gandaki River from the dam to the area of concern and enhanced consultation with local
                         communities will be conducted during the project preparation and implementation.

                         Environmental impacts are likely to be limited. There will be minor civil works involved in the
                         modification of the headworks. In the immediate construction area there will be no impacts on the
                         present land forms and land use, including agricultural land, forest and natural habitats. The
                         operation of a construction site, including workers’ camps, workshops, batching plants, machinery,
                         heavy equipment etc. will produce minimum emissions (noise, dust, exhaust gases) and generate
                         limited quantities of solid waste and sewage. Such impacts will be most significant during the
                         construction phase and abate once the repair is completed and the plant is in operation. Good
                         housekeeping measures, a detailed EMP that contains clearly defined, contractually agreed
                         mitigation measures and implementation arrangements, and a well-established and empowered
                         environmental site supervision firmly linked with construction supervisions, are deemed sufficient to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         address these construction-related impacts.

                         Spoils from road construction and waste disposal from villages and towns introduced from outside
                         the project areas into the Kali Gandaki and Andhi Khola rivers pose serious threat to the health of the
                         river system. It also has a negative impact on the Kali Gandaki A plant due to exposure to excessive
                         sediments and floating debris. Further assessment will be conducted during the project preparation
                         and possible mitigation measures discussed with the Government and local authorities.

                         The project is expected to trigger World Bank OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment, OP 4.11 on
                         Physical Cultural Resources, OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples and OP 4.37 on Safety of Dams. An
                         environmental and social policy framework (ESPF) will be prepared in this regard in compliance
                         with the relevant government policies and World Bank OPs, including resettlement and indigenous
                         peoples.

                         A safeguard review will be conducted during the project preparation to: (i) review the social and
                         environmental management and performance of the Kali Gandaki A Hydropower Plant; (ii) identify
                         any social and environmental issues outstanding from the Completion Review, (iii) identify new
                         social and environmental issues emerged recently. This review will also identify and assess
                         potential social and environmental consequences of the project activities under the proposed
                         rehabilitation project. Following the conclusions of the review, necessary action plans such as
                         Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared for compliance with relevant government
                         and World Bank policies during the project preparation.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the              safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Kali Gandaki A Hydroelectric Project is located approximately 180 km west of Kathmandu. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project was designed as a run-of-river type hydroelectric project on the Kali Gandaki River, near the
                         confluence with Andhi Khola river, with an installed capacity of 144 MW at a net head of 115 m
                         utilizing a rated discharge of 142 m3/s to generate about 840 GWh of electric energy per annum.

                         The headworks are located near the villages of Mirmi, Andhi Muhan and Harmichaur, downstream
                         of the Andhi Khola confluence. The reservoir extends upstream to Set Beni at the confluence of the
                         Seti Khola. The powerhouse is located underground except for the control building. During the dry
                         season (Nov-May), the reservoir level is kept at 524 m and drawdown to generate max power of 144
                         MW. Power generation is reduced during the infilling. During the wet season (June-Oct) the
                         reservoir is kept at a lower elevation of 518 m to minimize build up of sediments in the reservoir
                         area. Based on continuous monitoring during the monsoon, the plant is to be shut down when the
                         sediment concentrations reach 5,000 ppm. In reality real time sediment monitoring instruments to
                         measure sediment concentrations are not available in the plant.

                         The Kali Gandaki basin is sub-tropical to temperate with hot (max 40 degrees celsius) and wet
                         summers and cool winters (100 degrees celsius). The basin is situated in the midland of the lower
                         Himalayas. Most of the basin is hilly and deeply incised with elevations between 400 m and 1600 m
                         in the project area. The sediment transport capacity of the Kali Gandaki river is quite high, especially
                         during the monsoon.
                           The Kali Gandaki River is inhabited by snow trouts in the upper reaches, mahseer in the middle
                           reaches and the river carp and catfish in the lower reaches. Out of a total 128 species of fish reported
                           from the Gandaki River system, 57 species were collected from the Project area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           As per the project completion report, the project concept evolved as a result of increased
                           environmental and social concerns at international and national levels. Environmental considerations
                           were taken into account during the pre-feasibility and feasibility studies. Further site investigations,
                           design changes and project optimization, reviews and recommendations by a Panel of Experts and
                           ADB staff provided basis for detailed environmental studies and formulating mitigations measures.
                           Some design parameters were changed or modified and additional studies have been conducted
                           regarding environmental impacts during the detailed engineering design and planning phase.
                           Important provisions and modifications were made to minimize and to mitigate and the adverse
                           impacts as follows:
                           •        The dam height was carefully adjusted to ensure that the water storage level did not inundate
                           the religious “Holy Stone? and the Seti Beni Market at the end of the backwater zone upstream.
                           •        To sustain the aquatic and wildlife in the reduced flow zone below the diversion dam the
                           result of model studies recommended a riparian release of 4 m3/s water from the dam during the dry
                           season and an additional 2 m3/s would be provided during religious events.
                           •        The locations of project sites including the transmission line alignment and substations were
                           carefully sited to protect major settlement, school, hospital and cultural, religious and
                           environmentally sensitive area.
                           •        Provision of 1 % investment from the project net revenues for rural electrification program
                           of surrounding areas of the project.
                           •        Allocation of US$ 4.3 million for environmental measures excluding in built contractors
                           costs.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Kali Gandaki A Plant has been under commercial operation since August 2002. The Environmental
                           and Social Studies Department (ESSD) of the NEA has carried out a post-construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Impact Study of the project. ESSD staff completed operation phase environmental
                           and social monitoring activities of the project for two year (2005-2006) and prepared an
                           Environmental and Social Operation Manual for the project for submission to the Asian
                           Development Bank.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
                           Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          TBD

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No               No pest management activities are foreseen
                                                                                 under the project.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   Yes                           The Holy Stone at Set Beni at the end of the
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         reservoir would require further protective and
                                                                                                                                 strengthening works. These will be designed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 and implemented under the project.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     Yes                           There are indigenous communities in the project
                                                                                                                                 areas. They may be affected by construction
                                                                                                                                 impacts. Project planning will screen and
                                                                                                                                 identify such groups. Consultations will be
                                                                                                                                 carried out with them over the proposed project,
                                                                                                                                 their views and perceptions of the project,
                                                                                                                                 impact assessment and design of mitigation
                                                                                                                                 measures. A policy framework on indigenous
                                                                                                                                 peoples will be developed and included in the
                                                                                                                                 ESMF.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The proposed project is not expected to have
                                 4.12                                                                                            any land acquisition or resettlement issues.
                                                                                                                                 However, an assessment will be carried out over
                                                                                                                                 possible social impacts under the project. A
                                                                                                                                 resettlement program was designed and
                                                                                                                                 implemented under the Kali Gandaki
                                                                                                                                 Hydropower Project. The program was
                                                                                                                                 completed in 2001. A review will be conducted
                                                                                                                                 of the program implementation performance
                                                                                                                                 and, if there are any outstanding issues,
                                                                                                                                 necessary mitigation measures will be proposed
                                                                                                                                 and implemented under this project.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         Yes                           Currently the documents fulfilling the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 requirements for Dam Safety are missing.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             Not applicable to KGA.
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not located in a disputed area, nor
                                 7.60                                                                                            is the project area likely to become one in the
                                                                                                                                 foreseeable future.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 17-Dec-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The project is conducting review of implementation performance of the social and environment
                                      program under the past KGAHPRP and an assessment of possible social and environmental
                                      impacts under this proposed project. The objectives of the review assignment are to:(i)evaluate the
                                      social and environmental management and performance of the Kali Gandaki A Hydropower Plant;
                                      (ii) identify any social and environmental issues that are outstanding, (iii) identify new social and
                                      environmental issues that have become apparent recently, and (iv) identify and assess potential




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             social and environmental consequences of the proposed rehabilitation works to be funded under
                             the proposed World Bank project.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Pravin Karki

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                         Date: 08-Oct-2012
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Jyoti Shukla (SM)                               Date: 12-Oct-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
