                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA3330
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Liberia                            Project ID:    P133445
                            Project Name:      Liberia Accelerated Electricity Expansion Project (LACEEP) (P133445)
                            Task Team          Clemencia Torres De Mastl
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          08-Apr-2013                        Estimated   30-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTG2                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (50%), General energy sector
                                              (25%), Thermal Power Generation (15%), Hydropower (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Corporate governance (30%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery
                                              (35%), Infrastructure services for private sector developm ent (20%), Other
                                              Private Sector Development (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      35.00           Total Bank Financing:                    35.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                  35.00
                              Total                                                                                        35.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The project development objectives are to increase access to electricity and strengthen institutional
                           capacity in the electricity sector.



                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                         3. Project Description
                         Key Challenges: To support the GoL ambitious goals for an accelerated expansion of electricity
                         services in Liberia until 2030. The proposed project focuses on three of the most pressing issues that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         need to be addressed for the electricity sector in Liberia to be able to embark on a sustainable
                         development path. The first aspect is the expansion of the transmission and distribution grid that
                         today is limited in Monrovia and practically nonexistent in the rest of the country, in order to provide
                         access to electricity services. The second issue is the importance of creating the conditions that will
                         facilitate the shift from diesel to HFO-based thermal generation for the country to effectively benefit
                         from the price differential of the two fuels on the international market. Finally the third aspect is the
                         strengthening of the institutional capacity within the government to lead the development of the
                         electricity sector.

                         The proposed project consists of the following three components:

                         Component 1: Extension of electricity transmission and distribution systems (estimated cost: US$
                         19.72 million).

                         This sub-component will provide access to electricity to about 86,209 new users located not only in
                         Monrovia but also outside of the capital, along the corridor to the town of Kakata. The new users will
                         represent a diverse mix of residential users (from low to higher income), small business, institutional
                         consumers and a few agro industrial customers. The objective of this component is to continue the
                         expansion of services to the population in general, while reaching out in particular in Monrovia to 40
                         to 50 business and institutional customers with a demand larger than this of residential users.
                         Broadening the base of customers will contribute to improve LEC’s financial performance while
                         achieving the goal of expanding services to the population.

                         The scope of work under this component is based on the short-term investment program defined by
                         MLME and LEC that aims at extending electricity services both in Monrovia and to three economic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         corridors outside the capital: Kakata, Bomen Hill and the airport. In particular, the proposed project
                         will finance the transmission and distribution investments for the corridor of Monrovia-Kakata and
                         the investments for extending the services in Monrovia at the distribution level. The component is
                         divided into three sub-components, according to the implementation arrangement needed for their
                         implementation as follows:

                         -       Sub-component 1-A. Extension of transmission and distribution system to Kakata. The sub-
                         component will finance (i) the construction of a 66 kV sub-transmission line between the Paynesville
                         substation in Monrovia and the town of Kakata; (ii) the construction of a 66/22 kV substation in
                         Kakata; (iii) the construction of both 22 kV and low voltage distribution lines, including the
                         connections to new consumers along the Monrovia-Kakata corridor and in the town of Kakata.

                         -        Sub-component 1-B. Extension of the distribution system in Monrovia. This sub-component
                         will finance the extension of electricity services within the service area of the management
                         contractor. This will include the infrastructure for distribution lines from Paynesville and its
                         surrounding in about nine communities, as well as the connection of 40 to 50 large customers in
                         various parts of the city.

                         -       Sub-component 1-C. Preparation and implementation of the component for the extension of
                         transmission and distribution systems. This includes detailed design, safeguards instruments and


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         other preparatory consultancies for the transmission and distribution investments. This also includes
                         the hiring of consultants with financial management and procurement expertise to strengthen the
                         Project Implementation in LEC and the possibility of hiring additional experts if need arises after the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management contractor has departed in 2016.

                         Component 2. Construction of HFO facilities for off-loading, transport and storage, of (HFO) and
                         support for optimization of HFO procurement (estimated cost: US$10.56 million)

                         This component supports Government strategy of shifting generation capacity from diesel to HFO-
                         based thermal generation to reduce the cost of electricity. Increasing generation capacity with
                         thermal plants running on HFO to expand services and reduce the cost of electricity is only possible
                         however, if there is a reliable and sufficient supply of HFO at prices significantly cheaper than diesel.
                         There are both physical and commercial aspects in the optimization of the supply of fuel. This
                         component supports both aspects of the process.

                         On the physical side, the component finances the construction of facilities to offload, store and pump
                         HFO from sea tankers with capacity in the range 30,000 – 40,000 tons, in order to minimize unit
                         price of freight. The HFO will be offload at the BOMC Pier of the China Union concession and will
                         be transported about 1.5 kilometers to a large storage tank in Bushrod Island on LEC’s premises. A
                         legal agreement between the GoL and the concessionaire China Union will govern the access and use
                         of the pier facilities and an agreement between the Government and LEC will ensure that the
                         facilities are properly operated and maintained.

                         On the commercial side, the component provides technical assistance to the GoL to optimize its
                         procurement of fuel in the international markets and define the most adequate fiscal regime for
                         importing and selling HFO used in electricity generation for LEC. In parallel with the support
                         provided under the LACEEP, the first Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC-1), currently under
                         preparation also supports this open, competitive approach tot eh procurement of HFO and includes a
                         condition to the effect in the Matrix of Policy actions, whereby an open competitive procurement
Public Disclosure Copy




                         process of HFO used in electricity generation for LEC would be implemented by December 2014 to
                         ensure the lowest CIF cost of the fuel. If completed on time, HFO will be available when the various
                         HFO-based generation plants currently in the pipeline will come into operations.

                         This component is thus composed of the following activities:

                         -       Sub-component 2-A Construction of HFO transport and storage facilities. This sub-
                         component will support: (i) construction (supply and installation) at the Bong Mining Company site,
                         adjacent to the pier or to the existing storage tank, of a pump station to transport HFO to the storage
                         tanks located at the Bushrod Island site; (ii) construction of a pipeline connecting the Bong Mining
                         Company and the Bushrod island HFO storage tanks; and (iii) construction of a new storage tank at
                         Bushrod Island site, with capacity of approximately 16,200 cubic meters, equivalent to the
                         consumption of generating plants totaling 30 MW at base load during 3 months (180 m3/day x 90
                         days).

                         -       Sub-component 2-B. Detailed design and supervision of HFO Infrastructure investments.
                         This sub component will finance the consultancy services needed to prepare the component, such as
                         the detailed engineering design, preparation of bidding documents, and the contract of the owner’s
                         engineer who will supervise construction works.



                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         -       Sub-component 2-C Technical assistance to the government for optimizing the procurement
                         of HFO. The project will finance technical assistance to the government to (i) optimize the
                         procurement of HFO in international markets; (ii) define a pricing regime for HFO used in electricity
Public Disclosure Copy




                         generation and a fiscal regime for HFO imports and sales.

                         Component 3. Technical Assistance to MLME. Support for the expansion of supply options and for
                         the strengthening of the sector’s institutional capacity (estimated cost: US$ 4.72 million).

                         This component provides support to MLME in specific areas where the Ministry has a key
                         responsibility, as the entity responsible to lead the development of the electricity sector. It will also
                         support the overall strengthening of MLMEs’ institutional capacity. In particular, this component
                         supports the Government’s decision to attract private investments into generation as a way of
                         leveraging the large needs for public funds in transmission and distribution. The nature of such
                         specific transaction may include the sale to LEC of surplus electricity generated by large
                         concessionaires or by greenfield plants (independent power producers or IPPs), depending on the
                         best option identified under the LCPDP. In all cases, attracting the private sector into the business of
                         supplying electricity to LEC may require the use of credit and risk mitigation mechanisms. The use
                         of such mitigation mechanism, if needed, could also be an option for the procurement of HFO for
                         electricity generation. This component also provides institutional support to MLME to strengthen its
                         capacity to fulfill its core responsibilities and implement the project. It will include specifically the
                         following activities:

                         -        Sub-component 3-A Technical assistance to attract private investment for electricity
                         generation. Activities under this component will assist MLME in the legal, technical and commercial
                         structuring of the transaction.

                         -        Sub-component 3-B Training and provision of short term expertise and financing of selected
                         studies, including (i) the hiring of different experts such as senior financial management expert and a
                         senior procurement specialist, and (iii) studies needed for the medium-term development of supply
Public Disclosure Copy




                         options, notably in hydroelectricity.

                         -       Subcomponent 3-C. Cost of managing the project, including the audit. This sub-component
                         will provide the resources needed based on the financial and procurement assessment of MLME to
                         implement the components under its management.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project location is the Greater Monrovia area. The economic corridor included for electrification
                         in this project goes from Monrovia to Kakata. Exact locations of the distribution line routes are not
                         known as of yet, which is why the safeguard instruments are an Environmental and Social
                         Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Liba C. Strengerowski-Feldblyum (AFTN2)
                         Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (AFTCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)




                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes            While the general site of some of the works is
                         BP 4.01                                         known (e.g. Component 2), the scope and types
                                                                         of the works are yet to be finalized. Thus, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         proposed project will build on the Environmental
                                                                         and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                                                                         prepared for the energy sector in the context of
                                                                         the Liberia Electricity System Enhancement
                                                                         Project (LESEP) by the implementing agency
                                                                         LEC. This document contains the provisions
                                                                         necessary to guide the preparation and
                                                                         implementation of activities in the energy sector.
                                                                         The ESMF has been updated to reflect some new
                                                                         LACEEP project details and has been consulted
                                                                         upon and disclosed both in-country and in the
                                                                         World Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No             In the immediate project area there are no
                                                                         natural habitats. The project is located in an urban
                                                                         and peri-urban area.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No             There are no forests in the immediate project
                                                                         area.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No             No pesticides will be used or procured in the
                                                                         project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes            The LACEEP ESMF includes a “chance find
                         BP 4.11                                         procedure? which will be included in all
                                                                         construction contracts. Physical Cultural
                                                                         Resources which might be affected are some
                                                                         graves in the Right-Of-Way. Contractors will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         instructed to avoid these graves.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No             There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                         area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes            The policy applies to potential investments in
                         4.12                                            the 66 kV sub-transmission grid and the 22 kV
                                                                         and other low voltage networks that are intended
                                                                         to delivery electricity to end-users. Since the
                                                                         process for undertaking a technical design,
                                                                         including location of the network facilities, will
                                                                         be finalized during implementation phase, a
                                                                         Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) based on
                                                                         the one prepared for LESEP has been updated,
                                                                         consulted upon, and disclosed before appraisal.
                                                                         The RPF contains guidance on preparation of
                                                                         potential Resettlement Action Plans (RAP),
                                                                         which might need to be prepared, consulted upon,
                                                                         disclosed and implemented in the future, as
                                                                         appropriate.




                                                                 Page 5 of 9
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               The project does not include or depend on any
                                                                                dam.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No                  The project does not depend on water from an
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                international waterway.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  There are no disputed areas in the project area.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Under component 1, extension of electricity transmission and distribution systems, the exact
                              locations for new lines and subsequently the exact scope and type of impacts are not known. In
                              component 2, the general site of the works is known, but the scope and types of works have not
                              been finalized. OP 4.01 is thus triggered to cover the environmental impact, related to the
                              installation of the distribution equipment, the fuel supply lines and storage facilities. The
                              environmental impacts are expected to be limited due to the use of existing rights of ways and
                              premises in the urban areas of Monrovia. The proposed project will build on the safeguards
                              instrument prepared previously for the energy sector in the context of the Liberia Electricity
                              System Enhancement Project (LESEP) by the implementing agency LEC, which is the
                              Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). This document contains the
                              provisions necessary to guide the preparation and implementation of activities in the energy sector
                              and it includes a “chance find procedure? to ensure compliance with OP 4.11. This ESMF has
                              been updated to reflect the LACEEP project details and has been consulted upon and disclosed
                              both in-country and in the World Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal. The implementing agencies of
                              the Project, the Ministry of Lands, Mines and Energy (MLME) and the Liberia Electricity
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Corporation (LEC), will be responsible for the implementation of both the ESMF and the RPF.

                             OP 4.12 is triggered to cover clearance of land for the network right of way (RoW) under
                             component 1, which may require some land acquisition leading to relocation and displacement of
                             households and/or assets. In case any land acquisition or compensation becomes necessary, the
                             costs will be covered by the Borrower. The project will prepare before appraisal a Resettlement
                             Policy Framework (RPF) with guidelines for completion of a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), as
                             needed, in case any land acquisition, and/or restriction of access to resources should occur.
                             Similarly to the ESMF, the RPF also builds upon the sector-wide RPF previously prepared for
                             Liberia. The updated document will be disclosed both in-country and in the World Bank InfoShop
                             prior to appraisal.

                             Under component 2, sub-component 2-A covers the rehabilitation of HFO transport and storage
                             facilities at the pier in the Port of Monrovia port as well as the construction of new storage tanks
                             on the South side of the pier. There is no land acquisition or restriction of access to resources
                             anticipated at these locations. Similarly, the construction of a small diameter new pipeline of
                             around 1.5 km length that will connect the pier, the new storage tanks and Bushrod Island thermal
                             plant, is not expected to involve any land acquisition or restriction of access to resources as it is
                             within an existing RoW on which there are no settlements. The Bushrod Island thermal plant site
                             is located on the premises of the Liberia Electricity Corporation (LEC) and there is no


                                                                        Page 6 of 9
                           encroachment at this location.

                           The environmental impacts include anticipated HFO thermal power plant operations, mostly air
Public Disclosure Copy




                           pollution by NOx and particles. The ESMF includes hazardous wastes management practices
                           during construction and operation and other related measures regarding the management of public/
                           occupational health and safety issues. These might include issues such as potential PCB
                           contamination from existing facilities. An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
                           and Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) will be prepared for the project after
                           the application of screening procedures. The ESIA/ESMPs preparation will be guided by the
                           World Bank approved ESMF for the original project. The ESIA/ESMPs will be prepared,
                           reviewed and cleared by the Bank, and disclosed in-country and in the Infoshop within six months
                           of the effectiveness of the project, and before any construction starts.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The project is in environmental category B. It is not anticipated that any serious indirect or long
                           term environmental or social impacts will be caused by the project. The project is expected to
                           bring positive benefits to communities, individuals and businesses. The environmental concerns
                           arising from the possible construction of the transmission networks include minor loss of
                           vegetation cover in the peri-urban areas in the Monrovia vicinity, noise, dust and waste generation
                           as well as occupational/public health and safety issues. When in operation, the distribution line
                           would need to be monitored to evaluate safety, visual intrusion, and problems associated with
                           repair and maintenance etc.

                           The area around the existing HFO tanks, which will be rehabilitated by the LESEP project that is
                           implemented simultaneously with LACEEP, at Bushrod Island is polluted with HFO. This HFO
                           pollution happened during the civil war due to neglect of the facilities. All the HFO polluted soil
                           will be taken out before the rehabilitation of the tanks can start and will be stored in a concrete
                           confined area or treated to international standards. The exact method of disposal has still to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           determined, but the method selected will be in compliance with World Bank Safeguard Policies
                           and Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines of April 2007. The risks of the existing polluted
                           area and the disposal of HFO polluted soil are local and manageable. The risks of a HFO spill
                           during operation will be small and the HFO spill with local and are related to filling the HFO
                           storage tanks at the port from moored vessels, transport through the HFO pipeline of around 35 cm
                           diameter and 1.5 km length and HFO storage in the rehabilitated tanks in Bushrod Island.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            The line routing for the proposed networks has not been finalized. During the feasibility study,
                           alternative routing to minimize environmental and social impacts will be assessed. In particular,
                           the project will ensure that the routing will avoid densely populated areas, especially avoiding
                           areas where institutional structures (e.g. schools, churches and health centers) may be displaced
                           and where graves might be affected (a chance find procedure will be included in all contractor
                           contracts).
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The implementing agencies of the Project, the Ministry of Lands, Mines and Energy (MLME)
                           and the Liberia Electricity Corporation (LEC), will be responsible for the implementation of both
                           the ESMF and the RPF, in their respective components, that is component 1 for LEC and the other


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                           components for MLME. LEC has started to set up a separate environment and social coordinating
                           team. The LEC has also hired several consultants who have been engaged to prepare RAPs and
                           ESIAs. To ensure smooth implementation of safeguards instruments, the project will provide
Public Disclosure Copy




                           capacity building similar to the technical assistance programs to LEC that have been set up for
                           similar electricity sector projects in Liberia previously (e.g. LESEP and LESEP II), which are
                           proceeding well.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The project will benefit the communities in and around the Monrovia urban center, including the
                           peri-urban areas in the outskirts of the city as well as Kakata. In addition to households who will
                           greatly benefit from improved electricity access, the other beneficiaries would be small businesses
                           and industries who have expressed demand for more reliable electricity. Government agencies and
                           social infrastructure (schools, health centers, churches) are also expected to benefit from increased
                           energy access. Throughout the updates of the ESMF and RPF, extensive stakeholder consultations,
                           including with community and greater Monrovia urban leaders, have been undertaken by LEC.
                           Key issues raised included information on environmental impacts, how monitoring of
                           environmental impacts would be managed, and possible resettlement issues arising from
                           construction of the HFO pipeline.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Apr-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Liberia                                                          09-Apr-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Apr-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Liberia                                                          09-Apr-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [       ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?



                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader: Clemencia Torres De Mastl
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name:                                                   Date:
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Meike van Ginneken (SM)                           Date: 11-Apr-2013




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
