                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC926

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Aug-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Benin                            Project ID:      P122950
                            Project Name:      Benin Cities Support Program (P122950)
                            Task Team          Kwabena Amankwah-Ayeh
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          26-Feb-2013                      Estimated        04-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTU2                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector:            Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (31%), Sanitation (31%), Sub-
                                               national government administration (16%), Solid waste manageme nt (15%),
                                               Other social services (7%)
                            Theme:             Urban services and housing for the poor (50%), Municipal governance and
                                               institution building (24%), Decentralization (13%), Particip ation and civic
                                               engagement (13%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  60.00
                              Total                                                                        60.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project’s development objective is to improve urban management to increase access to urban
                           services in targeted cities of Benin.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project aims at supporting GoB in (i) strengthening the capacities of Benin’s municipalities in
                           managing and implementing urban services, (ii) addressing the infrastructure gaps in Benin’s cities,
                           (iii) strengthening and further enhancing the intergovernmental fiscal framework and thereby
                           building the basis for a full-fledged devolution.
                         The proposed project comprises four components as follows:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component A: Service delivery improvement through infrastructure rehabilitation, maintenance and
                         expansion (Base cost: IDA US$44 million equivalent). This component will support the
                         improvement of infrastructure service delivery through rehabilitation and expansion of urban
                         community infrastructure in 10 urban municipalities of Benin to improve their effectiveness as
                         economic growth poles. Demand driven sub-projects financed under the project would be taken from
                         the existing and updated Community Development Plans of the 10 participating urban
                         Municipalities. These projects may include, among others, urban drainage systems, paved urban
                         roads, water supply, sanitation facilities, Solid Waste Management, covered markets, lorry/
                         articulated vehicle/car parks, safe toilets for primary and secondary schools, health centers and
                         others. Project Beneficiary Municipalities are Cotonou, Abomey, Parakou, Porto Novo, Abomey
                         Calavi, Lokossa, Kandi, Boichon, Nantetengu and Jugwu. These were selected using a uniform
                         criteria that sought to identify readiness of Municipalities for inclusion in the project including: (i)
                         community-participated, well drawn up community development plans that have priority investments
                         identified; (ii) size of the population; (iii) Municipality revenue set aside for maintenance of existing
                         infrastructure (averaged for the last five years); (iv) existing and working Community Development
                         Associations (Comité du Development de Quartier-CDQs) and SAICs; (v) local economic
                         development activities already established and working within the commune; (vi) other development
                         partners’ projects that the Municipalities are participants; (vii) level of poverty; (viii) availability and
                         qualifications of technical staff to lead the project implementation within the Municipality/commune;
                         and (ix) location with regard to the Regional structure of the decentralization efforts and possibility
                         of servicing these cities as growth poles for development of the country.

                         Component B: Municipal and Urban Management (Base cost: IDA US$6 million equivalent). This
                         component is targeting principally the ten main cities of Benin to improve governance, municipal
                         management, and fiscal performance through the provision of technical assistance, training, and
                         equipment. Upfront training and management enhancement support in procurement, project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management, financial management, social and environmental safeguards, monitoring and evaluation
                         and disaster management, and others that will be identified as specific needs of the participating
                         Municipalities once the project implementation gets underway, would be financed by the project for
                         all participating Municipalities (may just be refresher courses for the 6 old cities which were
                         beneficiaries of PGUD-II.. This will be done towards making the cities capable of undertaking
                         proper physical and financial audits to better inform their development planning for services delivery.

                         • Institutional strengthening and capacity building for municipalities—Capacity building in
                         investment planning and programming, financial management, procurement, safeguards, monitoring
                         and evaluation, development and maintenance of infrastructure and services: The project will
                         improve the national approach to development through enhancing city-wide planning tools,
                         preparation of city-level urban technical and financial audits and performance-based contractual
                         arrangements for service delivery as a complement to local development plans in all 10 participating
                         cities. These municipal audits would be instituted as annual exercises that would help on continuous
                         basis to build reliable baseline information on the organization, financial structure, and investment
                         needs of these cities and provide the basis for a coherent municipal management and investment
                         programing in the future. Strategic planning tools including procedures for setting priorities in
                         demand-driven sub-project choices that will be consolidated into the annual investment plans
                         (program) to be approved by the municipal councils for implementation will be deployed to
                         strengthen urban management in the participating Municipalities.
                          Furthermore, the proposed project will support the following:
                         (a)      Acquisition of digitalized maps for three largest target cities (Cotonou, Porto Novo and
                         Parakou) and the appropriate software to process them;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (b)      Development of appropriate urban master plans for three main cities (Cotonou, Parakou and
                         Porto Novo) and identification of priority littoral investment plan;
                         (c)      Developing strategic sanitation plans for all 10 participating cities and identification of
                         priority sanitation investment program for each participating city;
                         (d)      Preparation, execution and monitoring of maintenance programs in all participating cities;
                         and
                         (e)      Training.

                         In addition, the project will provide the following core areas of support, targeting weaknesses in the
                         current fiscal transfer framework for local governments in Benin:
                         (a) Support to resource mobilization reforms and implementation: The project will support technical
                         assistance (TA) and supply of equipment (software as well as some hardware) to help participating
                         Municipalities increase communal revenues through better tax payer identification and better
                         management of revenue-generating systems and facilities. Local resource mobilization in
                         participating cities will be improved through studies that will identify weaknesses in their systems
                         and will include, among others:
                         (b)      Updating the local fiscal base: diagnostic of the taxation potential, evaluation, updating of
                         fiscal registers and enrollment, and support to tax collection procedures to restore fiscal potential in
                         the participating cities; including the diagnostic, preparation, and publication of a local taxation
                         manual; and
                         (c)      Studies and technical assistance to all participating municipalities to develop management
                         models for revenue generating facilities such as markets, bus stations, etc. that already exist of will
                         be built during the project’s life.

                         Component C: Deepening Decentralization and Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer System (IFTS)
                         (Base cost: IDA US$6 million equivalent). The component will support two principal areas (i)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         overall national reforms of the intergovernmental fiscal framework and (ii) support to strengthen the
                         fiscal base in municipalities.
                         With regard to fiscal reforms, the projects aims at supporting the Government’s drive to further
                         decentralize fiscal, political and social responsibilities to local governments to increase service
                         delivery.. The main focus of the component is to work with Government agencies to restructure the
                         existing weak Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer System IFTS including FADeC, PONADEC and
                         CONAFIL and improve the predictability and overall functionality of the system (Annex III details
                         the whole field of Inter Governmental Fiscal Transfers mechanism as it currently stands in Benin).
                         The proposed project wi ll provide support to help GoB renew, restructure and strengthen the
                         CONAFIL system of IGFT and enable GoB to better channel its own funds to LGs through this
                         existing mechanism. This will be achieved through technical assistance services; including (i)
                         reviews and analysis of the existing IFTS, (ii) support to the State and the Municipalities to develop
                         and strengthen regulations, principles and functionality of allocations and transfers, (iii) technical
                         assistance to CONAFIL to properly fulfill its mandate, and (iv) consultancy support to provide
                         revision of overall policies and regulations guiding the IFTS as a whole. The objective of this
                         support is to make the overall IFTS fully operational and based on formulas accepted by all
                         participating Municipalities and the State.

                         Component D: Institutional Strengthening, Monitoring & Evaluation and Project Management (Base
                         cost: IDA US$4 million equivalent). This component proposes to support activities aimed at
                         strengthening: (i) implementing agencies to better support and monitor municipal development; (ii)
                         the local private construction sector to improve its capacity to deliver quality infrastructure; and (iii)
                         support to project management, monitoring and evaluation of project results, and targeted training for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the Technical Secretariat and project implementing entity IE staff.


                         This proposed project is a follow on effort to scale up the PGUD-II project activities in order to
                         enhance the impact of a project that performed very well and that established a solid basis for
                         improved municipal management and service delivery. The Bank Team had envisaged a different
                         tool (switch from working on “building the pipes for Governments and cities? to “building the
                         institutions that build the pipes through systematization of the intergovernmental fiscal transfer
                         mechanism) for bring benefits of this project to the cities of Benin. In the Team’s project preparation
                         dialogue with Government, effort was made to shift focus from doing what was done in PGUD-II
                         (fixing the pipes) towards a new era of urban operation for Benin (fixing the institutions that fix the
                         pipes). However, Government recognizing the impact of PGUD-II on the cities that participated in
                         PGUD-II (the demand from the population, the enhanced revenue generation, the better informed
                         citizenry and communications between groups in the communities for project planning,
                         implementation monitoring, etc) made a specific request to enhance and expand the benefits of
                         PGUD-II to more of its large cities and then use this project to better prepare the ground for the
                         eventual next step in municipal development for Benin—employing Intergovernmental Fiscal
                         Transfer (IGFT) mechanism to direct cities systems for local/municipal development. Until a well
                         structured system for sharing of national resources between the state and local governments was
                         established, the GoB did not find CONAFIL (the supposed IGFT mechanism) to be transparent,
                         usable and effective for the kinds of things the Team had discussed with Government as the first line
                         of order for the preparation of this project. It is envisaged that through this project more of what was
                         done successfully in the PGUD-II project can be expanded to all large cities of Benin and ready them
                         for the next level of urban management that will be heavily geared towards enabling the State to
                         allow its own decentralization policy to foster better local urban development.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Specifically, the proposed operation would finance investments to improve the service delivery of the
                         10 participating cities and to help address a large infrastructure backlog in cities that may be
                         benefiting for the first time from an IDA financed project. The Government-decreed project
                         implementation committee has carried out the following activities which will support swift
                         implementation of the expanded activities: (i) screening of cities for eligibility conducted according
                         to the eligibility and appraisal criteria for over 20 subprojects from all the 10 participating local
                         governments, (ii) technical, environmental impact assessment and socioeconomic studies are ongoing
                         and requests for proposal for technical design and tender documents are being prepared and will be
                         ready before effectiveness. Similarly, GoB is reviewing the PGUD-II ESMF and RPF in an attempt
                         to review, revise and adapt them to the current project. These will be submitted to the Bank for
                         clearance and then disclosed both in-country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the               safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project locations are 10 selected urban municipalities of Cotonou, Abomey, Parakou, Porto
                         Novo, Abomey Calavi, Lokossa, Kandi, Boichon, Nantetengu and Jugwu.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The borrower, through the Benin Environmental Protection Agency (ABE) has knowledge of Bank
                         safeguards policies having supported many Bank projects both on approving ToRs, EIA studies and
                           EA Audits. Staffs of the parent Ministry have ample knowledge of Bank safeguards policies having
                           participated in various Bank safeguards policies training sessions facilitated by the PGUD-2 project.
                           Building on this, the proposed project will further strengthen the capacity of environmental staff in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the ministry to assist in the implementation of the ESMF and RPF; and would also benefit from the
                           assistance of the Bank’s environmental and social safeguards specialist in the project team.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
                           Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTN1)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The proposed project is classified as
                           BP 4.01                                              environmental Category B because no activity
                                                                                funded under the project is expected to have a
                                                                                significant negative environmental or social
                                                                                impact. The proposed project triggers the OP
                                                                                4.01 on environmental assessment. Activities
                                                                                under the proposed project are not expected to
                                                                                generate any adverse environmental or social
                                                                                effects, as a large part of the project is geared
                                                                                towards sustainable improvement and
                                                                                development of urban infrastructures. Since the
                                                                                location, extent and magnitude of the
                                                                                investments are not known at this stage of
                                                                                project preparation, the appropriate instruments
                                                                                to prepare before the appraisal is an
                                                                                Environmental and Social Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                Framework (ESMF). The existing ESMF of
                                                                                PGUD-2 will be revised, updated and adapted
                                                                                for this project with the understanding that
                                                                                EIAs, EMPs, RAPS or ARAPs will be prepared
                                                                                as dictated by the environmental and social
                                                                                screening checklist contained in the ESMF. For
                                                                                due diligence, the ESMF will have to be
                                                                                disclosed in-country and at the info-shop prior
                                                                                to appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           Interventions on the proposed project might lead
                                 4.12                                                                                            to land take, restriction of access to assets or
                                                                                                                                 sources of livelihood. For due diligence, since
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 the location, extent and magnitude of the
                                                                                                                                 investments are not known at this stage of
                                                                                                                                 project preparation, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                                 Framework (RPF) will be prepared and
                                                                                                                                 disclosed in-country and at the infoshop prior to
                                                                                                                                 appraisal. The RPF of the PGUD-2 will be
                                                                                                                                 revised, up-dated and adapted for this project.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 04-Feb-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the ISDS-Appraisal Stage. The ESMF
                                      and RPF will be approved and disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Kwabena Amankwah-Ayeh
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 02-Aug-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Alexander E. Bakalian (SM)                                                                                           Date: 29-Jun-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
