                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA2451
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Jan-2013, 17-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          China                              Project ID:    P123729
                            Project Name:     China: Jiangxi Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Project (P123729)
                            Task Team         Binyam Reja
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         24-Sep-2012                        Estimated   13-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    EASCS                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Aviation (80%), Public administration- Transportation (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Other urban development (80%), Regional integration (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        105.13               Total Bank Financing:         50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                              Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  55.13
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     50.00
                              Total                                                                                    105.13
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve airline connectivity in Northeastern Jiangxi
                           Province and demonstrate the environmental sustainability of the development and operation of the
                           Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed Project will have two components: (i) Airport Infrastructure Development, and (ii)

                                                                      Page 1 of 12
                         Institutional Development and Capacity Building.

                         Component 1a: The Airport Infrastructure Development component will include the construction and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         installation of the following activities:

                         (a)      Airfield – construction of runway, taxiway, etc;
                         (b)      Terminal building;
                         (c)      Air traffic control;
                         (d)      Freight Facility;
                         (e)      Supporting Infrastructure Facility (fuel storage farm, water supply, power supply, fire
                         stations, heating, storm/water management, parking, fence, etc);
                         (f)      Environmental Management Plan -- Implementation of the EIA/EMP recommendations for
                         inside and outside of the airport, including those related to access roads and re-routing of rural
                         connectivity;
                         (g)      Land Acquisition and Resettlement and Rehabilitation of Project Affected Families (financed
                         fully by government own funds). This also includes forest revegetation, accessibility restoration and
                         replantation.
                         (h)      Auxiliary Facility (office building, staff quarters, etc); and
                         (i)      Service vehicles.

                         Component 1b: Storm water reuse system and ground aircraft auxiliary power unit. During the
                         course of project preparation, the PMO identified additional measures to enhance the green airport
                         design, which were not included in the original FSR. Specifically, the PMO proposed the inclusion of
                         a storm water reuse system and a ground aircraft auxiliary power unit to further enhance the
                         environment sustainability. After a review by the Bank, it was decided that these activities would be
                         included as it would enhance the project “green airport? objectives.

                         In addition, the Shangrao Municipal Government (SMG) will be constructing an access road (4.65
                         km) to link the proposed airport with the nearest main road, as well as other utility infrastructure. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         access road will be fully financed by SMG outside of the proposed project description. Nonetheless,
                         the safeguard policies agreed for the proposed project will apply for the access road, as well as the
                         other civil works associated with the airport.

                         Component 2: The Institutional Development and Capacity Building Component will finance the
                         following consultant services, studies and training:

                         (a)       Project Management Consultant to provide advisory services to support the PMO and SSAC
                         with project coordination and monitoring;
                         (b)       Management Consultant to Develop Airport Operation Model and support SSAC to prepare
                         and implement Human Resource Development plan, Operational and financial manual (in
                         accordance China’s company’s law), Compliance with CAAC regulations and international practices,
                         and Develop marketing plan to attract airlines and assist in service agreement negotiations with
                         airlines;
                         (c)       Technical assistance to support the PMO to (i) document the lessons learned in developing
                         Green Airport concept, (ii) to share their experience widely with other potential cities considering
                         building green airport in China though wider dissemination and holding workshops and road shows
                         in selected cities; and (iii) other civil aviation related studies;
                         (d)       Training and study tours covering several aspects of airport construction and operations.



                                                                       Page 2 of 12
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Shangrao is located in the NE of Jiangxi Province bordering Zhejiang Province, Fujian Province and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Anhui Province. It has 12 cities and counties under its jurisdiction with a land area of 22,791 km2.
                         Shangrao falls within the sub-tropical humid monsoon climate zone. Mean annual temperature is
                         from 16.7 to 18.3ºC, and mean annual rainfall is 1,901 mm. The prevailing wind is from NE or NEE
                         in spring and winter; and from South and SW in summer and autumn. Average wind velocity is
                         1.4m/s. The terrain of the Shangrao city is dominated by small hills and valley plains.

                         The airport will acquire a land of about 1.6 km2 featuring low hills that rise from 90 m to 116 m. The
                         proposed site for the airport is 8 km away from Shangrao city downtown. Due to intensive human
                         activities, native vegetation in the airport site has already been replaced. The land required for the
                         airport features low hills covered by shrubs, woods, few farmlands, unused land, and water ponds.
                         There are no ecological sensitive areas, such as nature reserve, national forest parks, or natural
                         habitats protected in the proposed project site. No rare or endangered species of flora and fauna in the
                         project area have been identified.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Feng Ji (EASCS)
                         Jun Zeng (EASCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               The policy is triggered. An EIA with an English-
                          BP 4.01                                             language executive summary and an EMP has
                                                                              been prepared for all identified project activities.
                                                                              An Environmental Management Framework is
                                                                              also prepared for a activities that are not fully
                                                                              defined yet, most notably forsome activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              outside of the airport (access road and associated
                                                                              infrastructure). In addition environmental
                                                                              enhancement measures to the project such as
                                                                              green airport design approaches are included in
                                                                              the project design and financed through the loan.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No                Physical investment of the project will be in
                                                                              suburban area of Shangrao Municipality, about 8
                                                                              km south from the center of Shangrao. The
                                                                              project is not located within protected areas. The
                                                                              EA indicated that the project would not have the
                                                                              potential to cause any significant conversions or
                                                                              degradation of natural habitats.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No                The project will not finance activities that would
                                                                              involve significant conversion or degradation of
                                                                              critical forest areas as defined under the policy.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No                The proposed project will neither procure nor
                                                                              result in increased use of pesticides.




                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes              A cultural resources survey was conducted for
                            BP 4.11                                           all project sites. The field survey found that 137
                                                                              household graves are with the airport site. As
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              such these graves need to be relocated.
                                                                              Compensation for the relocation of household
                                                                              graves is included in the RAP. Chance finds
                                                                              procedures are included in the EMP.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No               The social screening done for the project
                                                                              concluded that no ethnic minority communities
                                                                              are present in, or have collective attachment to
                                                                              the project area. The project will be constructed
                                                                              within Houmentang of Zunqiao Township,
                                                                              Shangrao County, about 8 km south from
                                                                              downtown of Shangrao Municipality. During the
                                                                              site visit, no ethnic minority community has been
                                                                              identified within the project area.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes              There will be land acquisition and structure
                            4.12                                              demolition caused by the project construction.
                                                                              The main involuntary resettlement impact will
                                                                              include collective land acquisition, relocation of
                                                                              houses, and temporary land taking during project
                                                                              construction. Therefore, the Bank's policy on
                                                                              Involuntary Resettlement has been triggered and
                                                                              a Resettlement Action Plan has been prepared and
                                                                              disclosed by the client in both English and
                                                                              Chinese. Detailed resettlement impact surveys
                                                                              has been carried out during RAP preparation. A
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              Resettlement Policy Framework has also been
                                                                              prepared for activities outside of the airport
                                                                              (access road and associated infrastructure), as the
                                                                              exact alignment has not been fixed yet.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                            Projects on International        No                 Not Applicable.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 Not Applicable.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The major environmental consequences of the project and mitigation measures are described
                              below.

                             Major Environmental Impacts due to Construction


                                                                      Page 4 of 12
                         Construction will cause temporary impacts to the surrounding environment, including vegetation
                         loss, noise of machinery and trucks, vibration, dust, wastewater, and land acquisition and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         resettlement issues. If properly planned, construction impacts to neighborhoods, and the natural
                         environment can be avoided or minimized.

                         Soil Erosion. Construction works will involve clearing of vegetation in areas that are needed for
                         site works. Assessment of soil erosion caused by the project has been conducted. After balancing
                         cut and fill, the project will generate 80,000m3 spoil from airport construction.

                         Impacts on Surface Water. The construction of the airport will occupy 1.6km2 land and create an
                         impervious surface (~0.28km2) in an area that is now covered mainly by grassland, some brush,
                         woodlands and water ponds. Rapid runoff from this impervious area could have some impact on
                         natural hydrology in the vicinity of the airport. But this impact would be very limited because the
                         airport is located at the top of hills where the watersheds originate, and the area of land taken by
                         the airport construction is relatively very limited comparing with the areas of watersheds involved.
                         Stormwater runoff may include pollutants associated with leaks and spills of oil, diesel, and jet
                         fuels during operation and maintenance of ground service vehicles, and fuel storage and handling
                         activities.

                         Natural Habitats and Forestry. The project will not have the potential to cause any significant
                         conversions or degradation of natural forest or natural habitats. The project is not located within
                         protected areas. The project area has been deeply influenced by human activities, which consists
                         mainly of brush, grassland, clumps of second-growth trees, villages, farmland, and water ponds,
                         and unused land. Field survey has been conducted confirming that there is no endemic or unique
                         vegetation, nor any endangered animal species. Some of the areas are habitats for rodents, and
                         birds which are not endemic or unique. Therefore Natural Habitat (OP4.04) is not triggered by the
                         project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will occupy 104ha of second-growth trees where common species such as camphor,
                         pines, and firs can be found in the sub-tropical humid monsoon climate zone. The survey has
                         identified that 3,722 small camphor trees and cultivated saplings need to be transplanted in
                         accordance with national regulations.

                         Physical Cultural Resources. A cultural resources survey was conducted for all project sites, led by
                         local cultural resources bureau and EA consultant. The field survey found that 137 household
                         graves are with the airport site. As such these graves need to be relocated in consultation with the
                         affected families.

                         Impact on Irrigation System. Within or in the vicinity of the airport site, there are 36 small water
                         ponds which mainly provide the local farmers with minor irrigation water for their paddy fields.
                         The airport construction will reduce the irrigation water quantity by occupying water ponds or
                         their catchment areas. Assessment from Shangrao Water Resources Institute shows that
                         approximately 20ha(300mu) paddy farms will be affected by the project

                         Re-routing of Rural Roads and Power Electric Lines. The airport will interrupt two local rural road
                         (i.e. one will be cut off by the airport, the other will be slightly affected) and electric power line.
                         These will re-routed. The anticipated impacts are considered to be minor on the environment.



                                                                    Page 5 of 12
                         Resettlement site. One resettlement sites has been selected for 14 households to be relocated.

                         Airport Connecting Road, Associated Utility Pipelines, Construction of Temporary Access Road,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Burrow Pits, Disposal sites. A 4.65 km urban road and associated utility pipelines (i.e. water,
                         sewer, natural gas, and power lines) will be built to connect the airport with Shangrao downtown.
                         Temporary access road, burrow pits, and disposal sites may be required for these activities. The
                         anticipated impacts are considered to be minor on the environment. Though the connecting road
                         has the potential to increase noise in nearby area, the impacts are not expected to be significant due
                         to the small amount traffic vehicles serving the passengers to and from the airport.

                         Major Environmental Impacts due to Operation

                         Noise and Vibration Impacts. The most significant sources of noise and vibrations from airport
                         operations are aircraft during the landing and takeoff cycles. Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport is a
                         small feeder airport. Projected flights in the year of 2020 is 13.2 sorties/day, of which 73% takeoff
                         is during daytime(7:00-19:00), 15% in the evening (19:00-22:00) and 12% at night(22:00-7:00);
                         while 73% landing is during daytime(7:00-19:00), 27% in the evening (19:00-22:00), and none at
                         night(22:00-7:00). The assessment considered both Chinese national standards and the World
                         Bank Safeguards policies including the IFC’s EHS noise guidelines. To measure noise exposure in
                         the airport vicinity, EA used two noise indexes: Lwepcn a noise index based on the Perceived
                         Noise Level which is presented in Chinese standard, and LAeq, a noise index based on the
                         equivalent continuous sound level which is presented in the EHS guidelines. Noise modeling
                         shows that for the year of 2020, 20 households at two villages (i.e. Xiawutang, Tashuixujia) will
                         expose noise levels (LAeq) ranging from 56.3 to 56.7 dB(A) exceeding 55 dB(A) for daytime. 210
                         households at five villages (Xiawutang, Shangwutang, Beilong, Cangding, and Tashuixujia) will
                         expose 46.3-46.6 dB(A) noise levels exceeding 45 dB(A) for nighttime. 7 households at
                         Tashuixujia will expose maximum noise level 49.7 dB(A). As such, noise level will have slight
                         impacts on 210 households and some moderate impacts on seven households. Noise Contour
                         mapping are included in the EIA.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Air Emission. Assessment was conducted on the air emission from airport related activities
                         including combustion exhaust from aircraft during landing and takeoff and ground operation, from
                         ground service vehicles, vapors from fuel storage and handling, and emissions from local ground
                         vehicles servicing passenger and the airport. It is estimated that in the year of 2020, aircrafts will
                         discharge 1.02 tons of SO2, 19.83 tons of CO, 5.47 tons of NMHC, and 12.04 tons of NO2. The
                         ground vehicles will discharge 7.07 tons of CO, 0.3 ton of NO2, and 0.7 ton of NMHC. Fugitive
                         mission of NMHC from fuel storage area is estimated to be 1.38 tons/a. As previously noted,
                         Shangrao airport is a small feeder airport, and its air emission has insignificant impacts on the
                         ambient air quality.

                         Stormwater. Stormwater runoff may include pollutants associated with leaks and spills of oil and
                         fuels during airport operation, and fuel storage and handling activities. Shangrao falls within the
                         sub-tropical humid monsoon climate zone where aircraft de-icing /anti-icing fluids will not be
                         used.

                         Waste and Wastewater Management. Airport operations will generate nonhazardous solid waste
                         (268 tons/a), sludge (20 tons/a), spent oil (0.5tons/a), and wastewater (58m3/d).

                         Risk Management. Risk assessment has been conducted. The major risks associated with the

                                                                    Page 6 of 12
                           project are the fuel storage facilities and the gas filling station which may lead to fire accidents and
                           fuel leakage.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project will require the acquisition of 160 hectares of village land (including 30 hectares of
                           cultivated land) which will affect some 2500 people from 500 families. The project would also
                           require the demolition of 5760 m2 of existing structures which will affect 76 people from 16
                           families. The project construction will also interrupt local rural road and irrigation systems.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The proposed airport will increase the number of tourists and tourism spending which will
                           improve local economy and help to encourage investment and trade benefiting the local economy.
                           With the airport development, the rural area surrounding the airport would be gradually changed
                           into an economic development area. The airport will attract half million passengers to Shangrao
                           each year, imposing some pressure on the city’s infrastructure service. However, the total number
                           of tourists into the city was 19.868 million in 2010. The incremental tourist number will not likely
                           have significant impacts on local infrastructure service, for which Shangrao has already
                           formulated a tourism development plan.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Different alternatives have been considered in pre-feasibility and feasibility reports and the EA,
                           comparing them against technical, environmental and social criteria The analysis includes
                           alternatives analysis for airport sites, storm water discharge, runway alignment, wastewater
                           treatment, fuel for ground vehicles , and “with vs without project? scenario etc.. The analysis
                           focuses on the selection of airport location. Initially six alternative sites were selected. After site
                           survey, three alternative sites were screened out for further analysis, The Houmentang site was
                           selected considering: (i) Overhead clearance: the new site will avoid cutting down surrounding
                           hills (150m-315m height), and minimize the impacts on the surrounding environment;(ii) The
                           aircrafts, either landing, or taking off, will not pass over Shangrao city, avoid densely populated
Public Disclosure Copy




                           area; (iii) Resettlement will be minimized; (iv) Access convenience; and (v) Utility supply
                           convenience. During project preparation, the layout of the airport has been planned trying to
                           minimize social impact. As a result, the proposed airport terminal will be moved 140 meters to the
                           east to avoid the interruption of a nearby irrigation system.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The EMP proposes all measures to mitigate environmental impacts during design, construction
                           and operation.

                           Major Mitigation Measures during Construction

                           Construction: Environmental specifications have been prepared to mitigate construction related
                           impacts. Environmental specifications will be incorporated into bidding documents and civil work
                           contracts, and will be enforced by construction supervision. Environmental specifications for civil
                           work contractors are shown in Annex of the EMP.

                           Soil Erosion. To minimize soil erosion, spoil will all be used to backfill low lying areas of the
                           airport. As such, the project will not need any burrowing pits or extra disposal sites. Potential soil
                           erosion during construction will be mitigated by the implementation of a water and soil


                                                                       Page 7 of 12
                         conservation plan which specifies erosion and sedimentation mitigation measures such as (i) good
                         site drainage system will be installed; (ii) open cut areas will be promptly seeded or landscaped;
                         (iii) cut slope will be stabilized or protected; and (iv) spoil materials will be timely placed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Monitoring on soil erosion will be conducted during and after construction.

                         Impacts on Surface Water. Care will be taken during design not to disturb the hydrology of the
                         area. Fox example, a small existing gully crosses the site and will be cut off by the construction of
                         the runway embankment. The disruption will be avoided by placing a culvert underneath the
                         runway embankment to carry the natural flow of water of gully to the downstream area along the
                         line of its natural location. The drainage design will include eight stormwater discharge outlets and
                         distribute the runoff to three watersheds based on the detailed storm-runoff routing.

                         Compensation cost for re-vegetation is included in the project. Project sponsor will engage
                         experienced institutions to transplant 3,722 camphor trees to a selected nursery base, under
                         guidance of local forestry technical intuitions and local forestry bureau. A transplantation plan has
                         been prepared specifying requirements for transplantation time, techniques, budget and monitoring
                         for the transplantation.

                         Physical Cultural Resources. Compensation for the relocation of household graves is included in
                         the RAP. Chance finds procedures are included in the EMP.

                         Impact on Irrigation. Restoration measures for the affected irrigation system have been proposed,
                         including: (i) land compensation (see RAP); (ii) renovation of existing irrigation ditches (i.e. lining
                         and dredging for approximately 9km irrigation ditch); (iii) adding more storm water discharge
                         outlets at the airport; and (iv) change of crop patterns etc..

                         Re-routing of Rural Roads and Power Electric Lines. New routings for the interrupted roads and
                         electric power line have been included in the project design. The anticipated impacts are
                         considered to be minor on the environment. Mitigation measures for construction related impacts
Public Disclosure Copy




                         have been developed in the EMP.

                         Environmental Impacts of Resettlement. The resettlement site will be provided with adequate
                         infrastructure (e.g. roads, water, electricity, and drainage facilities) which will be designed and
                         implemented during the resettlement process.

                         Airport Connecting Road, Associated Utility Pipelines, Construction of Temporary Access Road,
                         Burrow Pits, Disposal sites. The anticipated impacts are considered to be minor on the
                         environment. General mitigation measures have been included in the EMF, based on which
                         specific EMPs will be prepared after the precise sitting alignments for these facilities are
                         determined.

                         Major Environmental Impacts due to Operation and Major Mitigation Measures

                         Noise and Vibration Impacts. Adequate measures for noise management which have been taken
                         and will be taken include:
                         -       Alternative analysis for airport sites has been conducted, and the flight path of aircraft will
                         not be over densely populated city areas.
                         -       The types of flight equipment used by t he airlines has been carefully selected which are in
                         compliance with international standards.

                                                                    Page 8 of 12
                         -        The EA has identified potentially affected receptors. The EMP proposes sound insulation
                         of buildings that are exposed to aircraft noise above noise limits based on further monitoring. For
                         social impacts consideration, sound insulation measures may also be needed for all 563
Public Disclosure Copy




                         households at five villages in the vicinity of the airport. RMB 19.95 million (equivalent to
                         USD3.16million) has been reserved for the sound insulation.
                         -        EMP also proposes to restrict development of noise-sensitive buildings in the vicinity of
                         the airport- an area within approximately 3 kilometer to each end of the runway, and 0.5km to
                         each side of the runway. If construction of noise-sensitive buildings in the restriction area is
                         absolutely needed, these buildings will be equipped with adequate sound insulation facilities.

                         Air Emission. Measures to prevent, minimize, and control air emissions include (i) minimizing
                         fugitive air emissions from by close monitoring and timely maintenance of equipment; and (ii)
                         selecting cleaner fuel, i.e. natural gas for heat generation system.

                         Stormwater Runoff. The airport design will divert and pre-treat stormwater drainage from areas of
                         potentially leaks and spills of fuels through use of oil /water separator, and contaminated water
                         will be discharged to the wastewater treatment station in the airport. Therefore, the storm water
                         discharge through the stormwater drainage network is not expected to negatively impact on
                         aquatic environments.

                         Waste and Wastewater Management. The solid waste and sludge will be sent to Shangrao
                         municipal sanitary landfill for final disposal, and spent oil to a qualified company for treatment.
                         Wastewater will be treated by a wastewater treatment station (10m3/h) to be installed at the
                         airport.

                         Risk Management.. The project has developed an emergency preparedness and response plan for
                         potential accidents/risks which may be caused by airport operation (e.g. fire, explosion, plane
                         crash, and safety breaches). The emergency monitoring plan has been prepared for monitoring the
                         accident in the fuel storage area, including the monitoring locations, items, frequency and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reporting procedure. Regular drill will be conducted, and hazardous materials will be managed to
                         prevent accidental releases, fire, or explosions, as described in Chinese regulations and the General
                         EHS Guidelines. The EMP also presents an outline for the health and safety plan for the airport
                         operations, and proposes measures to protect worker’s health and safety (see EMP Annex III).

                         Environment Management Plan and Environmental Management Framework

                         A detailed Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been prepared addressing all issues
                         identified in the EIA. The EMP proposes mitigation measures, establishes an organizational
                         structure, procedures, institutional responsibilities for implementation, and a budget and source of
                         financing for each activity, and includes environmental monitoring and capacity building
                         programs. An EMF has been prepared, setting out the guidelines and procedures to assess the
                         environmental impacts associated with the airport access road and associated utility infrastructure.
                         Based on the EMF, specific EMPs will be prepared after the precise sitting alignments for these
                         facilities are determined.

                         The EMP proposes adequate measures to mitigate adverse impacts and enhance positive impacts
                         during design, construction and operation. Environmental aspects have been taken into account in
                         the project design. The green airport design guidelines have been developed in the EMP.
                         Environmental friendly design includes balancing excavation and back filling earthworks,

                                                                    Page 9 of 12
                         minimizing interruption of natural drainage system in design, reuse of wastewater, and rainwater
                         storage for landscaping, irrigation and flush toilets in the airport, and use of clean fuel for ground
                         vehicles at the airport. Environmental specifications will be used to minimize construction related
Public Disclosure Copy




                         impacts. Mitigation measures for the operation have been included in the EMP.

                         Institutional Arrangement. Environment management responsibilities have been defined.
                         Environmental management during construction involves the Project Management Office of
                         Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Corporation, civil work contractors, and Environmental
                         Supervision Engineers. During the construction, the PMO will appoint one full-time staff to take
                         responsibility for coordinating EMP implementation. Environmental supervisors will be
                         responsible for daily environmental management. During operation, the Airport Company will be
                         in charge of environmental management and environmental monitoring under the guidance and
                         supervision of Shangrao EPB. All personnel of the Project Environmental Office, environmental
                         supervisors and construction workers and monitoring personnel etc. will receive environmental
                         training.

                         Environmental Monitoring. An environmental monitoring plan has been developed for both the
                         construction and operation phases and incorporated into the EMP, which includes the monitoring
                         location, monitoring parameters, methods, frequency and cost estimate. PMO will be responsible
                         for submitting the progress report on environmental management and for compiling the reports of
                         environmental monitoring.
                         Budget. In addition to the fund(RMB19.95) reserved for noise mitigation, other estimated cost for
                         the environmental management is RMB 42.49million, covering mitigation measures and
                         monitoring cost. Details of the cost estimate are presented in the EMP.

                         Following the relevant Chinese laws, regulations and World Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary
                         Resettlement, the Shangrao Project Office has prepared a RAP to address involuntary resettlement
                         impact caused by airport construction, rural roads and irrigation system restoration. A
                         Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was also prepared since the exact locations of the airport
Public Disclosure Copy




                         road and other facilities have not yet been finalized. The resettlement planning work was carried
                         out by the line agencies under the guidance of a team from Wuhan University with prior
                         experience in resettlement planning for World Bank financed Projects. Planning work included
                         project impact inventory surveys, social economic surveys and consultations over resettlement and
                         livelihood rehabilitation strategies.
                         The following were the guiding principles for developing the RAP/RPF:
                         (a)      The original living standards of all affected people should be improved or at least be
                         restored;
                         (b)      Resettlement plans, sites of new houses, standards and building areas should be
                         determined after consultation with the affected people;
                         (c)      For all affected buildings, the compensation should be calculated on the basis of the
                         current replacement cost without consideration of depreciation;
                         (d)      Compensation rates, location of new residential sites and areas should be formulated after
                         consultation with the affected population;
                         (e)      All compensation funds should be paid before acquisition;
                         (f)      Special assistance will be provided to the vulnerable households identified during the
                         detailed planning and implementation process.

                         Jiangxi Province has several ongoing Bank financed projects. Shangrao Municipality, though new
                         to the Bank projects, has established a Project Leading Group at municipal level to oversee and

                                                                    Page 10 of 12
                           coordinate the preparation and implementation of the Project. This Leading Group is chaired by a
                           Vice Mayor assisted by officials from a number of governmental agencies. In addition Shangrao
                           has established a project management office (PMO) to take overall responsibility for project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           preparation and implementation. For project preparation, Shangrao PMO has engaged a qualified
                           institute to carry-out full environmental assessment (EA). Training on WB safeguard policies and
                           guidelines has been provided by the Bank team to the EA institute and project entities, and will
                           continue throughout the implementation process to enhance their capacity for environmental
                           management.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             In accordance with Bank Safeguard policies and Chinese regulations, public consultations were
                           conducted from January to September 2012, including public consultation meetings and
                           questionnaire survey, with project affected persons (e.g. villagers) and other stakeholders (village
                           associations, schools, local water resources bureau and local forestry bureau). The consultation on
                           the EIA TOR was conducted in January 2012, and consultation on the draft EA documents in
                           September, 2012. Issues discussed mainly included noise impacts, restoration of rural roads and
                           local irrigation system etc.. Their opinions and concerns (e.g. noise impact, restoration of rural
                           roads, irrigation system) have been taken into account in the EA process and project design. The
                           EA safeguards documents were locally disclosed at village associations on September 23, 2012
                           and at local websites on September 29, 2012 through announcements published on the local
                           website and newspaper. The EA safeguard documents were sent to the Bank InfoShop for
                           disclosure on October 30, 2012.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09-Oct-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   30-Oct-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      02-Jan-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            23-Sep-2012
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Sep-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   30-Oct-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            20-Sep-2012
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level


                                                                     Page 11 of 12
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Binyam Reja
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name:                                                   Date:
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                              Date: 17-Apr-2013




                                                                       Page 12 of 12
