                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA5002
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Africa                            Project ID:    P143367
                            Project Name:     African Forum for Agricultural Advisory Services Second Multi-Donor Trust
                                              Fund (P143367)
                            Task Team         David J. Nielson
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       18-Jun-2013                         Estimated   29-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTA2                                Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Agricultural extension and research (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural policies and institutions (40%), Education for the knowledge economy
                                              (30%), Rural services and infrastructure (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      18.40           Total Bank Financing:                0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                      10.90
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                0.00
                              CAADP Pillar 4 institutions                                                             6.50
                              International Fund for Agriculture Development                                          1.00
                              Total                                                                                   7.50
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To reform and strengthen Agricultural Advisory Services (AAS) in accordance with FAAP principles
                           towards increasing agricultural productivity and food security.


                                                                      Page 1 of 4
                          3. Project Description
                         The project will support AFAAS, AASs and CFs to participate in implementation of CAADP Pillar
                         IV and will support the emergence, in each member country, of a common umbrella body (called
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Country Fora) under which they will be able to share information, exchange information and
                         innovate on how to improve AAS delivery. CF enable AAS actors to relate to each other within a
                         framework of a set of agreed principles, rules and well defined roles and responsibilities. CF is also
                         pre-requisite for the AASs to be embedded in the national agricultural innovation systems so that
                         they are continuously aware of the factors in the system that influence their effectiveness. The CF
                         would enable the stakeholders monitor the performance of the system and identify the issues that
                         they need to respond to. Hence the general objectives of supporting CFs are (i) to strengthen the
                         capacity of AAS stakeholders at country level to lead advisory service development, (ii) to
                         proactively and responsively support the CF to mobilise, reflect and learn how to improve advisory
                         service provision within an agricultural innovation system framework, (iii) to act as the arm of the
                         country CAADP implementing organs linking with AAS stakeholders and, (iv) to be able to utilize
                         (within and between countries) the human capacity that is being developed for undertaking reforms
                         in AAS.

                         The project will also strengthen AFAAS innovation, communication, information and knowledge
                         management capacity. It will assist AFAAS to design and implement KIT management strategy that
                         enables AAS stakeholders to network with each other and to access information from external
                         sources. This component will also support establishment of infrastructure and mechanisms for
                         enabling AAS actors to network for purposes of, among other things, sharing experiences, finding
                         solutions to everyday problems that they face, accessing global knowledge hubs and facilitating
                         collective innovation in AAS delivery.

                         Moreover, the project shall strengthen AFAAS partnership capacity. It will achieve this by
                         networking and forming linkages and partnerships with other organizations and initiatives that have
                         similar mandates and interest in building AAS. It shall pursue partnership relationships in the context
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of CAADP with Sub-Regional Research Organizations, umbrella regional and continental
                         organizations bringing together the various categories of actors in agricultural innovation including
                         farmer organizations, non-government organizations, higher education institutions, information/
                         knowledge management organizations, continental advocacy organizations, and the private sector.

                         Finally, the project will strengthen AFAAS governance and management systems. This will include:
                         support for AFAAS internal Units; an updating of its governance manual, operational manual,
                         internal systems, guidelines and constitution; establishment and strengthening of a human resource,
                         finance and procurement units; and strengthening of the information and communications unit. The
                         component would fund: (i) operational costs including staff salaries of the Secretariat; (ii) office
                         equipment; (iii) convening of and participation in regional and international fora; (iv) capacity
                         building in financial management, procurement, accounting, and human resource management; (v)
                         rehabilitation and maintenance of the AFAAS Secretariat Headquarters; (vi) development and
                         maintenance of an M&E system, and (vii) General Assembly and Board meeting expenses.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         AFAAS headquarters is in Kampala, Uganda, however, AFAAS will support the emergence and
                         strengthening of CF of AAS stakeholders at the country level. AFAAS’ membership includes North
                         African and Sub-Saharan African countries, and existing Country Fora include Benin, Malawi,


                                                                      Page 2 of 4
                           Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda and Sierra Leone. The project does not involve activities with
                           environmental and social impacts.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                            6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/      No
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                N/A
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                N/A
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                                                      Page 3 of 4
                               N/A
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                                                                                             Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: David J. Nielson
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 19-Jun-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Severin L. Kodderitzsch (SM)                   Date: 19-Jun-2013




                                                                      Page 4 of 4
