INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC574
a Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Feb-2012
0
C-)
1 1. BASIC INFORMATION
U)    A. Basic Project Data
0
0
.U,
Q      Country:               Papua New Guinea             Project ID:             P126157
.      Project Name:         Rural Service Delivery and Local Governance Preparation and Pilot (P126157)
Task Team Leader:      Sean Bradley
Estimated Appraisal Date: 00-undefined-0000         Estimated Board Date:   27-Jul-2012
Managing Unit:         EASNS                        Lending Instrument:     Specific Investment Loan
Sector:                Other social services (50%), Sub-national government administration (20%), General agriculture, fishing and
forestry sector (10%), G eneral education sector (10%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (10%)
Theme:                 Participation and civic engagement (34%), Other rural development (33%), Other social development (33%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Financing Source                                                                      Amount
Borrower                                                                                 0.00
Free-standing TFs for Bank                                                               3.80
Pacific Sub-region Free-standing Trust Fund Program                                      0.00
State and Peace Building Fund                                                            0.00
Financing Gap                                                                            2.31
Total                                                                                     3.80
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Is this a Repeater project? No
B. Project Objectives
>N    The Project Development Objective is to pilot a successful local community driven development (LCDD) platform in PNG that would be adopted by
O     Government as a way to improve the access, quality and management of basic public services delivered in rural communitiesin PNG. As such, the
project will help to address the low levels of access and desired outcomes of a number of basic services (health, education, water, access, etc.) as
a)    identified by local communities.
-      C. Project Description
Q      The project would be financed as a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) from Trust Fund resources totaling approximately US$ 6.1 million to be
o     implemented over a period of three years from 2012 to 2014. A grant of US$3.8 million has been approved by the Papua New Guinea Sustainable
-0     Development Program (PNGSDP Ltd.) in support of the project and for which a Bank administered Trust Fund is being created. 1/ A further US
$1.8 million is being sought from the Korea Economic and Peace-building Trust Fund (managed by OPCFC), while the balance of
US$480,000 is expected in local counterpart and community contributions. Additional financing is expected from local governments and
communities. It is expected that the pilot project would, if proven successful, lead to a scaled up local community drive development operation with
IDA, other development partner, and Government of PNG funding.
It is proposed that the pilot would operate in two provinces and involve approximately 14 LLGs (covering a potential beneficiary population of
approximately 280,000). Testing of the LCDD systems and procedures would be done through the financing of community grants of an estimated
US$100,000 per participating LLG per year (for years 2 and 3 of the pilot). These community grants could be used for a wide-range of small-scale
social or economic investments and/or services (e.g., improvements to health or education facilities, for water or sanitation, to improved access
(roads, bridges, wharves, etc.), and/or to improve livelihood opportunities). The specific purpose of individual grants would be determined by
communities on an annual basis with the support of trained facilitators, and would be approved at LLG level based on agreed-upon criteria that
reflect Government policies and any relevant World Bank requirements. This system of sub-grant design, approval, fiscal transfer and reporting on
progress would be linked to, and integrated with the Government's existing systems to avoid duplication and additional administrative burden.
The project would have three main components: (i) systems and financing of community service-delivery grants, (ii) capacity building of national
and sub-national government (or non-government) entities, and (iii) project management (including monitoring, evaluation and knowledge sharing).
These three components are described in more detail below.
Component 1: Systems and Financing of Community Service Delivery Grants
The first component of the project would provide grants to LLGs to finance community-identified sub-projects. Communities will be responsible for
the identification and prioritization of community needs. The sub-projects will be developed through a participa tory planning process that will be
integrated into the preparation of Ward and LLG development plans. Typical sub-project grants are expected to include small-scale community


﻿infrastructure, technical assistance and capacity building, and enhancement of sustai nable service delivery systems. However, at this stage it is
impossible to say which specific areas of support (e.g., education, health, water and sanitation, roads/bridges/wharves, etc.) would be prioritized.
The project would finance a Community Grants Fund (currently estimated at US$2.9 million in value) that would be used to support these
community projects based on agreed-upon procedures and criteria that would be outlined in an operations manual that the Government would
develop and the World Bank would approve. Among other issues, these procedures would draw on recent research on exclusion and benefits
sharing (around the Ok Tedi Community Mine Continuation Agreements) to help ensure equity in project identification and development.
Component 2: Capacity Building of National and Sub-national entities
0
The second component would support the strengthening of capacities of national and sub-national government (and non-government) entities to
a)    manage and implement the project, and to improve local governance as it relates to basic service delivery. One aspect of this support would build
co    capacity of Ward and LLG personnel to manage the project at the local level, including improved ward planning, review and evaluation of specific
0
_Z)    ward plans, grant management to communities, basic financial management and procurement, reporting, and monitoring of community projects.
.n    LLG managers would be the key focal point for work at this level while ward recorders will likely be trained to serve as community facilitators.
Q      Another aspect of this support at local level would be to develop the tools and training materials to introduce social accountability and participatory
performance monitoring initiatives (e.g., community scorecards, public expenditure tracking, and public feedback mechanisms) to strengthen the
-0
downward accountability and responsiveness of providers of support and services, to LLG and to communities. Training and capacity building
.      support to help improve the participation and inclusion of traditionally marginalized groups (including women) would be articulated and financed as
well.
As appropriate, this component would also support the involvement of non-governmental agencies (NGOs, churches or civil society groups) that
have traditionally provided basic services in certain areas of PNG. The decision to involve such entities to either facilitate planning or support the
provision of services would depend on the presence and strength of local level government authorities and service providers in a given area, and
on the demand from communities. Given the wide range of capacities and coverage throughout PNG, the testing of such a public-private
partnership under this pilot scheme is seen as being valuable to Government's understanding of what works best under what circumstances.
This component would also support the capacity of the Department for Provincial and Local Government Affairs (DPLGA) at the central level to
help in: the overall development and monitoring of the project; evaluation of impacts (as part of the current responsibilities of the Provincial and
Local Services Monitoring Authority and the Performance Management Division of DPLGA); coordination across the key government stakeholders
(including Community Development, Rural Development, the National Economic and Fiscal Commission, etc.); and coordination among other
donor and international development agencies who are implementing similar programs. The project would also provide support to provinces to
ensure close linkages with the activities being supported in respective LLGs. In addition to capacities, the project would finance minor equipment
purchases and operational costs to facilitate effective participation of the different levels of government offices.
Component 3: Project Ma n agreement
The third component would support a project coordinating team at the national level and small project management teams in the targeted
provincial administrations. The national team would lead the dialogue with sub-national partners in setting up and executing the project, in the
development of the procedures and materials to be used in support of the first two components of the project, and in coordinating the work at
national level. Where required, additional contractual staff, consultants, and technical advisors will be brought in to support project implementation
and gradually build local capacity. A robust monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system, a project information system, and a grievance redress
mechanism will be developed as part of the overall project management system. Disaggregated gender data would be collected, and a detailed
0.    evaluation of the project processes (versus impact) would be undertaken. An independent monitor of project implementation will be contracted
0     locally to ensure timely information on project progress and to assist in identifying adjustments where warranted.
The project management component will also include a strong information, communications and knowledge sharing element to address the
o)    problems of fragmentation and disconnectedness, as well as a general deficit of information and development knowledge at the local level and
Z5     between the local and national levels. This sub-component would also serve to inform various stakeholders about the project and its operational
.U)   procedures, and to disseminate implementation. Learning events could include exchange visits across provinces, local governance forums, study
Q
a     tours, and development of various learning and knowledge products. These activities will draw on the M&E data-- as both process and impact
data become available, they would be translated into materials to facilitate learning. The events would target other potential provinces, non-
3     governmental partners and practitioners, policy makers and development partners particularly interested in the sector (AusAID and the EC). This
information would be complemented by the already large amount of data on CDD operations from the region.
1/ PNGSDP Ltd. is a not-for-profit limited liability company registered and operating in PNG that was established as a result of an agreement
between the Government of PNG and BHP Billiton (the Australian company that ran the Ok Tedi Mine in PNG), which supports sustainable
development projects and initiatives to benefit the people of PNG.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
Two provinces would be included in the pilot project: Western Province and second which has yet to be chosen. Western Province is the largest
and least densely populated province in PNG. It comprises more than half of the country's border with Indonesia. There are several large rivers
that run through the province including the Fly River and its tributaries including the Strickland and Ok Tedi rivers, the largest lake in Papua New
Guinea Lake Murray is also in Western Province. The Tonda Wildlife Management Area in the south-western corner of the province is a wetland of
international importance and the largest protected area in Papua New Guinea.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Through the scaling up of the Bank's portfolio in PNG over the last two years, the Borrower has developed a greater knowledge of safeguard
policies. Training has also been provided to project teams, consultants and central agencies such as the Departments of National Planning and
Monitoring, and of Environment and Conservation. The capacity of the Department of Environment and Conservation to monitor project
compliance with safeguards still remains limited due to capacity constraints. Therefore, the project team will need to include sufficient safeguard
and monitoring capacity to implement the measures incorporated into project design.


﻿F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Knut Opsal (EASER)
John R. Butler (EAPCO)
Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (EASPS)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
o
Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?  Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01  Yes       Component 1 will include a range of demand-driven small scale sub-projects which
0                                                     will likely include infrastructure activities such as: rehabilitation or upgrading of
.U                                                    physical structures such as buildings (health facilities, markets, teacher housing,
Q                                                     etc.); very small-scale transport infrastructure rehabilitation/repair (tracks, small
O                                                     feeder roads, bridges, docks, etc.); small-scale water catchment and supply
systems; etc. Construction of new facilities is also possible but e xpected to be
0..                                                   very small in both scale and scope. The average size of subprojects is expected to
be in the range of US$ 5,000 to 20,000.
The potential impact of any subproject will depend on the nature, location and
specific characteristics of the investment. In most cases, adverse environmental
impacts are expected to be temporary, site-specific, reversible and limited to the
construction phase. They could include temporary disturbance of drains or
streams, noise and dust during construction, small-scale vegetation loss, and
pollution from inappropriate construction materials waste disposal. Potential
adverse impacts would be easily mitigated through a combination of a negative list
of inappropriate types or locations of sub-projects and technical guidance on
appropriate construction designs and practices. An Environment and Social
Safeguards Framework (ESSF) would be prepared as part of project preparation to
assist in the identification and mitigation of potential environment and social
issues, and to help address any environmental risks associated with the proposed
sub-project activities. The ESSF would contain environmental and social
assessment guidelines and procedures customized the project, simple forms and
guidelines to prepare environmental and social management plans where required,
and also include an Environmental Code of Practice (ECoPs). The participating
communities will be consulted on the ESSF and the ECoPs in their local language
and in a way that is culturally appropriate and acceptable to them. The project
operations manual would also outline a Grievance Redress Mechanism that would
be accessible to communities to directly raise issues or concerns o n project
implementation (including those related to environmental and/or social issues. The
ESSF and ECoPs would be disclosed locally in these communities in their
languages and also at the World Banks' infoshop.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No
Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
Pest Management OP 4.09            No
0
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11  No
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      Yes         Papua New Guinea is one of the most culturally diverse countries in the world, with
a                                                     over 850 indigenous languages and at least as many traditional societies, out of a
population of just under seven million. It is also one of the most rural, as only 18%
of its people live in urban centers. Most people outside the towns live in a
subsistence-based economy with strong attachments to the land and a family-
based social structure. Customary land notionally covers most of the usable land in
the country, some 97% of total land area. The vast majority of communities are
indigenous, as defined in the policy. Th e vulnerability of indigenous groups
isbased less on their belonging to an ethnic groups and more from living in remote
locations. Since all beneficiaries of the project and all communities affected by the
project are indigenous, no stand-alone Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be
required. . In situations where the entire project is considered an IPP, a summary
of how the project complies with OP 4.10 should be presented as part of the PAD
and be disclosed, along with the social assessment, consultation framework (in
draft form) prior to appraisal.. The elements of an IPP, including frameworks to
ensure free prior and informed consultations and a grievance mechanism, are
included in the project design and will be applied in the implementation of the
project. The consultation framework will help to ensure that the project and
subprojects will assess broad community support on the basis of social
assessments and consultations that will be carried out with groups targeted by the
project. The social assessment would also help to ensure that culturally-
appropriate benefits are included in the sub-project; and that measures to mitigate
adverse impacts are taken


﻿Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12    No            The project will not finance any activity that requires involuntary resettlement, and
any "new" land acquisition (assumed to be in very few cases, if at all) would be
done on a voluntary basis and apply a "clan land use agreement" process. The
rural nature of theproject guarantees that any such lands would be under
tcommunal ownership and the community nature of the sub-projects suggest that
-                                                              voluntary donation is a realistic expectation. Siting of new infrastructure would also
h be voluntary so that existing assets that might be affected by such acquisition
would also be governed by the voluntary land use agreement and the project
would not pay compensation. Possible damages or losses caused by any
contractor working on a sub-project would be the responsibility of the contractor to
0
address, which would be indicated in the relevant contract document. These
M_                                                             procedures would be reflected in the operational procedures manual of the project.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37               No
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP  No
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60  No
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-May-2012
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
March-June, 2012
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:              Name: Sean Bradley
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Name: John R. Butler (RSA)                                   Date: 08-Feb-2012
Sector Manager:                Name: Charles M. Feinstein (SM)                                Date: 24-Jan-2012
CL
0
O
0
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


