                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC1261

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Aug-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                            Project ID:      P129657
                            Project Name:      Concentrated Solar Power Project (P129657)
                            Task Team          Yanqin Song
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          10-Dec-2012                      Estimated        02-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector:         Other Renewable Energy (100%)
                            Theme:          Climate change (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      76.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         80.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Gap                                                                  0.00
                              Total                                                                        156.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the proposed project is to demonstrate the technical and economic
                           viability of the CSP development in cold, dry and high latitude conditions in China and contributes
                           towards achievement of China’s 2020 CSP development target.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project is a national concessional bidding project organized National Energy
                           Administration (NEA). As one of the leading RE enterprises in China, China Datang Corporation
                           Renewable Power Co. Ltd (Datang RE hereafter), whose mother company is Datang Corporation
                           (Datang), won the bid. Datang RE created and registered a subsidiary, Datang Ordos Renewable
                           Power Co. Ltd., in Ordos, Inner Mongolia, to develop the proposed project.
                         The proposed project includes the construction of a 50 MW CSP plant on a 200 ha site in the Gobi
                         area. Annual power generation is estimated at 120 GWh. The approved tariff is about US$ 0.15/kWh.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         According to the concession’s conditions, the project should be built within 30 months after the
                         project company is registered. The project company was registered in December 2011.

                         Technology and cost. Following the requirement in the concession program, parabolic trough
                         technology was selected for the proposed CSP project with 4 hours of thermal storage. Given the
                         water scarcity in the northern region of China, the plant will be dry-cooled. The CAPEX is estimated
                         to range from US$ 148 million to US$156 million.

                         Project scope. The project scope includes development and construction of a 50MW Concentrating
                         Solar Power plant. The designed plant consists of four principle components: a solar field, heat
                         transfer fluid (HTF) system, thermal energy storage system, and power block. Bank resources will be
                         used for financing a solar field, HTF system, and thermal energy storage system.

                         Financing. The total project investment is estimated to be US$156 million and the proposed IBRD
                         loan would be around US$80 million. The remaining financing will be covered by (a) Equity from
                         Datang RE as required by Chinese law (at least 20 percent); and (b) a commercial loan from the
                         China Construction Bank.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the            safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in Balagong Town of Hangjinqi in Ordos, Inner Mongolia. The site is well
                         suited for solar projects, especially for development of CSP, due to adequate solar resources and
                         proximity to the power grid. An existing 220 kV substation is located 700 meters away from the
                         project site. The land acquisition for the proposed CSP plant is currently under progress.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If Datang RE is designated, it has strong technical staff and is financially robust. It is listed on
                         Hongkong Stock Exchange and therefore developed adequate governance, financial management,
                         and auditing system. Datang RE is experienced in design, construction, and operation of wind power
                         and other renewable energy projects, such as solar PV. As of June 30, 2010, the company’s total
                         installed capacity reached 2720 MW, becoming one of the leading renewable energy companies in
                         China. Datang RE’s financial situation is considered strong and it has solid experience with power
                         plant’s construction and operation.
                         If the Project Company is designated as implementing agency, it will be assisted by Datang RE and
                         staffed adequately to carry out the preparation and implementation of the project. The Bank will also
                         provide the required training and ensure that adequate systems are developed during the preparation
                         of the project.
                         In any case, the Task Team will assess the capacity of the implementing agency for implementing
                         environmental and social safeguard requirements and, as needed, an appropriate capacity
                         development program will be included in the project for management of environmental and social
                         issues in accordance with World Bank requirements.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Chongwu Sun (EASCS)
                         Jun Zeng (EASCS)
                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          Project related environmental issues appear to
                           BP 4.01                                     be minimal. In accordance with Chinese
                                                                       Environmental Assessment requirements, A
                                                                       Chinese Environmental Impact Assessment
                                                                       Report was prepared, for a 85 MW CSP power
                                                                       plant, by Nanjing Research Institute of
                                                                       Environmental Sciences, a institute holding EA
                                                                       Class A Certificate issued by the Ministry of
                                                                       Environmental Protection, and approved by
                                                                       Inner Mongolia EPB in 2008. The capacity of
                                                                       the proposed CSP for Bank financing is reduced
                                                                       to 50 MW, at the same location.

                                                                       Through site visit and discussion with the client
                                                                       and their EA consultant, the task team
                                                                       conducted preliminary environmental screening:

                                                                       The proposed project is located the New Energy
                                                                       Development Zone, in Balagong Town of
                                                                       Hangjinqi in Ordos, Inner Mongolia (see Figure
                                                                       1-1). The site is well suited for solar projects,
                                                                       especially for development of CSP, due to
                                                                       adequate solar resources and proximity to the
                                                                       power grid. An existing 220 kV substation is
                                                                       located 700 meters away from the project site.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       There are no farming and other active economic
                                                                       activities in that area and villages are at least 5
                                                                       km away from the Zone.

                                                                       Environmental Issues-Construction
                                                                       Environment, worker health and safety issues
                                                                       associated with construction are the traditional
                                                                       aspects of moving men, materials, and
                                                                       machines, namely:

                                                                       Waste gas
                                                                       Pollution during construction period is mainly
                                                                       dust from: excavation and use of explosives,
                                                                       and stacking, transport, loading, unloading of
                                                                       construction materials (concrete, sand, etc.)
                                                                       Exhaust gases and dust from movement of
                                                                       various vehicles and construction equipment,
                                                                       and storage sites of construction rubbish
                         Noise
                         Noise sources include mechanical devices and
                         vehicles including grab, blender, vibrator,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         concrete transportation vehicles, bulldozer,
                         impact driller, air compressor, welder, multiple
                         function wood planner, trucks, pile drivers and
                         grinders.

                          Waste water
                         The waste water from this project during the
                         construction period is sewage from the
                         construction crew and small amounts from
                         equipment cleaning and mechanical flushing.

                         Solid waste
                         The solid waste during the construction period
                         of this project is non-hazardous waste generated
                         mainly from the construction rubbish and
                         rubbish from construction crews.

                         Health and Safety
                         Use of heavy equipment, lifting and moving
                         equipment and materials, handling and use of
                         explosives and various hazardous materials
                         (paints, cleaning materials, oil, greases, etc.).

                         Environmental Issues-Operation
                         The project will use a dry cooling system, so
Public Disclosure Copy




                         water requirements will be minimal. The main
                         pollution during operation period mainly is
                         nonhazardous solid waste and wastewater
                         generated from the workers daily functions.
                         There will also be a small amount of wastewater
                         produced from mirror cleaning and the
                         concentrate stream from the reverse osmosis
                         desalting system producing purified water for:
                         mirror cleaning, boiler make-up, and cooling
                         system for the heat transfer fluids etc.

                         There are minor health and safety issues
                         associated with the use and handling of the heat
                         transfer fluids (HTF). These materials are
                         relatively inert and safe, but they are
                         combustible. The HTF can burn at elevated
                         temperatures. Its chemical nature is such that its
                         use as heat transfer medium in a properly
                         designed and operated system does not normally
                                                            constitute a serious fire or explosion hazard:
                                                            vapor leaking into the air rapidly cools down to
                                                            temperatures below the fire point. However,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            high pressure mists can form an explosive
                                                            mixture with air if there is a leak in the heat
                                                            exchange system between the molten nitrate salt
                                                            and the HFT. The feasibility study
                                                            recommended nitrogen blanketing to avoid the
                                                            formation of an explosive mixture in case of a
                                                            HTF to nitrate salt leakage. An emergency
                                                            response plan is recommended for the operation
                                                            of the CSP, included in the EMP.

                                                            Based on the above, this policy is triggered and
                                                            the instruments are: EIA and EMP.

                                                            IFC’s Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS)
                                                            Guidelines on Community Health and Safety,
                                                            and Occupational Health and Safety are
                                                            applicable to this project.

                                                            The project has been categorized B because (1)
                                                            there is no hazardous materials/wastes from the
                                                            proposed technology and processing of the CSP
                                                            project; (2) the proposed CSP project is not
                                                            located in a sensitive environmental area, and
                                                            there is no significant flora and fauna in the
                                                            area; and (3) the environmental impacts of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            proposed project screened and identified are
                                                            measurable and manageable and none of them
                                                            are unprecedented.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No   As mentioned above, according to domestic
                                                            requirement and regulation, an EIA was
                                                            prepared and cleared in 2008 for a 80 MW CSP
                                                            at the same site, located in the semi-desert area.
                                                            However, that project was not proceeded. When
                                                            this 50 MW CSP project is proposed for Bank
                                                            financing, that EIA was provided for Bank
                                                            information. In that EIA, there was information
                                                            about survey of natural resource, which
                                                            indicated that there was no significant natural
                                                            habitat resource near the site and no significant
                                                            flora and fauna in that area. Based on this
                                                            available information, OP4.04 is not triggered.
                                                            The TT will ask the EA consultant to recheck
                                                            and confirm this in the EA process.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project will not involve any forestry
                                                                 activity.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not involve any pesticides.

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    Initial screening and site visit by the task team
                         BP 4.11                                 did not reveal any relics or physical resources
                                                                 that are culturally or historically significant. The
                                                                 EA report prepared in 2008 had confirmed this.
                                                                 The task team request the institute which
                                                                 prepared EA to further consult with relevant
                                                                 government authorities responsible for
                                                                 protection of physical cultural resources during
                                                                 EA preparation process. Furthermore, EMP will
                                                                 include chance find procedures in accordance
                                                                 with both Chinese regulations and World Bank
                                                                 policy.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   The project will be constructed in Bayinger
                                                                 Village at Balagong Town, Hangjing Banner,
                                                                 Ordos Municipality, Inner Mongolia
                                                                 Autonomous Region. There are 619 households
                                                                 living in the Bayinger Village. Among its 1500
                                                                 people, 925 are Mongolians and the remaining
                                                                 are Han people. Within the village, there is no
                                                                 clear boundary between Mongolians and Han
                                                                 people; Although Mongolians has its own
                                                                 language, the villagers use Mandarin in their
                                                                 daily lives and they also intermarry. Moreover,
                                                                 they are not presenting customary social and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 political institutions. And in the village, they
                                                                 live together with Han people and share land
                                                                 and natural resources. Based on these
                                                                 discussion, the team consider the OP4.10 is not
                                                                 triggered. But assessment will be carried out in
                                                                 the preparation stage regarding any potential
                                                                 impacts on local communities from the
                                                                 construction of the transmission line.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No    The project will occupy a total of 200 ha of land
                         4.12                                    area. The land was taken by the local
                                                                 government in 2008. Therefore, there will be no
                                                                 land acquisition or structure demolishing needed
                                                                 for the project construction.
                                                                 The power plant will be connected to the
                                                                 existing substation with a 110 kV-line. The
                                                                 construction of the required transmission line
                                                                 will be located along the existing highway with
                                                                 no land acquisition required.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project is not expected to involve any dams.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project will not involve any international
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project will not involve any disputed areas.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Nov-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Complete the PAD stage ISDS before November 15, 2012
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Yanqin Song

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA) Date: 12-Sep-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                  Date: 29-Aug-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
