INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA321
b  Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Feb-2012
0
1 1. BASIC INFORMATION
U)    1. Basic Project Data
0
0
.U,
Q      Country:               Ghana                        Project ID:             P125595
.      Project Name:         Ghana - PPP Project (P125595)
Task Team Leader:      Peter J. Mousley
Estimated Appraisal Date: 09-Jan-2012               Estimated Board Date:   27-Mar-2012
Managing Unit:        AFTFW                         Lending Instrument:     Adaptable Program Loan
Sector:                General finance sector (80%), General industry and trade sector (20%)
Theme:                Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Financing Source                                                                      Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                             30.00
Total                                                                                    30.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Is this a Repeater project? No
2. Project Objectives
The Objective of APL I is to improve the legislative, institutional, financial, fiduciary and technical framework to generate a pipeline of bankable
PPP projects.
3. Project Description
>N    Component 1: Institutional, Fiduciary, Legislative, and Financing Capacity Building - (US$10 million):
0-
0
O      PPP Capacity Building: This component is focused on developing the in-house capacity within the Government of Ghana, beginning with MOFEP,
a     to identify, assess, develop, implement and manage PPP transactions. The support provided under this component will be deployed through four
M     instruments:
0
U),   (i)    technical assistance for activities such as policy work, sector analyses, embedded consultancy services, investment planning and
Q      analysis (both public and PPP) work, and other PPP-related advisory support. This will include a senior PPP Specialist within the PID Unit as well
o     as other specialized expertise such as financial modelers, PPP procurement specialist and sector-specific expertise - as approved through annual
E      work planning exercises;
(ii)    systems and equipment to enable both central and line MDAs to manage and monitor PPP concessions, make available relevant
information for specific PPP transactions (i.e data rooms), develop a GOG PPP website where policies, laws, regulations, guidelines and other
related information will be shared with the public, and other ICT equipment necessary to implement a modern PPP communications platform;
(iii)   PPP-specific training for key GOG stakeholders on both broad and sector specific topics. This also includes resources for in-house
training, workshops, study tours, and courses. Additionally capacity building will also be provided to the Project Finance Analysis (PFA) Unit and
Strategic Projects team under the PID to enhance their capacity to undertake the general economic and cost benefit assessments of all Public
Investment Projects in advance of a decision as to whether justifiable investments are best served by public or PPP procurement methods...
(iv)    Outreach support and capacity building to private sector for PPP engagement:
The resources made available under this component will be targeted to the key central and line ministries leading the PPP work in Ghana.
Primarily, support will be given to the MOFEP PID Unit and its sub-units. This includes the Project Finance and Analysis (PFA) Sub-Unit and the
PPP Advisory Sub Unit (PAU), as well as other key central MDAs including, as required, other key MOFEP departments (budget, debt, legal etc)
including, for example, the Public Procurement Authority (PPA), Ministry of Environment and Environmental Protection Agency. The resources for
the line ministries will be provided in parallel as line ministries proceed with the development of PPP transactions. As such, initial resources will be
mobilized for the Ministry of Health (to support Korle Bu transaction), Ministry of Transportation and Ghana Ports Authority (for ports), and Ministry
of Roads and Highways (for roads). This support will be targeted to the PPP Project Management Units (PMUs) that, as stipulated in the National
Policy on PPP, will be set up in each Ministry developing a PPP transaction.
Legislative, Regulatory and Policy Technical Assistance: In line with the GOG efforts to strengthen its PPP legal framework, the GOG is now
developing a PPP Act. This Act will provide legal authority to the key elements of the recently passed PPP Policy. The GOG has requested
support to draft the PPP Law as well as associated regulations, guidelines, including critical those for the management and procurement of
unsolicited bid and other complementary laws or policies to achieve a robust legislative and regulatory enabling environment. To ensure that this
legal and regulatory work is enacted, the component will also support outreach activities such as stakeholder consultations and sensitization
Page 1 of 5


﻿workshops across the Government MDAs and the private and financial sectors both domestically and internationally to build understanding and
awareness around the reform actions that the GOG is undertaking. Annex 2 provides more detail on the legislation/policies that may require
revisions.
PPP Fiscal Commitments and unsolicited bids: The component will also provide resources for the development of a Framework for Managing
Fiscal Commitments (FC) and Contingent Liabilities (CL) associated with PPPs and the development of guiding principles for addressing
unsolicited bids . Both are critical aspects of instituting a PPP regime according to international best practices
O     Developing the Institutional Capacities for PPP Financing Instruments to be supported under the APL Phase II program: Key to the successful
implementation of the National PPP Policy will be availability of suitable sources of project finance. The APL Program is seeking to support the
a)    Government in the establishment of three key financial services as set out in the National Policy. This includes a Financial Intermediary Loan
cn    (FIL), a Viability Gap Scheme (V GS) and a Project Development Fa cility (PDF) which are summarized below and explained more fully in Annex 7.
0
0
.n    Developing FIL Guidelines/Operational Manual. The FIL which would be designed in line with OP8.30 guidelines is a mechanism through which
Q      the Bank can assist to introduce long-term local currency to help facilitate financial structuring, particularly for PPP projects lacking a foreign
currency revenue flow. FIL funding would be deployed through qualifying Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) via arrangements with the Bank
of Ghana, to meet priority project financing needs. Over the longer term, once in place, Bank FIL support could be directed , should it prove to be a
.      sustainable and cost-effective approach, through the Infrastructure Financing Facility the government is considering to to establish, as is the case
in countries such as India and Indonesia. The FIL which is an option being prepared under the APL Phase II could be financed via IDA or
potentially IBRD or a blend, depending on ongoing current graduation discussions ongoing between the Government of Ghana and the World
Bank.In preparation for the advent of this financing instrument, the APL Phase I will assist the Bank of Ghana (BOG), which is the government
recommended entity to serve as the FIL Apex, to develop the required fiduciary and other capacities and operating procedures to manage the FIL.
The project will also assist the BOG to undertake the due diligence required compliant with OP8.30 to select PFIs.
Supporting for the VGS framework. The VGS that the GOG PPP Policy has indicated that it plans to establish is designed to facilitate private
sector investment in those PPP projects that while having commercial potential have additional substantial initial capital expenditure outlays that
require additional public sector support in order for them to be effectively structured for market. The project will provide support to the Budget
Office in MOFEP to establish the capacity and operating procedures to ensure effective implementation of the VGS.
Framework for Long Term Financing for Infrastructure: There is a need to also address weaknesses in the capital markets given its significance to
financing PPP transactions. Phase I will do so by making resources available for the following areas: (1) Government bond market development;
(2) Nongovernment Bond markets - Legal and Regulatory Assistance, (3) Transparency and Market Infrastructure; (4) Capacity Building; (5)
Support to the Equity Markets. The support under this component is in line with the Capital Market support outlined in the recently approved
Financial Sector Strategic Plan- FINSSP II. Additionally this component will assist the GOG to undertake the relevant analysis to determine the
appropriateness and modalities of a potential infrastructure financing facility. This will entail a critical assessment of market demand and cost
effectiveness considerations relative to other long-term financing options.
Component 2: PPP Pipeline Preparation and Transaction Advisory Support (US$ 18.5 million): This component supports the GOG to develop a
commercially viable and Government-backed apipeline of PPP projects to financial close. (i) Project Concept Notes (PCN), Investment Appraisal,
PPP Pre-Feasibility Studies (PFS) VfM (Full Feasibly Studies (FS) including investment appraisal and VfM; (ii) Transactions Advisory Services (iii)
safeguards work; and (iv)transaction-specific market outreach activities( i.e. road shows, investor promotion conferences, etc); (iv) other
o.    specialized technical diagnostic work deemed necessary in the assessment\development of the transactions (eg tolling and ability\willingness to
0     pay assessments).
The GOG have a number of projects already under development through unsolicited bids. For these, the Project will support the provision of
o)    upstream sector and technical advisory services to government MDAs. This support can come in the form of specialized consultancies for
05 particular technical issues or for longer-term embedded consultants to support the government in its analysis of these proposals and in negotiating
with sponsors to ensure the best Value for Money outcomes in line with public interest.
-      Finally, this component of the project will assist the PID unit to develop the PDF mechanism which will, over the long run, be the official
3     government vehicle through which financing will be provided for project preparation and transaction advisory work. It is the Government intention to
design this instrument, as will also be the case for the FIL and VGS, with robust governance framework, operating procedures and reporting
requirements. This will also assist in the government effort to mobilize other domestic and donor funding to complement any available government
contributions for project development activities.
** Prospective Projects That May be Considered for Financing Under the PPP Project
Tier I
(1) Oil and Dry Bulk Terminals -Takoradi-Greenfield
(2) Container\Multi-Purpose Terminals -Takoradi- Greenfield
(3) Transit Cargo Sheds -Greenfield
(4) Kotoko-Accra Airport  Rehabilitation & Expansion
Tier II Projects
(5) Accra-Takoradi Motorway, Rehabilitation & Expansion
(6) Tema Maternity Ward,  Rehabilitation & Expansion
(7) Lab/Imaging for Kore Bu Hospital, Greenfield
(8) Korle Bu Hospital Development, Rehabilitation & Expansion
Component 3: Project Management and Monitoring & Evaluation -(US $ 1.5 million) This component will finance specialized consultant services to
assist MOFEP-PID in project implementation and to develop a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation system to track cost effectiveness and
development impact of PPPs that are supported under the GOG PPP Program. The project implementation unit is expected to comprise of 7
positions: Project Coordinator; FM Specialist, Senior Procurement Specialist, Auditor, M&E Specialist, Safeguard Specialist; and Capacity Building/
Page 2 of 5


﻿Outreach Coordinator. Noteworthy that additional support to PID over that for the PlU is also provided under component 1.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
For APL (1): Accra, Ghana.
For APL (2): The part of the project will span all core infrastructure sectors. These sectors most likely include road and bridges, airports, ports,
urban development such as water and sanitation, and rail. The #first-mover# transactions will most likely be in the transport sector- roads, ports,
>,     airport, water and power that are located in all different geographical locations in Ghana. As such, safeguards analysis must take into
consideration all salient physical characteristics at each intervention site. These include, inter alia, waterways, rivers, canals, flood plains, at-risk
O      and environmentally vulnerable locations that are associated with the anticipated areas of intervention.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
0
75     Chaogang Wang (SDV)
a      Joseph Ese Akpokodje (AFTEN)
-0      6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01  Yes         Safeguards policy OP 4.01 has been triggered, given that APL Phase 11 will include
civil works including the rehabilitation and refurbishment of existing infrastructure,
as well as the construction of new infrastructure, such as roads, ports, airport,
power, railways, irrigation and water supply. Some PPP projects have been
initially identified in the pipeline for the first movers. The Bank will finance some of
these project through the FIL or VGS under APL II, and thus, the ESMF was
prepared.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No           Phase I of the APL is not anticipated to have any adverse impacts on critical
natural habitats (forests, wetlands, mangroves, etc.) or environmentally sensitive
areas. However, activities envisaged in the second phase of the Program may
involve civil works that transverse sensitive ecosystems, such wetlands. In
addition, the Program may support port concessions that include rehabilitation and
dredging of existing ports and harbors which could have potential impacts on
marine life.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No           The PPP will not finance any project which involves conservation or degradation of
any forest area and any plantation activities.
Pest Management OP 4.09             No           This APL will not fund directly procurement of pesticides or pesticide application
equipment. However, future activities in the second phase of the project may
require pest management.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11  No       Activities during Phase II of the APL may include civil works with chance of
affecting cultural resources. The ESMF includes provisions for addressing such
cultural heritage chance finds.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No           No indigenous communities are present in any locations of the first mover projects.
Further screening will be carried out during project implementation if the Bank
finances other project in the PPP pipeline.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12  Yes         Many of the transactions in the PPP program could involve minimal or moderate
C,,                                                    land acquisition and or restriction of access to usual means of livelihood as most of
0                                                       the transactions will largely be rehabilitation of existing infrastructure. However,
.U)                                                     some of the transactions may involve significant land acquisition. As part of
Q                                                       safeguards due diligence, a RPF was prepared.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No           This PPP Program will not be directly involved in the construction of new dams.
However, the Phase II of the APL may support projects that depend on water from
existing dams or water reservoir. The ESMF and RPF checklists would be used to
screen such projects for their potential and environmental and social impacts. Dam
safety reports and environmental and social audits of the associated facilities
would be carried as required.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP  No    Some of the water projects that may be funded during Phase II of the APL may
7.50                                             rely on water resources from other countries, thus triggering the World Bank's OP
for projects on International Waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60  No        No disputed areas were identified in any known project locations
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant andlor irreversible impacts:
Overall, the project is anticipated to have positive socio-economic benefits in terms of modernization of facilities and public services, improved
environmental performance; and increased economic growth. Due to large scale of civil works involved only in APLII, the project would have the
potential to cause adverse social and environmental impacts. Most of adverse impacts will be of site-specific, and are limited in terms their
significance. Management of adverse impacts are related to : i) crossing sensitive sites such as a nature reserve and water resource protection
areas; ii) community impacts such as land taking and resettlement; iii) construction impacts such as noise, dust, soil erosion and social
disturbance, and iv) operational related impacts of roads and railways, such as vibration, road safety and community severance.
Page 3 of 5


﻿2. Describe any potential indirect andlor long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
Most of the transactions in the PPP Program are not expected to result in major losses or acquisition of land or in restrictions to sources of
livelihoods. In most cases, the transactions will involve limited adverse social or environmental impacts that are few in number, generally site-
specific, largely reversible, and readily addressed through mitigation measures. Some of the infrastructure projects financed by the project
could, however, have substantial impacts on the environment, some irreversible (e.g. ports, airports, other major transportation systems).
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
The process of alignment and terminal location selection can be an important tool for minimizing or avoiding adverse social and environmental
O        impacts. The alternative analysis, including the option of "no action" or "no project", was required in the TOR of consultant. But such analysis
has not been thoroughly carried out at such early stage.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
0
and implement the measures described.
ESMF and RPF have been prepared based on relevant Bank policies and government regulations in Ghana. The project ESMF and RPF will
o        guide the preparation of environmental and social impact assessments (ESIAs)/environmental and social management plans (ESMPs),
resettlement action plans (RAPs), and/or other safeguards instruments that will be prepared for the PPP transactions, some of which will be
financed by the Bank Phase II of the APL. Transactions not financed by the Bank, whether in whole or in part, will not fall within the Phase II
APL Program description. The project will set up a review process to ensure screening of all potential transactions for environmental and social
impacts prior to approval by the PID. The screening can be carried out by a designated officer of the PID (Environmental and Social Officer) or
other MDA in accordance with the PID procedure. The screening process will involve an assessment of the project to determine: (a) the
appropriate project categorization for the EA; (b) applicable World Bank environmental and social safeguards; (c) potential for environmental
and social impacts and (d) cultural or other sensitivities.
Environmental Management Plans for each sub-project will be required. Each intending concessionaire will as part of its proposal, submit an
overview of how environmental issues of the project will be addressed on a continuous basis. The plans will also specify standards proposed
for the sub-project to ensure environmental sustainability. Standards and plans proposed to address social issues including labor relations will
be particularly important. This could include, inter alia, structures to handle retrenchment, special packages for workers that have attained
retirement age, retraining of staff to acquire the needed skills.
Resettlement action plan will need to be prepared for transactions involving involuntary land taking based on the required in the RPF. The RPF
contains details of the principles and objectives governing the preparation and implementation of resettlement action plans (RAPs), including
review, approval and disclosure of RAPs, screening for Involuntary Resettlement, establishment of baseline and socioeconomic data, and the
likely categories of project affected persons. Compensation arrangements for those being involuntarily resettled, including possibilities for land
exchange, are outlined in the RPF. In particular, the RPF also contains a mechanism for resolving disputes that may arise.
The capacity of the borrower to carry out their respective design, planning, approval, permitting, monitoring and implementation roles will, to a
large extent, determine the success and sustainability of the PPP program in addressing environmental and social issues. The first step in
pursuing capacity building will be to identify the capacity building needs of the various stakeholders. Given the nature of the environmental and
social management requirements and provisions outlined in this ESMF and RPF, competencies and capacity building will be required in the
following areas: (i) Environmental Impact Assessment Process - Basic Concepts, Screening, scoping, impact analysis, mitigation measure and
monitoring, reviewing EIA Reports, (ii) Environmental Due Diligence - Types of due diligence, screening projects for liabilities, scoping due
diligence investigations and reviewing due diligence reports; (iii) Resettlement planning and implementation, including scoping of resettlement
0L
0        impacts, valuation of assets, development of livelihood rehabilitation strategies; and (iv) Monitoring and Evaluation - Understanding the
O        importance of M&E in project implementation, M&E requirements for environmental and social sustainability of projects. Detailed training plan
a)       and budget is included in ESMF. Ghana has institutions and mechanisms for addressing environmental assessment and management.
U)     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
0
on potentially affected people.
.U,
The project has multiple stakeholders, including government line ministries (such as ministry of roads and highways, ministry of transport,
o        etc) , state agencies (such as EPA, land commission), project implementation agencies, non-governmental organizations, and local
communities. During project preparation, meetings were held with key officials and opinion leaders to gauge level of awareness and
involvement with the project, and concerns about project implementation.
In preparation of ESMF and RPF, three public meetings were held in Tamale, Takoradi and Accra. Over 100 persons from relevant government
agencies, local government authorities, non-governmental organizations, and civil society groups attended the consultation meetings.
Attendees were supportive of the project and interested in what types of sub-projects would be considered, and how they would be managed in
terms of short- and long-term disturbances, etc.
Consultation will continue during project implementation. Affected people will be consulted in preparation of resettlement action plan, social
assessment, environmental management plan, and environment assessment. Draft documents will be discussed with MDAs, local authorities,
and affected communities. The approved safeguards instruments will be disclosed locally.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   17-Nov-2011
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                               22-Nov-2011
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                22-Nov-2011
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors
Resettlement Action PlanlFramework/Policy Process
Page 4 of 5


﻿Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                  Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    17-Nov-2011
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                22-Nov-2011
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 22-Nov-2011
If the project triggers the Pest Management andlor Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Auditior EMP.
0
O      If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
0)
0
75     C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
Q      OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [
0..    OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
Ill. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:           Peter J. Mousley
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 14-Feb-2012
Sector Manager:             Name Paul Noumba Um (SM)                                  Date: 26-Jan-2012
0)
0
Page 5 of 5


