                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA5655
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                             Project ID:    P130164
                            Project Name:      Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization Project (P130164)
                            Task Team          Mesfin Wodajo Jijo
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          04-Sep-2013                       Estimated   29-Oct-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDT                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Other rural development (70%), Managing for development results (20%),
                                              Infrastructure services for private sector development (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     224.00           Total Bank Financing:                157.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           67.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 157.00
                              Total                                                                                       224.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to improve rural connectivity, enhance road safety and
                           strengthen road sector management capacity of the state of Rajasthan.
                            3. Project Description
                           The Bank will finance the project through a Credit from the International Development Association

                                                                      Page 1 of 21
                         (IDA) as a Specific Investment Loan (SIL). The Project will be implemented over a five year period.
                         The total cost of the project is estimated at the equivalent of USD 224 million. The Bank share is
                         estimated at US$157 million.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project is designed to enhance the effectiveness of Bank's support through a two pronged
                         strategy focusing on: (a) Investments: supporting poverty alleviation through improved connectivity
                         of smaller habitations; and (b) Technical and knowledge support: facilitating gradual transformation
                         of the Public Works Department (PWD) into a modern road agency by adopting best practice
                         examples of sector policies, strategic planning, and project and asset management, as well as piloting
                         some innovations to optimize cost and time of construction as well as minimize environmental foot
                         print. The project will also finance preparatory activities of follow-on operations including network
                         analysis of about 7000 km of State Highways (SHs)/Major District Roads (MDRs) to prioritize about
                         700 km corridors for which detailed engineering design and project reports will be prepared.
                         These objectives will be achieved through implementing the following components: The project
                         objective will be achieved through implementing the following components: (a) Rural Connectivity
                         Improvement; (b) Road Sector Modernization and Performance Enhancement; and (c) Road Safety
                         Management.

                         The project has four components as described below.
                         Component A: Rural Connectivity Improvement (USD 197 million, including IDA credit USD 138
                         million; civil works): This component would support construction of about 2,500 km rural roads to
                         provide connectivity to about 1,300 revenue villages with population between 250 and 500 in the
                         areas of the state not covered by Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) and introduce good
                         practices of cost effective low volume technologies. The roads will predominantly be built using a
                         bitumen surface and will include all necessary bridges and cross drainage works to maintain year
                         round connectivity. This component will also support consultant and technical assistance services to
                         help the PWD in the overall project management including supervising and monitoring the
                         construction packages with periodic site visits and progress/ status monitoring and reporting.
                         Further, this component includes support for construction of about 100-120 km of village and other
                         low-trafficked rural roads connecting sparse populations through low-cost new technology materials
Public Disclosure Copy




                         like quarry wastes, chip sealing or thin bituminous surfacing on a pilot basis to test and confirm the
                         effectiveness of such technologies in rural roads.

                         Component B: Road Sector Modernization and Performance Enhancement (USD 11 million,
                         including IDA credit USD 7.75 million; technical assistance and goods)
                         The Project will facilitate gradual transformation of the PWD into a modern road agency by putting
                         in place best practice examples for sector policies, financing, strategic planning, road safety, and
                         project and asset management. This would enable the PWD to: (i) enhance both the quality of
                         delivery and effectiveness of various road programs; (b) sustain the assets created under those
                         programs through better planning and garnering more funds; and (c) improve road safety
                         management.
                         The project will support implementation of a Road Sector Modernization Plan (RSMP) designed to
                         address key sector issues by considering the best practice road industry examples available in India
                         and abroad. This component will support implementation of an RSMP in the following key areas:
                          •       Improved policy framework: Strengthening of existing road sector policies and strategies
                         including a robust financing framework for both road construction and maintenance, strengthening of
                         policy framework for PPP and participation of local governments in managing road access to small
                         communities;
                          •       Sustainable Asset Management: Modifying and putting to use the current MMS into a
                         computerized asset management system to prepare prioritized investment and maintenance plans for

                                                                      Page 2 of 21
                         both construction and maintenance of state roads using rational criteria for investment decisions;
                         introduction of area-wide maintenance contract system and other forms of maintenance contracting ;
                           •     Modernization of Engineering Practices and Business Procedures: including introduction of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         modern project preparation and management practices, design and construction standards, new
                         technologies specifically to promote cost-effective road construction for low trafficked roads (about
                         50,000 km), improved procurement procedures, and a PWD-wide procurement and contract
                         management manual;
                           •     Institutional and Human Resource Development: Strengthening of PWD institutional
                         structure, building of staff capacities to keep them abreast with latest road industry practices, and
                         computerization of PWD offices;
                           •     Preparing a pipeline of feasible projects for implementation: Feasibility and DPR preparation
                         of about 700 km of SH/MDRs ready for financing after initiation of pre-construction activities. At
                         appraisal, shortlisting of international consultants for the service is ongoing; and
                           •     Enhancing Governance & Accountability in PWD: Bringing in transparency and openness in
                         all major activities involving public procurement and financing through improved voluntary sharing
                         of information and on demand as per the RTI.

                         Component C: Road Safety Management (USD 15 million, including IDA credit USD 10.55 million;
                         civil works, technical assistance and goods): This component will support the strengthening of road
                         safety management systems in Rajasthan with the objective of reducing the number of fatalities and
                         serious injuries from traffic accidents in the state. This will be accomplished through establishing and
                         implementing a multi-sector demonstration activity approach on selected corridor(s), iRAP surveys
                         financed by Govt. of Rajasthan (GoR), on high-risk, high-volume state highways, support to the state
                         on select policy reviews, capacity building of PWD and other agencies in road safety engineering and
                         integration of road safety into asset and project management, road safety audits on project roads,
                         road safety education and awareness programs, and possible support to procure equipment for
                         ongoing safety programs of the state’s Transport and/or Police Departments. These interventions
                         have been designed based on a detailed Road Safety Management Capacity Review (RSMCR),
                         which followed established guidelines to assess the preparedness of the state’s agencies in tackling
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the state’s road safety challenges. This component will support the following activities:

                         Safe Corridor Demonstration Program (SCDP, USD 12 million, IDA USD8.4 million): This sub-
                         component will primarily support multi-sector road safety interventions on select demonstration
                         corridors. Given that GOR is interested to carry out the iRAP surveys on some of its major state
                         highways quickly , it will finance this activity on ten high-risk, high volume roads to obtain the
                         baseline road safety assessment; a 100 km stretch will then be selected from among these roads as
                         the demonstration corridors for targeted multi-sector road safety interventions. The focus of these
                         interventions will be on improving the safety of pedestrians, bicyclists and motorized two-wheelers
                         through a range of engineering (as suggested by iRAP), enforcement, education, health care and
                         community awareness measures . It will support procurement of related goods, civil works and
                         consultancy services for implementation of a multi-year result-focused safety action plan. A road
                         safety management (RSM) consultancy is envisaged for assisting the PWD’s Road Safety Cell in
                         supervision of the design, development and monitoring of the road safety interventions and related
                         performance indicators for these activities and their effects on treated corridors, comparing before-
                         after road safety conditions. It is envisaged that this will develop the capacity of the state agencies to
                         eventually evolve a State Road Safety and Traffic Management Board, which will coordinate and
                         implement multi-sector road safety interventions on all state roads in the long term, including the
                         development of an informed State Road Safety Strategy.



                                                                       Page 3 of 21
                         Formulation of State Road Safety Action Plan (USD 1.0 million, IDA USD0.7 million): Building on
                         the lessons from the SCDP, this sub-component will support consulting services to help the state in
                         formulating a road safety action plan building upon a long-term safe system vision, establishing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         required institutional structures for multi-sector coordination and decision making that could then be
                         applied on all state roads eventually. This technical assistance will also include benchmarking of
                         current state policies (on road safety aspects) with international best practice to identify and evaluate
                         options and make recommendations for improvements. Proposed tasks under this sub-component are:
                         •        Review of existing institutional arrangements and recommendations for better set-up for
                         multi-sector coordination
                         •        Support to the state’s other stakeholder departments in preparing their investment plans for
                         road safety across the state
                         •        Crash investigation training for Police (to complement the implementation of the Road
                         Accident Database Management System under the proposed NHIIP of MoRTH)
                         •        Development of a Manual of road infrastructure safety principles and good practice
                         (incorporating safe system principles), and associated training for the Public Works Department
                         •        Developing/enhancing University based road safety research capacity in Rajasthan
                         •        Review of heavy vehicle operations, driver and rider licensing arrangements (including
                         license testing), penalties for offences

                         Road Safety audits on project roads (USD 1 million IDA USD 0.7 million): This component will
                         primarily support the conduct of road safety audits on all project roads post construction to ensure
                         that adequate road safety provisions have been incorporated.
                         Road Safety Education & Awareness campaigns (USD 0.25 million, IDA USD 0.18 million): This
                         sub-component will support the formulation and dissemination of road safety awareness campaigns
                         in the project districts. NGOs that already active in the field will be harnessed to deliver the activities
                         that may involve use of audio-visual media, targeted advertisements, road safety literature to be
                         distributed in schools/colleges and use of existing load speaker systems at high crash locations. In
                         addition, it may also include imparting first aid transponder training to establishments along some of
                         the project roads.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Equipment for ongoing Road Safety Initiatives (USD 0.75 million, IDA USD 0.53 million): This
                         sub-component will support the procurement of sample state-of-the-art equipment/goods and
                         associated training in the tactical application of the equipment that could then be used by the state’s
                         Transport/Police Departments in their ongoing road safety initiatives. These could be in the form of
                         speed guns, intersection cameras, variable message signs or back office offence processing systems.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in the state of Rajasthan, a state situated in the north-western part of
                         India. It is the biggest state in the country of India and lies between 23°30' and 30° 11' north latitude
                         and 69° 29' and 78° 17' east longitude. Rajasthan is bordered by the states of Punjab, Uttar Pradesh
                         and Haryana in the north and north-east. The state of Madhya Pradesh lies in the south-east and
                         Gujarat in the south-west. The state shares its north-western and western boundary with the Indo-
                         Pakistan international border that extends about 1,070 km and borders major districts of Barmer,
                         Bikaner, Ganganagar and Jaisalmer.
                         This north-western state is the largest Indian state with an area of 3,42,239 sq.km. comprising 11
                         percent of the total geographical area of the country. The state stretches length-wise 869 km. from
                         west to east and 826 km. from north to south. The Tropic of Cancer passes through its southern tip in
                         Banswara District. Administratively, the state is divided into 32 districts.


                                                                        Page 4 of 21
                         The huge portion of the state of Rajasthan is desiccated and houses the biggest Indian desert- the
                         Thar Desert known as the 'Maru-kantar'. The oldest chain of fold mountains - the Aravali Range
                         splits the state into two geographical zones - desert at one side and forest belt on the other. The Thar
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Desert or the Great Indian Desert encompasses about 70 percent of total landmass of Rajasthan and
                         hence it is identified as the "Desert State of India". The Thar Desert is the biggest desert in India and
                         encompasses the districts of Jaisalmer, Barmer, Bikaner and Jodhpur. It experiences extreme climate
                         with an average annual rainfall less than 25 cm.
                         Rajasthan has also other varying topographic features though a major part of the state is dominated
                         by parched and dry region. The extensive topography includes rocky terrain, rolling sand dunes,
                         some wetlands, barren tracts or land filled with thorny scrubs, river-drained plains, plateaus, ravines
                         and wooded regions. The Mount Abu is the only hill station of the state and houses the Guru Shikhar
                         Peak that is the highest peak of the Aravali range with an elevation of 1,722 m. Moreover, the rocky
                         range of Amber, hilly range of Mewar, river basin of Bharatpur and fertile Aravali range lend to the
                         topography of the state a unique mix. The state also has the largest chunk of wastelands, which is
                         about 20 percent of the total wastelands of the country. The main rivers in Rajasthan are Ahar,
                         Banas, Berach, Chambal, Gambhir, Ghaggar-Hakra, Gomati, Kali Sindh, Lavanavari, Luni, Mahi,
                         Parbati, Sarasvati, Sukri and West Banas.
                         Like its varying topography, Rajasthan has varying climate. The climate of the Rajasthan can be
                         broadly classified into four distinct seasons. They are - pre-monsoon, which is the hot season
                         preceding the monsoon and extends from April to June; the monsoon that occurs in the month of
                         June in the eastern region and mid-July in the western arid regions; the post-monsoon that
                         commences from mid-September and continues till November and the winter that extends from
                         December to March with January being the coldest month of the year. The average temperature in
                         winter ranges from 8° to 28° C (46° to 82° F) and in summer the average temperature range from 25°
                         to 46° C (77° to 115° F).
                         The average rainfall varies throughout the state. The western part that consists of the desert receives
                         an annual rainfall of 100 mm (about 4 inches). The south-eastern part of Rajasthan receives annually
                         650 mm (26 inches). Like most parts of India, the state receives a maximum rainfall during the
                         monsoon season during the months of July to September.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The soil and vegetation type in Rajasthan alter with its wide-ranging topography and the availability
                         of water. The varied kind of soils available in Rajasthan are mostly sandy, saline, alkaline and chalky
                         (calcareous). Clay, loamy, black lava soil and nitrogenous soils are also found.
                         Owing to the limited rainfall, food crops are grown in the plains that are drained by the rivers and
                         streams owing to the alluvial and clay soil deposits. There are mainly two crop seasons. The major
                         crops sown during the months of June-July and harvested in September-October are bajra, jowar,
                         pulses, maize and groundnut. Main Rabi crops for which sowing operations start during October-
                         November and harvested in March-April include wheat, barley, pulses, gram and oil seeds. Among
                         oil seeds, rape and mustard are the two important varieties. Fruits and vegetables are also sown
                         throughout the state depending on the suitability of the soil. Fruit trees grown include orange, lemon,
                         pomegranate, guava and mango. The hilly tracts of the Aravali are characterized by the black, lava
                         soils that sustain the growth of cotton and sugarcane. The main source of irrigation is wells and
                         tanks.
                         Rajasthan is the abode of certain flora and fauna that are particularly endemic to arid regions and are
                         specially adapted biologically to survive in the dry/water deficient regions of the state. Due to vast
                         size and altitudinal variations (some areas are 1,700 m above the sea level), there is variation in the
                         vegetation types found in the state. The state has semi-green forests (Mount Abu) to dry grasslands
                         of the desert. It also has dry deciduous thorn forest (Aravali) and wetlands (Bharatpur).
                         Kejri (prosopis cineraria) is the most prolific and an all-purpose tree of the desert arid zone. The
                         other pre-dominant tree species found in the state are varied species of acacia and Azadirachta indica

                                                                       Page 5 of 21
                         (Neem). Trees found in the hilly area of Mount Abu include Salar (Bowellia seriata), Bamboo
                         (Dendor calamus strictus), Dhav (Anogeisrus pendula), Mango and Jamun (Syzygium cumini).
                         Vegetation in the desert region is limited to very slow growing stunted trees, thorny shrubs and some
Public Disclosure Copy




                         grasses. The forest vegetation is pre-dominantly deciduous in nature. It primarily consists of thorny
                         bushes, shrubs and xerophilious grass. Perennial grasses of the arid zone such as sewan (lasiurus
                         sindicus), dhaman (cenhrus cikaris), boor (cenchrus jwarancusa) and bharut (cenchrus catharficus)
                         not only help to bind the soil but also are good fodder for the livestock.The other natural vegetation
                         type in Rajasthan is ephemeral, occurring only during the monsoon season. Some National Parks also
                         house numerous species of herbs and plants that have medicinal values.
                         Only 9.36 percent of the total geographical area is classified as forest. The extent of natural forests in
                         Rajasthan is not only one of the lowest in the country but also lowest in terms of productivity.
                         Forests mostly confined to the east of the Aravali range constitute just about 9 percent of the total
                         area of the state. With the western half a desert terrain, most of the area under forests is restricted to
                         eastern and southern parts of the state. The forests are unevenly distributed in the various districts.
                         Most of the forests are over the hilly areas i.e. in Udaipur, Rajasamand, Kota, Baran Sawai
                         Madhopur, Chittorgarh, Sirohi, Bundi, Alwar, Jhalawar and Banswara districts, which make up for
                         about 50 percent of the forests of the state. Dense natural forests are in protected patches, mostly
                         confined to various national parks and wild-life sanctuaries.
                         Afforestation in new areas and reforestation on areas where vegetation cover has been lost are both
                         stupendous tasks looking at the adverse edapho-climatic conditions prevailing in most parts of the
                         state coupled with serious biotic pressure. Edapho-climatic constraints affect the productivity and
                         therefore an appropriate carefully designed plantation strategy is essential to ensure survival of
                         plantation works undertaken in the project.
                         Owing to the varied topography, there is also a variation in the flora and fauna (including avifauna)
                         found in the state. The desolate lands of Rajasthan with absolutely no vegetation may be poor but is
                         of great worth to the wildlife as it is rich in animal habitat. Rajasthan is known to have a number of
                         wild life sanctuaries and national parks in India. Some of the important protected areas in the state
                         include the Desert National Park, Rathambore National Park, Sariska National Park, Bharatpur Wild
                         life Sanctuary, Darrah National Park and Mount Abu Wildlife Sanctuary. The faunal wealth of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Rajasthan presents a vivid spectrum ranging from mammals and reptiles to bird life. Antelopes and
                         gazelles are found in most of the regions of Rajasthan. Black buck primarily inhabits the Jodhpur
                         (western) region and the small herds of Indian gazelle are found in the sandy deserts. The Blue bull is
                         spotted frequently on open plains and in the foot hills of the Aravalis. The four-horned antelope lives
                         in the hilly regions. Of the deer family, Sambar and the Spotted Deer are found in forests
                         interspersed with patchy open meadows.
                         The best known of the cat family in Rajasthan is the Tiger. An endangered species, tigers are now in
                         the protection of national parks in Ranthambhore and Sariska. Another of the threatened species is
                         leopard found in the rocky outcrops in the Aravalis and open arid countryside in Jodhpur area. Others
                         include Jungle Cat and the Caracal. The prominent members of the dog family once quite prolific in
                         Rajasthan are the Jackal, the Wolf and the Desert Fox. Civet, Hyena, Monitor Lizard, Porcupine, and
                         Wild Boar are also found in the state. The avian world is also well represented with Peafowl, Grey
                         Partridge, Bush Quail, Sand Grouse, Tree Pie, Great Indian Bustard, Imperial Sand Grouse, Siberian
                         Crane, Coot and Pelican Golden backed Woodpecker, Demoiselle Cranes crested Serpent Eagle and
                         the Great Indian Horned Owl. There are about 450 species of avifauna including various migratory
                         birds. Ghariyal, a large aquatic predator is also found in some rivers of the state.
                         Rajasthan is also famous for the majestic forts, intricately carved temples, decorated havelis and
                         forts. Jaipur, the capital city, is noted for the ancient houses made of a type of sand stone dominated
                         by a pink hue and is known as the ‘Pink City’. The state is home of the valiant Rajputs known for
                         their bravery and chivalry. The history of Rajasthan is about 5000 years old. Archaeological

                                                                       Page 6 of 21
                         excavations establish a connection with the Harappan culture, which dates to about 1000 BC. The
                         state is a classic blend of beauty and historicity, known for its traditional and colorful art. Rajasthan
                         is also famous for textile, semi-precious stones and handicrafts. The block prints, tie and die prints,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Bagaru prints, Sanganer prints, zari embroidery are major export products from Rajasthan. Items like
                         wooden furniture, handicrafts, carpets and blue pottery are also famous.
                         Rajasthan is one of the low income states of India. With a population of 68.6 million, Rajasthan is
                         lagging in many key socio-economic indicators and stands at 17th place (out of 29) in terms of the
                         Human Development Index. Its per capita income (USD 943) is about 20 percent lower than the
                         national average (USD 1185). About 75 percent of the state’s population is rural and mainly depends
                         on agriculture for its livelihood. The state accounts for 10 percent of the milk, 35 percent of the wool
                         and 10 percent of the meat produced in the country - it is the largest producer of wool and the 2nd
                         largest producer of milk in the country.
                         Rajasthan has about 65 varieties of minerals and accounts for more than 70 percent of India’s total
                         mineral production. There are a large number of small-scale industrial units in Rajasthan. There are
                         large deposits of zinc and copper and these are being exploited for the development of industries
                         dependent on these metals. The state also has large deposits of gypsum and lignite and mica. It has a
                         large production of cotton and the textile industries. Among the other industries, cement, ball
                         bearings, sugar, caustic soda and other chemicals operate in the state.
                         The state has good potential for growth in agriculture and agro-based industries, mining and minerals
                         processing, tourism, handicrafts and cottage industries, but this potential is underutilized due to
                         inadequate road infrastructure and market linkages. While Rajasthan has a state road network of
                         124,097 km , classified as State Highways (10,815 km), Major District Roads (9,198 km) and Rural
                         Roads (104,084 km, due to years of under-investment and inadequate maintenance, about half of the
                         road network is poor in terms of riding quality, geometry, pavement strength, drainage, and safety
                         standards. It is also disjointed due to missing links and dilapidated condition of bridges. Only about
                         11 percent of State Highways (SHs) and Major District Roads (MDRs) are double lane. Road density
                         in Rajasthan is 55 km per 100 sq. km, compared to the national average of 110. Per capita road
                         development cost in the state is very high due to the widely dispersed population.
                         In recent years, Rajasthan has made remarkable progress under the Prime Minister Gram Sadak
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Yojana (PMGSY) and provided road connectivity to about 81 percent of its habitations. However,
                         about 7,357 villages with population below 500 are not covered under PMGSY and thus providing
                         all-weather road access to these villages is a priority of the State Government as stated in the Twelfth
                         Five Year Plan. The local governments are already undertaking some earthwork and gravelling
                         works on the tracks serving these habitations under Mahatama Gandhi National Rural Employment
                         Guarantee Act (MGNREGA). Further, despite construction of PMGSY (rural) roads, effective
                         linkages from rural areas to markets served through SHs and MDRs are not yet established due to the
                         poor condition of the middle level of network. To fully realize and extend the benefits of investments
                         in PMGSY, to provide effective linkages from rural areas to markets and to support poverty
                         alleviation through improved connectivity of smaller habitations, significant improvements in the
                         road sector are required. Further, while there has been some investment in widening state highways
                         and district roads to accommodate greater volumes of traffic, much more is required to develop the
                         road network in the state.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Venkata Rao Bayana (SASDS)
                         Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (SASDI)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)


                                                                       Page 7 of 21
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes             The environment and social screening exercises
                         BP 4.01                                      and the application of the Environment
                                                                      Management Framework for rural road works
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      have identified some potential adverse impacts on
                                                                      road-side tree plantation, water bodies, local
                                                                      drainage, public water supply sources, material
                                                                      sources, sensitive receptors, religious sites and
                                                                      other common property resources located along
                                                                      the road. To support integration of environmental
                                                                      and social aspects into the decision-making
                                                                      process and to improve the sustainability of
                                                                      investments made under the project by addressing
                                                                      the identified issues, OP/BP 4.01 is being
                                                                      triggered.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes             As part of Component B (Road Sector
                                                                      Modernization and Performance Enhancement),
                                                                      various sector level initiatives will be supported
                                                                      under the project. These include improving policy
                                                                      framework, strengthening of existing road sector
                                                                      policies and strategies, modernization of
                                                                      engineering practices/business procedures and
                                                                      creating asset management system to prepare
                                                                      ‘prioritized plans’ for both construction and
                                                                      maintenance of state roads.
                                                                      While no civil works will be financed under the
                                                                      project on roads passing through designated
                                                                      protected areas/wilderness areas, the larger
                                                                      institutional development plan for the road sector
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      in Rajasthan would need to address the issues of
                                                                      biodiversity management in the interest of road
                                                                      user safety (accidents with Blue bulls have been
                                                                      fatal/serious), environmental sustainability and
                                                                      tourism related reasons. Appropriate strategies
                                                                      and mechanisms will have to be built into the
                                                                      institutional systems to ensure that the over-all
                                                                      network planning/development and road
                                                                      selection/construction takes into account such
                                                                      factors, including use of rational criteria for
                                                                      investment decisions.
                                                                      Such efforts may help in gradually
                                                                      (systematically in the long term) minimizing and/
                                                                      or mitigating some adverse impacts resulting
                                                                      from fragmentation of natural habitats due to
                                                                      major road projects in the past and more
                                                                      significantly, in reducing the current issues
                                                                      around road user and wildlife safety in areas
                                                                      outside the designated protected areas, where



                                                              Page 8 of 21
                                                                         animals crossings/accidents are known to occur
                                                                         frequently.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes             As per the screening results available so far, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         proposed civil works under the rural connectivity
                                                                         component would be accommodated largely
                                                                         within the existing Right of Way (land already in
                                                                         possession of the PWD). Due to such works, no
                                                                         significant impact on the health and quality of
                                                                         forests is likely to occur. Such works are also not
                                                                         likely to impact the rights and welfare of people
                                                                         and their level of dependence upon the forests.
                                                                         These works are not expected to bring about any
                                                                         change in the management, protection or
                                                                         utilization of natural forests or plantations.
                                                                         However, a small quantum of forest land may be
                                                                         required for sub-projects targeted for improving
                                                                         road safety, primarily to improve geometry at
                                                                         specific spots/sections and to construct the road to
                                                                         a standard configuration. More so, the project will
                                                                         support detailed design/engineering preparation
                                                                         of sub-projects with about 700 km length
                                                                         (primarily SHs and MDRs) – the corridors will
                                                                         be known only after the feasibility/prioritization
                                                                         study has been completed from a network of 7000
                                                                         km. Sub-project/s under this category may require
                                                                         forest land diversion or impact some forest areas/
                                                                         communities. Keeping this fact in mind, OP 4.36
                                                                         has triggered for this project and for all such sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         projects where forest issues are identified, the
                                                                         engineering/safeguard preparation will be carried
                                                                         out in accordance to the requirements of the said
                                                                         policy.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              OP 4.09 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                         biological/environmental control methods or
                                                                         reliance on synthetic chemical pesticides is not
                                                                         envisaged.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             Implementation of sub-projects is likely to affect
                         BP 4.11                                         religious structures of local significance. Also,
                                                                         since civil works are involved, ‘chance finds’ at
                                                                         work sites is a likely impact that will have to be
                                                                         managed by incorporating appropriate provisions
                                                                         in the bidding/contract documents (through
                                                                         environment, health and safety requirements).
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             The requirement for triggering this policy sets-in
                                                                         due to Component A, which provides for Rural
                                                                         Connectivity Improvement, including in districts/



                                                                 Page 9 of 21
                                                                                areas having a sizable tribal population. To
                                                                                address any likely adverse impact and enhance
                                                                                benefit to this population, the project will adopt
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                the Vulnerability Framework prepared for the
                                                                                Bank-funded PMGSY – Rural Roads Project
                                                                                (currently under implementation in Rajasthan).
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes               The roads proposed for construction under
                            4.12                                                Component A are mostly existing earth/gravel
                                                                                roads, built under Government of India's
                                                                                MGNERGA program – which comprises a
                                                                                substantial quantum of works to be financed
                                                                                under this project. The proposed width of such
                                                                                works would largely be restricted to the available
                                                                                Right of Way (land available with PWD as
                                                                                indicated in the Revenue Records). However,
                                                                                where available width is too small, additional
                                                                                land may be required for construction of the road,
                                                                                which shall be made available through voluntary
                                                                                land donation, a mechanism being followed under
                                                                                the on-going Bank funded PMGSY - RRP II
                                                                                Project, which is also currently under
                                                                                implementation in the state of Rajasthan.
                                                                                Though the potential adverse social impacts are
                                                                                minimal, to support integration of social aspects
                                                                                into the decision-making process and to improve
                                                                                the sustainability of investments made under the
                                                                                project by addressing issues listed above, OP/BP
                                                                                4.12 is being triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No                OP 4.37 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                                there is no construction of new dams or activities
                                                                                that are concerned with safe functioning of
                                                                                existing dams.
                            Projects on International           No                OP 7.50 will not be triggered for this project as
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                there are no interventions planned/ proposed over
                                                                                or around an international waterway that could
                                                                                cause a potential conflict. There are also no
                                                                                activities that may affect the use or pollute such a
                                                                                waterway.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   OP 7.60 is not being triggered as the project is
                            7.60                                                not proposed in any disputed area.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project is expected to provide all season access to economic opportunities and social services


                                                                       Page 10 of 21
                         to 1,300 small revenue villages. The inhabitants in the area of influence of the project roads, local
                         businesses, as well as users of the project roads will be the direct beneficiaries of the project.
                         Those businesses and people will have improved access to markets and services through improved
Public Disclosure Copy




                         connectivity. Road users will also benefit from a safe transport system developed through
                         implementation of various road safety interventions proposed under the project. Modernization of
                         the PWD is expected to improve road sector management and build capacity of its staff, which
                         indirectly may benefit the road users in the state.

                         While socio-economic benefits are likely to accrue due to the rural road works and road safety
                         improvement works proposed under the project, some adverse cumulative impacts on natural,
                         physical and social environment are also likely to occur due to proposed activities/works.
                         Environmental Issues. Project activities, if not properly planned, managed and mitigated, could
                         have some local level adverse environmental impacts. The rural road works and road safety
                         interventions on selected road corridors may create some adverse environmental impacts,
                         particularly during the construction stage. While the adverse impacts are likely to be fairly limited
                         in the local context, the exact nature and magnitude of impacts will vary in accordance to the exact
                         location and type of engineering intervention.
                         Deficiencies in planning and design of sub-projects can lead to insufficient arrangements to
                         conserve natural drainage pattern leading to impairment to or worsening of the local/regional
                         drainage. On the whole, the typical likely impacts from the proposed operation include: i) felling
                         of some limited number of roadside trees; (ii) adverse impacts on water resources, including from
                         silt flow during execution of works; (iii) soil erosion; (iv) construction phase impacts, including
                         those related to camp site operation, dust generation, and pollution from plants, machinery, and
                         vehicles and improper disposal of debris/other construction wastes; (v) appropriate management of
                         materials (such as aggregates, sand, water, earth); (vi) safety concerns during construction works
                         and due to increased traffic speeds during operation for both road-users and road-side residents
                         and; (vii) the potential for poorly planned or managed development induced by the improved
                         roads.
                         Diversion of some forest land may also be required for widening/spot improvement in case of sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         projects involving safety interventions. This includes the plantation along avenue declared as
                         ‘protected forest’ that may be affected due to cutting of trees for road expansion in selected
                         stretches or at spots requiring geometric improvements.
                         Also, as part of Component B (Road Sector Modernization and Performance Enhancement),
                         various sector level initiatives would be supported under the project. These include improving
                         policy framework, strengthening of existing road sector policies and strategies, modernization of
                         engineering practices and business procedures and creating asset management system to prepare
                         prioritized plans for both construction and maintenance of state roads using rational criteria for
                         investment decisions. While no civil works will be financed under the project on roads passing
                         through designated protected areas, the larger institutional development plan for the road sector in
                         Rajasthan would need to address the issues of biodiversity management in the interest of road user
                         safety, environmental sustainability and tourism related reasons. Appropriate strategies and
                         mechanisms will have to be built into the institutional systems to ensure that the over-all network
                         planning/development and road selection/construction takes into account such factors.
                         Accordingly, the Bank’s OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment has been triggered, and the
                         project is designated as Category B. The three other Operational Policies that have been triggered
                         for the project include: Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36) and Physical Cultural
                         Resources (OP/BP 4.11).
                         Social Impacts: The project will facilitate provision of better physical access to basic infrastructure
                         facilities such as schools, health care and other government services. As the project includes

                                                                    Page 11 of 21
                           improvement of rural road connectivity, markets for agriculture produce are expected to develop
                           further and access to inputs and sale of produce at competitive prices would improve the socio-
                           economic conditions of communities adjacent to the road.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For developing rural roads under the project, construction is generally proposed along the existing
                           tracks and restricted to the width as available with PWD in the Revenue Records, whereby land
                           uptake is minimised. However, there could be instances where available width is too small
                           warranting some additional land requirement for constructing the road. In such cases, the most
                           common occurrence is the loss of small strips of agriculture land. Such additional land
                           requirements would be mostly in isolated locations requiring geometric improvement. Thus, the
                           potential adverse social impacts of the proposed project are likely to be low. The screening results
                           indicate that the impacts are minimal and not significant in nature. As only marginal losses of
                           structures or land is expected, the over-all the road side communities and road users are likely to
                           benefit from the road works in terms of improved access, safety and drainage.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             Road connectivity improvement interventions proposed under the project have the potential to
                           increase economic growth. It is also expected that the improved road conditions will create
                           opportunities for livelihood and will specifically reduce dust pollution that is currently arising due
                           to non-existent/poor pavement conditions and insufficient road width. Due to the proposed project
                           interventions, it is anticipated that some local drainage/water logging problems will be resolved.

                           The project interventions, particularly through the Rural Connectivity Improvement Component,
                           will help in catalyzing the benefits of investments in PMGSY. The project seeks to improve
                           connectivity to 1,300 villages (with about 2500 km of road length), which will increase their
                           accessibility to educational institutions and health centers that in turn may contribute to a positive
                           improvement in the social indices in the coming years. The strengthening of social capital from
                           enhanced habitation connectivity, increased access to employment, markets for agriculture and
                           other social services, and possible raise in land values are some of the long-term gains flows
Public Disclosure Copy




                           anticipated from the project.

                           Experience from the Rural Roads Project I (closed in 2012) has shown that improved rural roads
                           have led to an increase in land value and has also reduced migration to urban centers. It is
                           expected that the better connectivity and improved road surface quality will contribute either
                           directly or indirectly to the over-all development in the project influence area. However, increased
                           road use could also spur growth of commercial activities along the road. Potential long-term
                           impacts may include changes in land use pattern (from agriculture to real estate or other non-
                           farming purposes) and occupation of the people. This may also expose the road side communities,
                           specifically vulnerable groups to adversities linked to inadequate levels of safety. The impact of
                           road accidents and its impact on a household level is an associated impact resulting from the
                           programme/project
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             All civil works to be financed under this project would follow existing alignments and would
                           largely be confined to the available Right of Way. Since the operation does not involve
                           construction of new roads or by-passes, alternative measures to manage adverse impacts focus on
                           reducing the impact on road-side features. Alternatives were explored in cases where alignment
                           adjustments were required to avoid and/or minimize impact on structures, water bodies, cultural/
                           religious properties or other such features that are locally considered important.

                                                                      Page 12 of 21
                           For this, as part of the project preparation process, an environmental and social screening (on
                           randomly selected potential sub-projects) was conducted. This screening allowed for identification
                           of key environmental and social issues early-on. To address potential impacts on biodiversity and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           natural habitats, the project’s environment screening mechanism was designed to identify and
                           avoid impacts on critical/ecologically significant natural habitats. This has ensured that no such
                           road traversing through a designated protected area is included in the project.
                           Further, engineering design for rural roads incorporates feedback from the consultations with
                           concerned local community, project affected people, state departments (including officials from
                           Forests and Wildlife and Public Works Department), Community Based Organizations and other
                           key stakeholders. The factors to influence the design of road improvement works has included
                           resettlement, tree cutting, loss of arable land vis-à-vis the traffic-carrying performance and safety
                           of the roads, and impact on cultural properties.
                           Likewise, in the feasibility and detailed preparatory studies for about 700 km of state highway
                           corridors that will be financed under this operation, a similar approach (screening, consultations,
                           analysis of alternatives and joint verification exercises including that for by-pass or re-alignments,
                           if any) will be used. During the engineering design process and as part of the environment and
                           social assessment study, cross-sectional, structural and geometric design alternatives will be
                           considered.
                           As part of activities under Component B, the project would support the PWD in improving project
                           preparation and management practices, design and construction standards and adopt new
                           technologies, specifically for promoting cost-effective road construction for low volume roads –
                           some of these activities will also consider ‘alternatives’ from the view-point of reducing costs and
                           for minimizing the over-all environmental footprint in comparison to conventional practices.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Safeguard policy issues have been assessed by carrying out screening and applying OP 4.01, OP
                           4.04, OP 4.36, OP 4. 11, OP 4.12 and OP 4.10, resulting in distinct instruments. The safeguard
                           instruments thus prepared for the project include: (a) Environment Management Framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (EMF) for the over-all project covering both rural and non-rural works; (b) the Environmental
                           Codes of Practice (ECoPs) specifically to guide the preparation and construction of rural
                           connectivity works and; (c) the Social Management Framework (SMF), including the
                           Vulnerability Framework (VF) for rural roads and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for non-
                           rural works. These have been integrated into the project in the form of various avoidance,
                           minimization and enhancement measures. Specific details are given in the sections below:
                           Management of Environmental Issues and Risks
                           The project would support design and construction of roads covering: (a) about 2,500 km rural
                           roads to provide connectivity to about 1,300 villages; (b) road safety interventions and; (c)
                           preparatory studies for rehabilitation/ improvement of about 700 km priority sections of SHs/
                           MDRs. The rural road works mostly involve improving existing earth and gravel roads developed
                           under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) to thin
                           bituminous surfaced standard by providing suitable sub-base and base layers underneath. The road
                           safety works would mainly involve curve flattening, junction improvement, widening/ repair of
                           narrow/weak bridges, provision of truck-bye and other measures, as appropriate. The sub-project
                           preparation for pipeline projects involving Feasibility study, prioritization and DPR preparation,
                           covering about 700 km of state highways/road corridors may involve widening to two-lane
                           standards and improvements within and outside the existing right-of-way, including road safety
                           engineering measures to remove safety hazards.
                           The environment management process and tools for the project have been designed keeping in


                                                                     Page 13 of 21
                         mind this varied scope of work. Accordingly, to effectively plan, design and integrate
                         environmental dimensions into the over-all project preparation and implementation, an
                         Environment Management Framework (EMF) has been prepared. As the 2500 km of the proposed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         works are dispersed over a large geographic area consisting of several small works (typically with
                         a length of 2 to 5 km), a framework approach clearly specifying the selection, planning, design,
                         construction and monitoring requirements is more effective as a management tool.
                         The EMF has been prepared to guide the over-all sub-project preparation and implementation
                         process and covers aspects such as screening methodology (including on biodiversity/wildlife
                         issues); process and structure for preparing EIAs and corridor specific EMPs; institutional
                         arrangements; supervision, monitoring and reporting requirements to facilitate compliance with
                         the requirements specified in the World Bank Operational Policies and those required under Govt.
                         of India and State Government regulations. The framework will help in addressing environmental
                         issues and risks in a structured and systematic manner. The EMF has two specific sections. One
                         that will apply to the Rural Connectivity Component (adapted from RRP I and PMGSY – Rural
                         Roads Project) and the second that would guide the preparation of Feasibility, DPR and
                         environment safeguard studies for the selected 700 km of State Highway/Major District road
                         corridors. The latter will also guide the preparation and execution of road safety works/
                         interventions on selected road corridors.
                         The EMF has been informed by: (a) the results of an environment screening exercise that was
                         conducted on selected roads proposed to be covered under the project; (b) experiences from the
                         Bank-funded road projects in the state, particularly the completed Rural Roads Project I and the
                         on-going PMGSY – Rural Roads Project; and (c) experiences from similar state road projects
                         implemented/being implemented elsewhere in the country.
                         The environment management strategy/tools for the project further involves: (i) a screening
                         exercise to identify key issues including those related to forests/biodiversity/wildlife and consider
                         those in the selection and design of sub-projects; (ii) revision/modification of the Environmental
                         Codes of Practice (ECoPs) currently in-use for Bank-funded PMGSY - Rural Roads Project in the
                         state for application to the rural road works and; (iii) preparation of Environmental Impact
                         Assessment (EIAs) along with preparation of corridor-specific Environment Management Plans
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (EMPs) for state highways that would be prepared under Component B of the project (civil works
                         will not be funded under this project but may become a part of a follow-on project).
                         The nature and scale of civil works proposed under the Rural Connectivity Improvement
                         component of this project are essentially the same as that being executed under the on-going
                         PMGSY – Rural Roads project. Therefore, the environment safeguard instruments currently in-use
                         in Rajasthan after necessary modifications (such as inclusion of GoI/GoR’s regulatory
                         requirements for non-rural works proposed under the project) have been used for this project as
                         well. Following the application of the already developed and disclosed instruments for the
                         PMGSY – Rural Roads project, bids for civil works worth US$ 53 million have been already been
                         awarded and bids worth US$75 million are expected to be awarded by the end of September 2013.
                         Prior to bid invitation for such works, in line with the safeguard requirements and using tools
                         (formats) agreed for the PMGSY project, a screening has been/is being conducted to help the
                         decision-making process about inclusion of the proposed road under RRSMP. Further, the outputs
                         following the processes such as transect walk for identifying key features/issues and consultation
                         with local community, are to be appended as part of the Detailed Project Report (DPR) prepared
                         for each sub-project. An audit will confirm the application and implementation of agreed systems
                         and procedures prior to the disbursement of expenditure for such works.
                         For effective implementation of the rural road works, the requirements set forth in the EMF and
                         more specifically the ECoPs will be appropriately integrated and cross-referenced in the Detailed
                         Project Reports, contract conditions and Bills of Quantities.

                                                                   Page 14 of 21
                         However, the nature and scale of civil works envisaged for the State Highway sub-component
                         (covering preparation of Feasibility, DPR and Safeguard Studies for 700 km of State Highways) is
                         much larger than the scope of civil works under the rural road component. Thereby, corridor-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         specific EIAs and EMPs will be used as instruments for dealing with environmental issues of
                         roads that will be prepared as part of this operation.
                         Biodiversity protection and management also forms the core of the over-all environment
                         management approach in the project. Following this approach, it has been ensured that no road
                         traversing through a designated protected area is included in the project. The project will support
                         development of appropriate mechanisms as part of asset management and road prioritization
                         activities to deal with biodiversity/ wildlife issues in the larger context of the road sector
                         development in the state. Further, with huge quantities of quarry wastes that could be used in road
                         construction, the project will explore the opportunities for piloting new technologies/materials for
                         cost-effective road construction.
                         Monitoring and Evaluation: The environment management instruments provide monitoring and
                         evaluation parameters and describe the institutional arrangements to facilitate the ‘process’ and
                         ‘progress’ monitoring. The application and implementation of environment management
                         instruments, EMF (already prepared) and corridor specific EMPs (when these will be prepared
                         during the course of the project) will be closely monitored. A comprehensive assessment report on
                         environmental performance will be prepared by the Project Authority at mid-term and end-term.
                         Management of Social Issues and Risks.
                         To improve the over-all social safeguard management for RRCP and ensure compliance with OP
                         4.12 and OP 4.10 for Rural Connectivity Works (Component A), exclusive operational document
                         – the Social Management Framework (SMF) that includes the Vulnerability Framework (VF) - has
                         been adopted with suitable modifications from the PMGSY – Rural Roads Project. This
                         framework is in operation in Rajasthan for the on-going PMGSY – Rural Roads Project. The SMF
                         provides for information sharing, stakeholder participation in design, implementation and
                         monitoring, grievance redress, technical capacity development, and entitlement remedies for
                         Project Affected Persons (PAPs). It also clarifies the gaps in land donation processes and provides
                         guidelines for all land transfers, to help mitigate adverse impacts of the project on the PAPs. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         VF that is included in the SMF ensures that the development process generated by the Project fully
                         addresses the needs of the vulnerable population and enables measures to promote distributional
                         equity among the project affected persons (PAPs) in a culturally sensitive manner.
                         To guide the preparation of Feasibility, DPR and social safeguard studies for the selected 700 km
                         of State Highways/ Major District road corridors and preparation and execution of road safety
                         works/interventions on selected road corridors, the PWD has prepared a different social safeguards
                         instrument, viz, Resettlement Policy and Framework (RPF) in accordance with the Bank's OP 4.12
                         and OP 4.10. RPF provides the provisions to support squatters and vulnerable encroachers and
                         also assistance to the titleholders over and above the compensation amounts to be paid as per LA
                         Act in case they are affected due to the project.
                         If land is to be acquired for road safety interventions, the same will be acquired through the
                         District Administration following the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. Over and
                         above these internal arrangements, the PWD will hire NGO services, as required, to assist in the
                         implementation of RAP/s, if any.
                         Consultation and Grievance redress. Grievance redress will be achieved through informal and
                         formal mechanisms. Community concerns will generally be addressed during the project
                         preparation stage through information dissemination, the transect walk and community
                         consultations. A formal 3-tier Grievance Redress Mechanism will operate at the Panchayat,
                         District levels and at judicial level through the courts of law.
                         Assessment of Borrower Capacity for Environment and Social Management and Implementation

                                                                  Page 15 of 21
                         Arrangements
                         Borrower Capacity: The project will be implemented by PWD, using its existing structures to the
                         extent possible through support from other departments within Government of Rajasthan,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         including transport, police, health, revenue, forest, and district collectors and local offices. An
                         adequately staffed Chief Engineer (CE) (PMGSY) office has been functional in the state to
                         implement various Bank funded projects, including the Rural Roads Project I and the on-going
                         PMGSY project. The Chief Engineer’s office will be responsible for implementing the project
                         under the overall guidance of the Principal Secretary, PWD and a High Level Project Steering
                         Committee. The Chief Engineer’s office has designated units for engineering designs,
                         procurement, contract management, environment and social management, financial management,
                         computerization, institutional development, governance and accountability, and road safety.
                         To implement the safeguard management plans, institutional capacity is being developed through
                         creation of an Environment and Social Management Cell within the PWD (as part of the Chief
                         Engineer’s office). The cell would: (a) adequately maintain the personnel and resources required to
                         supervise, monitor and implement the safeguard instruments such as EMF, ECoPs, SMF, VF and
                         RPF; (b) acquire land in a timely fashion, if identified for a specific sub-project during DPR
                         preparation; (c) obtain and comply with the provisions of regulatory clearances, if and as
                         applicable and any other necessary government clearances/permissions such as from Irrigation,
                         Ground Water and State Pollution Control Board; (d) ensure the satisfactory implementation of the
                         environmental and social protection measures stipulated in the safeguard documents/instruments;
                         (e) furnish to the Bank quarterly environmental supervision and monitoring reports and; (f)
                         commission external consultants to evaluate the implementation of safeguard instruments.
                         The Public Works Department in Rajasthan is already familiar with Bank’s safeguard
                         requirements through implementation of Rural Roads Project (RRP I) and the on-going PMGSY -
                         Rural Roads Project. Even though there has been some staff turn-over, over-all there has been an
                         exposure on the application of safeguard instruments during sub-project preparation and their
                         subsequent implementation during project execution. The same institutional set-up, headed by
                         Chief Engineer at the state headquarter and with Project Implementation Units (PIUs) at field
                         level, will be involved in the preparation and implementation of this project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         However, there are some capacity issues on dealing with safeguard issues for larger sub-projects
                         (such as preparatory studies for State Highway Improvement sub-component), where specific
                         environment and social assessments are required and corridor-specific plans have to be prepared
                         and implemented in a systematic and time-bound manner.
                         More so, given that there are some environmental issues that are important and relevant in the state
                         and sector context (such as water availability issues; mining of materials for road construction;
                         road safety; need for exploring alternative/low cost material and technological solutions; presence/
                         crossing of wildlife and the resultant accidents etc.), the PWD as part of its modernization and
                         improvement plans would need to broaden its current thinking and approach (on environment and
                         social management issues) to more holistic and sustainable solutions. This would require setting-
                         up of a dedicated unit/cell (long term basis, not just for the project) as part of the over-all
                         institutional operations and its proper use and integration in day-to-day working of the department.
                         Strengthening staff capacity by deputing dedicated officials and providing them adequate
                         orientation/exposure/training is necessary. The staff in the field divisions would also need
                         orientation and sensitization as there is a strong linkage between engineering, environment and
                         social dimensions of road planning, execution and operation.
                         Implementation Arrangements for Environmental Management: Specifically for environment
                         management, the staffing arrangements in the project would be as follows:
                         A. At the headquarters, an Environment Management Cell will be created to handle all matters
                         pertaining to environmental management in road projects, including all activities related to project

                                                                  Page 16 of 21
                         planning and preparation, supervision, monitoring, evaluation, reporting, documentation, training
                         and over-all co-ordination with concerned agencies on environment management. The staffing of
                         this cell will be as follows:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (i)       A Nodal Environment Officer (Executive Engineer/Assistant Engineer level) who will
                         deal with matters pertaining to integration of environmental aspects into project design/contract
                         documents; preparation/integrating environmental aspects in the ToRs for various studies;
                         integrating environmental aspects in the modernization plan and other institutional studies; co-
                         ordination with various departments/agencies of Govt. of Rajasthan and other units involved in
                         project implementation and will be responsible for over-all monitoring and supervision of
                         environmental activities in the project. The Nodal EO will deal with matters pertaining to
                         regulatory clearances; planning, preparation and execution of plantation works including
                         compensatory afforestation and; co-ordination with Department of Forests and Wildlife Wing, as
                         and when needed. The Nodal EO will also deal with matters pertaining to supervision and
                         monitoring of environmental aspects related to construction management during project
                         implementation and assist the Chief Engineer in supervision, reporting documentation and data
                         management.
                         (ii)      An independent expert hired from the market to guide, support and assist the activities of
                         the environmental cell of the PWD.
                         (iii)     Data and Documentation Assistant: The EMC officials will be supported by a Data and
                         Documentation Assistant.
                         B. At the division level, an Assistant Engineer from the PWD division will be designated as the
                         Environment Officer, whose main responsibilities will include regular supervision, monitoring and
                         co-ordination of environmental aspects related to pre-construction, construction and operation
                         stages of the project. The Environmental Officer shall also be responsible for data collation and
                         selected verification at the field level.
                         Capacity Building for Environmental Management. The project may result in improving PWD’s
                         exposure and over-all capacity in managing environment issues. A training plan has been prepared
                         incorporating the project needs as well as the short and longer term capacity building needs of the
                         PWD. The plan consists of a number of training modules specific to various target groups. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         training will cover basic principles and methods of environmental assessment; mitigation plan/s;
                         implementation techniques; monitoring and reporting requirements; regulatory requirements and;
                         other relevant environmental management methods and tools.
                         Implementation Arrangements for Social Safeguards: The existing patchy implementation capacity
                         can affect social outcomes despite adequate safeguard provisions. This dearth in capacity will be
                         addressed through training and sharing of social lessons from roads programs. The Envir onmental
                         and Social Cell at PWD, Jaipur will coordinate the over-all implementation and monitoring of the
                         social safeguard instruments. In the field, the respective Divisional Offices will designate an
                         Assistant Engineer who would be responsible for the social management process. The ESC will be
                         assisted by social specialist hired from the market.In addition, specific measures would be put in
                         place to support social goals: (i) introducing social standards for DPR acceptability; and (ii)
                         providing an effective, and predictable grievance redress system. Continuous monitoring by the
                         designated Social Officer with support from Social Specialist hired from market, complimented by
                         Performance Audits and periodic reviews, will help identify the implementation lags as they
                         emerge, with appropriated modifications made.
                         All the Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) prepared by the field offices will have to be certified by
                         the Social Specialist for their compliance with the provisions of SMF. Sample reviews of contracts
                         under the project will be undertaken to monitor performance on application of agreed safeguards
                         procedures. The outcomes of the social safeguard processes will be monitored by the designated
                         Social Specialist at headquarter level and through observation and review of progress and audit

                                                                  Page 17 of 21
                           reports. The monitoring reports from these actions will be submitted to the Bank periodically and
                           communicated to the Gram Panchayats, as required. An audit will be undertaken to assess for the
                           compliance with the provisions of the SMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Stakeholders: The primary stakeholders related to this project include: (i) the community residing
                           along/close to the road, including farmers; (ii) road-side shop owners/vendors /businessmen; (iii)
                           road users; (iv) project affected persons; and (v) trusts/committees of the religious properties and
                           local market associations. The secondary stakeholders include local bodies like panchayats and
                           municipalities, officials from Public Works, Land Administration, Forest and Wildlife,
                           Agriculture, Horticulture, Tribal Welfare, Irrigation, Utility Departments and representatives from
                           the Community Based Organizations (CBOs) and Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs).
                           Consultations: Stakeholder consultation mechanisms are central to the design and implementation
                           of sub-projects and provide for information sharing, consultation and collaboration measures. It
                           provides procedures for dissemination of information and consultation with communities and the
                           affected people in particular through various stages of the sub-project cycle. While design stage
                           involvement requires stakeholder participation in planning road alignment and providing for local
                           level interventions (such as those related to cultural/religious properties, provision of cattle ramps
                           and drainage), implementation phase requirements encourage community feedback for a more
                           participatory monitoring.
                           A consultation framework has been laid out in the Environment Management Framework
                           (including ECoPs) and Social Management Framework (including Resettlement Policy
                           Framework and Vulnerability Framework) to ensure proper stakeholders consultation at all key
                           stages of sub-project preparation and implementation. The framework provides for encouraging
                           participation of women and representatives from the local community in districts under Schedule
                           V (tribal) in the consultation process.
                           The consultation process is designed such that: (i) affected people are included in the decision
                           making process; (ii) links between communities and their natural resource base adjacent to project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           locations are explored; (iii) public awareness/information sharing on project alternatives, benefits
                           and entitlements is promoted and; (iv) views and design solutions from the communities are
                           solicited.
                           Over-all, the consultation strategy/process is designed to enhance positive and manage negative
                           impacts from the project. Findings from these consultations will be considered in deciding on the
                           selection of preferred alignment/s, drainage facilities and other design interventions. Follow-up
                           consultations will also be conducted, as needed through pre-construction and construction stages
                           of the project. Outputs from this process have been/will be integrated into the engineering design
                           to the extent possible. Once the project commences implementation, the project team is expected
                           to have regular consultations with local stakeholders on environmental and social issues. The
                           project will also establish a Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM) at the sub-project level and at
                           the state level. A framework for GRM is presented in the RPF.
                           In accordance with applicable Bank policies, public consultations at local (along the project roads)
                           are being carried out. For the rural roads connectivity component (Component A), the process,
                           including transect walk and village meetings as part of the DPR preparation, as agreed for the on-
                           going Bank funded PMGSY – Rural Roads project are being/will be followed. The Environment
                           Management Framework (including the ECoPs) and the Social Management Framework
                           (including the RPF and Vulnerability Framework) of the present project, is in fact a modified/
                           revised version, which is currently in-use for t he on-going Bank funded PMGSY - Rural Roads
                           Project in Rajasthan among other six participating states. Feedback and inputs have been obtained


                                                                     Page 18 of 21
                           from a range of stakeholders both through formal and informal means on various occasions and
                           levels since the effectiveness of the first RRP I in 2005 and the on-going PMGSY - Rural Roads
                           Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For the component on preparatory studies for state highway/MDRs, consultations on
                           environmental and social issues and design propositions, with both primary and secondary
                           stakeholders would be conducted as part of the EA/SA process. Key stakeholders such as project
                           affected persons, opinion makers, experts, elected representatives and different department
                           personnel would be consulted both through individual discussions, village meetings and block
                           level meetings.
                           The public consultation process so far has indicated that the people strongly support the proposed
                           project interventions. Some concerns have also been highlighted by the people and these pertain to
                           drainage; accidents and road safety; compensation and resettlement issues; disturbances to
                           religious property and water sources. These have been/are being addressed during design
                           preparation, to the extent possible.
                           Disclosure: All PMGSY related safeguard documents are in public domain since September 2010.
                           The same instruments have been revised/modified for this project. The revised EMF, ECoPs and
                           SMF (including VF& RPF) have been disclosed in the PWD’s website and hard copies for
                           reference are available at the PMU level. The documents revised/modified for RRCP have been
                           also disclosed in the Bank’s Infoshop.
                           The executive summary of the safeguard documents will be translated in vernacular for
                           information and use of key stakeholders and will be placed in locations accessible to public.
                           Further, the full document will be made available at the project offices (sub-project level) for
                           reference of interested individuals/groups. Safeguard documents for sub-project roads (for about
                           700 kms of roads), whose preparation will be supported under the project will also be made
                           available on the Project Authority’s website.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       20-Aug-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    03-Sep-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                             05-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       20-Aug-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    03-Sep-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                             05-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       20-Aug-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    03-Sep-2013



                                                                    Page 19 of 21
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                              05-Sep-2013
                           Comments: Vulnerability Framework prepared for the on-going Bank funded PMGSY – Rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         Roads Project will be used for the proposed project – the document is already in
                                         public domain.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         Pest Management – Not Applicable
                         Physical Cultural Resources - Done - Covered under EMF.

                         Not Applicable
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement



                                                                     Page 20 of 21
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Mesfin Wodajo Jijo
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Zia Al Jalaly (RSA)                               Date: 17-Sep-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (SM)                      Date: 17-Sep-2013




                                                                       Page 21 of 21
