                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1725
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Argentina                          Project ID:    P129397
                            Project Name:     Montreal Protocol Hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFC) Phase-out Project
                                              (P129397)
                            Task Team         Tuuli Johanna Bernardini
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       22-Apr-2013                          Estimated   01-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: LCSEN                                 Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General industry and trade sector (95%), Central government administration
                                              (5%)
                            Theme(s):         Pollution management and environmental health (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         1.90           Total Bank Financing:   0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                         Financing Gap:          0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  0.00
                              Montreal Protocol Investment Fund                                                         1.90
                              Total                                                                                     1.90
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to support Argentina in phasing out controlled ozone-depleting
                           substances in accordance with the country's obligations under the Montreal Protocol.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 11
                         The proposed operation focuses on HCFC phase-out in the industrial sector. It is designed to support
                         the Government of Argentina (GoA) in its overall efforts to comply with its Montreal Protocol (MP)
                         obligations with a two-staged approach to reach: 1) a 10% reduction in HCFC consumption over the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         period 2013-2015 and 2) a further reduction of 25% by 2020. The first stage components have been
                         approved by the Multilateral Fund Executive Committee (MLF ExCom) and are ready to begin
                         implementation, while component 5 on the Foam Sector Plan (FSP) has been deferred until
                         preparation is authorized to begin by the MLF ExCom, in line with initiation of stage II of the
                         Argentine HCFC Phase-out Management Plan (HPMP), likely towards the end of 2013.

                         The project will be composed of five components with an estimated total value of USD 5 M to be
                         mostly invested in sub-projects. As necessary, the project will be restructured to adjust details of the
                         project design after the stage II FSP component has been prepared in detail. The restructuring will be
                         parallel to submitting the FSP to ExCom approval.

                         As part of the project preparation, a phase-out model has been developed that takes into account
                         HCFC consumption in the foam sector, the number of HCFC consuming enterprises and their phase-
                         out capacity, the state of specific alternative technologies, their overall short-term impact on both the
                         ozone layer and the global climate, measured by ozone depleting potential (ODP) and global
                         warming potential (GWP) respectively, and the degree to which their technological transformation
                         would fit into overall sector development strategies of the country.

                         In line with the MP Parties’ Meeting Decision XIX/6, which requests that HCFC phase-out be done
                         in a manner that takes into account climate and energy efficiency, the GoA is targeting adoption of
                         low GWP alternatives which will lead to both a net reduction in HCFCs and a lowering in energy
                         demand and avoided CO2 emissions. This is in accordance with a number of national programs and
                         projects aimed at promoting energy efficiency.

                         The project entails a combination of investments and technical assistance (TA) activities to foam
Public Disclosure Copy




                         enterprises and financial incentives to owners of CFC-using chillers. The components are outlined
                         below according to their status as per respective MLF approvals. They will be supported by policies,
                         regulations and TA activities that will be implemented in tandem with the HPMP being implemented
                         with the lead of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO).

                         The project has been prepared leaving the door open to a potential additional financing that could be
                         incorporated as a further component on HCFC-22 production phase-out. This will depend first on a
                         positive decision on eligibility for funding of the so called swing plants that are able to change their
                         production from one substance to another and have already received MLF funding for conversion
                         away from CFC production. This is the case of Frio Industrias Argentinas S. A. (FIASA), the only
                         HCFC producer in Argentina. Second, FIASA would need to apply for an independent technical
                         audit of its plant in order to initiate sub-project preparation.

                         Stage 1: Approved Project Components

                         Component 1: HCFC Phase-out at Mabe Argentina S.A. (MLF USD 838,612)

                         Provision of financing to phase-out 167.8 metric tons (18.5 ODP tones) of consumption of
                         HCFC-141b in the polyurethane rigid insulation foam production of domestic refrigerators at the
                         Mabe Argentina S.A. enterprise, including, inter alia: the installation of hydrocarbon storage and


                                                                       Page 2 of 11
                         blending equipment; replacement and/or retrofitting of foaming equipment; installation of a safety
                         control and gas monitoring system; polyurethane system development and qualification, including
                         the corresponding trials, training and refrigerators testing, and a comprehensive safety audit.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In the support of the goals of Phase 1 of the HPMP, this initial foam sector investment sub-project
                         targets the largest refrigeration appliance manufacturer in the country with a slight majority of
                         domestic ownership. The conversion of this enterprise can be easily implemented and achieved as
                         well-known conversion technologies that can ensure reliable, timely, climate-friendly and cost-
                         effective phase-out are readily available. The conversion technology selected by the enterprise is
                         pentane, consistent with the company's policy to use non-ODP/low GWP alternatives. Hydrocarbons
                         (HC, cyclopentane or cyclopentane/isopentane blend) have been selected as the HCFC replacement
                         given that HCs are a widely used, proven technology and that the factory size allows for a
                         competitive investment. The conversion will cause a minor increment of the company’s operating
                         costs of USD 30,105 for one-year of operation. As a result of foreign ownership, there is a minimum
                         of 48.4 % counterpart obligation. The conversion project from HCFC to HC at Mabe will involve
                         changes in the foaming process.

                         Component 2: CFC Replacement in Chillers (MLF USD 950,000)

                         Provision of support for the replacement of at least 20 CFC chillers in private enterprises: A total of
                         USD 1 M from the MLF-funded Global Chiller Replacement Program has been approved by the
                         MLF for implementation in Argentina. USD 900,000 will be used for providing 20% subsidies for
                         purchase of new equipment, USD 50,000 for related TA, and USD 50,000 for overall project
                         management during Phase I.

                         The component will continue an on-going replacement pilot. By replacing CFC chillers with ODS-
                         free and more energy efficient systems, future CFC emissions at participating chiller sites will be
                         prevented and future GHG emissions can be reduced. HCFC-123 and HFC-134a are the primary,
                         well-proven current choices for new centrifugal compressor chillers. While the selection of chiller
Public Disclosure Copy




                         technology will be decided by the chiller owners, the project will discourage the replacement of
                         chillers with HCFC-based equipment. Taking into account the high GWP of HFC-134a refrigerant,
                         new chillers using low or zero GWP refrigerants would also be explored in industry where hazardous
                         materials are routinely used and staff is highly trained in safety measures and emergency response.
                         The replaced chillers will be verifiably destroyed to make sure they are removed from the market.

                         The project's Operational Manual (OM) provides technical criteria for determining eligibility and
                         potential prioritization of chiller replacements and sets specific operational rules for implementing
                         the component. For example, eligible chillers must be in active use and the owner will be
                         responsible, supported by the PCU, for recovering and subsequently securing an adequate handling
                         of the CFC contained by the chiller to be replaced. The commitments and mutual obligations are
                         formalized by a Sub-grant Agreement between the PCU and the beneficiary enterprise.

                         Provision of technical assistance in diffusion, monitoring, and reporting on the replacement program
                         of CFC chillers and energy efficiency gains: 5% of the component 2 funding will be allocated for
                         small technical consultant and dissemination activities aimed at facilitating implementation and
                         potential scale-up of CFC chiller replacements.

                         Component 3: Technical Assistance: Monitoring and Compliance Reporting on HCFC-22 Production
                         Phase-out (MLF USD 76,000)

                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                         Establishment of a monitoring system to address annual HCFC-22 production, import quotas, and
                         stockpiles, and the upgrade of the Monitoring Information System (MIS) housed with the Secretariat
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of Environment and Sustainable Development. To ensure reduction of the HCFC consumption, the
                         GoA will regulate FIASA’s HCFC-22 production. Part of it is for export. This export component
                         increased significantly during 2009 and 2010, a trend that is expected to continue. Because of this
                         large percentage of export of locally produced HCFC-22, stockpiles are likely to be significant at the
                         end of year. The stockpiles need to be monitored to confirm that they will be exported in the
                         following years.

                         Given the inter-relationship between production and consumption of HCFCs and the implications
                         that this has for Argentina's MP compliance, a monitoring system will be established to address
                         annual production and import quotas and track stockpiles. Funding will be used to upgrade the MIS
                         housed with the SAyDS by developing a dedicated window within the system, housed with the MI,
                         to monitoring data related to HCFC production. This funding will also allow the MI to conduct
                         regular verification visits at FIASA’s production facility.

                         The OM includes a technical and operational plan for implementing the component.

                         Component 4: Project Management (MLF USD 50,000 for Phase I)

                         Provision of financing to the PCU to coordinate and manage the project implementation. The PCU
                         within the MI and under the Secretariat of Industry will coordinate and manage implementation of
                         the project components and their sub-projects in accordance with national regulations, sector specific
                         policies, and as stipulated in the Operational Manual (OM). Based on the MLF guidance, the project
                         is able to support the PCU operating costs with a 5% from component 2. The PCU team will be
                         primarily funded by the MI.

                         HPMP/Project Phase II
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 4: Project Management (Estimated USD 150,000)

                         See above. Based on the MLF guidance, the project is able to support the PCU operating costs with a
                         5% from component 5. The PCU team will be primarily funded by the MI.

                         Component 5: Foam Sector Plan for HCFC Phase-out (Estimated MLF USD 3 M)

                         To meet further HCFC phase-out targets in 2020 and beyond, Argentina will need to address
                         remaining consumption in the foam sector. The Bank has received USD 120,000 of approved
                         preparation funds to develop the Foam Sector Plan (FSP), and an initial foam sector survey was
                         carried out in early 2012 to define its scope. As decided during the HPMP Phase I negotiations, it
                         was agreed that the development of the FSP will be initiated towards the end of 2013 and be
                         submitted for ExCom approval as part of HPMP Phase II activities in 2014, with implementation to
                         commence in 2015. The projected value of the FSP is USD 3 M; including a TA component valued
                         at USD 0.5 M that will cover off the work to be done with the smaller enterprises for whom no direct
                         investment funding is available.

                         The FSP aims to completely phase-out consumption of HCFCs in various foam applications,
                         including domestic appliances, commercial refrigeration, sandwich panels, spray and pour in place,

                                                                      Page 4 of 11
                         box foaming, door insulation, integral skin, insulation boards, and others. Based on the 2010 national
                         HCFC survey, the Plan will address about 758 MT remaining in the foam sector, after taking into
                         account the 168 MT that will have been phased out by the Mabe project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The FSP will employ a series of investment and policy measures to address the phase-out in both
                         eligible and non-eligible enterprises. Technical assistance activities will be provided to the national
                         stakeholders on HCFC alternatives, including production trials and appropriate use. The Plan will
                         promote introduction of low GWP blowing agents in the applications where they are feasible and
                         commercially available (see part b of Appraisal Summary). For PU foam, in particular, hydrocarbons
                         have been successfully adopted by many enterprises that are capable of adequately addressing the
                         required safety measures.

                         While the currently available low GWP alternative blowing agents might not be applicable for all
                         small and medium scale PU foam enterprises, in particular for the spray foam application, other
                         suitable alternatives may emerge in the coming years. For example, a local company is working on
                         the development of a 100% vegetable-based polyol formulation for spray foam. During the
                         preparation of the FSP, the Bank will explore the feasibility of adoption of such an alternative.

                         The FSP will cover some 560 companies producing foam in Argentina. About 27 companies have
                         consumption of more than 5 MT of HCFCs per year, while the majority has consumption less than
                         0.5 MT. Most of these small companies are engaged in spray foam and ‘pour in place’ applications.
                         The FSP will address the enterprises with large consumption of HCFCs through individual
                         investment projects.

                         The foam sector survey identified 14 major enterprises producing PU foam that were and are
                         expected to remain eligible for individual projects as presented in Annex 2 of the Project Appraisal
                         Document.

                         The FSP will also address enterprises producing XPS insulation board. This will eliminate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         HCFC-142b and HCFC-22 in the manufacture of XPS insulation board. Information will be collected
                         to identify eligible foam enterprises during the sub-project preparation.

                         With respect to the smaller enterprises, the GoA will work through existing system houses to assist
                         and deliver the technical and financial assistance needed. There are five fully formulated system
                         houses in Argentina that supply a total of more than 500 customers. It is envisioned that the system
                         houses will assist in the FSP preparation and implementation by providing:
                         •       User identification
                         •       Collection of baseline data
                         •       Provision of technology transfer
                         •       Conduction of trials
                         •       Assistance in project design and equipment specifications (if necessary)
                         •       Collection of implementation documentation

                         Any conversion that for technical or economic reasons would imply closure of an enterprise will be
                         avoided, taken that small amounts of HCFC consumption will remain feasible until 2030.

                         To impleme nt the FSP, a 5% project management fee will be added to the component costs to be
                         applied from the MLF, as per MLF guidance. The PIU will provide:
                         •       Project supervision

                                                                      Page 5 of 11
                         •       Procurement (as required)
                         •       Compliance verification
                         •       Technology transfer to the system house (“train the trainer?)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The FSP will be designed and implemented to provide a level playing field for competing companies
                         to phase-out their use of HCFCs. Preparation of the component will include close consultations with
                         the involved enterprises aiming the FSP to benefit different size enterprises in an appropriate manner.
                         The FSP will include TA that together with Bank support will allow the GoA to establish a
                         supporting policy structure that will: (i) ensure that HCFC phase-out is permanent and sustainable,
                         (ii) promote the transfer and dissemination of suitable substitute technologies, (iii) provide
                         opportunities (e.g. workshops) for stakeholders to discuss policies on market readiness and supply of
                         chemicals for substitute technologies, and (iv) organize training for beneficiary enterprises/workers.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Sub-project investments will take place within the boundaries of existing industrial or commercial
                         plants in different parts of the country. The Mabe Argentina S.A. is located in an industrial park in
                         San Luis. Most of the projected chiller conversions will take place in industrial plants in the City of
                         Buenos Aires. The initial survey conducted for the Foam Sector Plan includes information on major
                         foam enterprises located mainly in the cities of Buenos Aires and Rosario (Santa Fe), and one in
                         Mendoza and Cordoba. Further site visits to foam enterprises will be conducted once the preparation
                         of the FSP gets started, likely towards the end of 2013.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Andrea Semaan (LCSEN)
                         Jose Vicente Zevallos (LCSSO)
                         Marcelo Hector Acerbi (LCSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              See section II on Key Safeguard Policy Issues
                          BP 4.01                                             and Their Management below.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               No investments which have an impact on natural
                                                                              habitats will be financed.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               No investments which have an impact on forests
                                                                              will be financed.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No               The project does not include the procurement or
                                                                              use of, or lead to an increased use of pesticides or
                                                                              other agricultural chemicals.
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               The project activities will take place within the
                          BP 4.11                                             boundaries of existing industrial or commercial
                                                                              plants/facilities, and will not adversely affect sites
                                                                              with archaeological, paleontological, historical,
                                                                              religious, or unique natural values.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No               The project is located in urban areas in different
                                                                              locations of the country, and will not affect
                                                                              indigenous peoples as defined by OP/BP 4.10.



                                                                      Page 6 of 11
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No                The involuntary resettlement policy is not
                            4.12                                                triggered as the project is not expected to entail
                                                                                any land acquisition or taking. Physical works
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                will be limited to equipment replacement in
                                                                                existing assembly lines. Further, the ESMF
                                                                                includes a negative list that excludes any activity
                                                                                that would imply involuntary resettlement as
                                                                                defined in the OP/BP 4.12.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No                The project does not depend on the safe
                                                                                functioning of any dam and neither invests in any.
                            Projects on International        No                   No investments which have an impact on
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                international waterways will be financed.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   The sub-projects will not be located in areas of
                            7.60                                                territorial dispute.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The project triggers the OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment. However, it will mainly have
                              a positive impact on the global environment by reducing the use of HCFCs, which are ozone-
                              depleting substances and greenhouse gases with a global warming potential (GWP) ranging from
                              several hundred to several thousand times that of CO2. There are no large-scale, significant and/or
                              irreversible negative impacts on environment caused by the project activities or ODS-free foam
                              production.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Under component 1, hydrocarbon (HC) technology has been selected as a blowing agent to replace
                             HCFC-141b that is generally used in the foam sector. HCFC-141b has a GWP of 2,400, whereas
                             that of HC (cyclo-pentane) is less than 25. HC is classified as a Volatile Organic Compound
                             (VOC), but its use results in very low levels of emission, about 2-3% of the blowing agent. This is
                             minuscule for instance compared to emissions from motorcycle traffic. There is no significant
                             environmental impact from the use of HC.

                             Other chemicals involved in foam production are Methylene Diphenyl Isocyanate (MDI), amine
                             catalysts, and fire retardants. Foam enterprises purchase pre-formulated polyol (blended with or
                             without HCFC-141b) and polymeric MDI for their rigid foam production. The probability that a
                             spill of polymeric MDI – a liquid at room temperature – would contaminate soil or water is very
                             low, because floors of foam production areas are cement coated with an anti-leakage low
                             permeability/chemical layer such as epoxy. In case MDI leaks into the soil, it will react with
                             moisture and the reaction result in CO2 and insoluble polyurea compounds, which are not
                             biodegradable but chemically inert. Fire retardant and a very limited amount of amine catalysts are
                             mixed/pre-formulated in the polyol at the system houses from which the foam enterprises purchase
                             pre-blended polyol and MDI; most of the foam enterprises will not handle these toxic chemicals
                             directly, yet Mabe S.A. is an exception to this rule. Fire retardant and amine catalysts will remain
                             in the final foam products and are not likely to be emitted to the environment during foam
                             production or later. As such, no legacy environmental contamination issues are anticipated in


                                                                        Page 7 of 11
                          association with foam production.

                          The principal safeguards concern of the project is flammability of HC and subsequent safety
Public Disclosure Copy




                          requirements that may present operational challenges for smaller foam enterprises. Methylene
                          chloride is the cleaning agent now used in the foam production process. It can affect human body
                          if inhaled or if the liquid comes in contact with eyes or skin or is swallowed. Methylene chloride
                          can be a hazardous waste but only when present in large quantities and high concentrations.
                          However, only small quantities are used in foam production and the mixing heads for new
                          cyclopentane based foaming units can facilitate the phase-out of the use of methylene chloride as a
                          cleaning agent.

                          Overall, there are minor environmental and OHS risks associated with inappropriate handling of
                          the various foam production chemicals or caused by spills. The project itself will not result in any
                          additional impacts or risks as all these chemicals are already in use at the plants. Nevertheless,
                          good operational procedures and mitigation measures must be in effect at all facilities supported
                          by the project. However, as a result of new processes and chemicals introduced by the project,
                          additional safety requirements will be necessary regarding fire and explosion risks associated with
                          the adoption of HC technology during the foam production process.

                          Finally, foam production process as well as chiller replacement imply generation of non-hazardous
                          solid waste that will need to be adequately disposed of.

                           Respect to social management, the project does not trigger any of the Bank’s social safeguards. No
                           land acquisition or taking will be needed as sub-project investments and physical works will be
                           limited to equipment replacement in existing assembly lines and/or within the boundaries of
                           existing industrial plants or commercial building in different parts of the country. The social
                           management of the project will imply the PCU to (i) ensure that adequate worker health and safety
                           measures are in place for the management of phased-out materials and introduction of alternative
                           technologies; (ii) prevent/mitigate potential loss of jobs/incomes within the small foam companies,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and (iii) ensure that adequate outreach, consultation and participation mechanisms are in place for
                           industry stakeholders to ensure their ownership, awareness and buy-in to conversion processes, as
                           well as for adjacent communities, as applicable.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             There are no indirect, cumulative, or long-term negative impacts caused by the project.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Argentina has been one of the early proponents of the accelerated phase-out of HCFCs due to its
                           international commitment to protect the ozone layer of further man-made depletion. The current
                           technically and economically available and more climate-friendly alternative technologies to
                           HCFCs are described in the PAD. For example HC technology is well proved and robust and
                           provides for feasible conversion options.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Each beneficiary enterprise will be required to comply with all applicable environmental and
                           labor law permits and follow provisions of sound socio-environmental management in order to
                           participate in the project activities and receive access to funding. An Environmental and Social


                                                                    Page 8 of 11
                         Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared for the project and disclosed within the
                         country and in the World Bank InfoShop. The ESMF reflects relevant national legal and
                         institutional framework, the Bank’s OP 4.01 and the World Bank Group OHS guidelines. It
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provides guidelines and tools to be applied in all beneficiary enterprises related to occupational
                         health and safety (OHS) measures and environmental management. The project will put particular
                         emphasis on appropriate waste disposal procedures for activities that involve replacement of
                         equipment.

                         To ensure application of adequate environmental management and OHS measures by the project’s
                         beneficiary enterprises, the same will need to fill out an initial questionnaire on their socio-
                         environmental management in light of complying with the related national regulation. Depending
                         on the Project Coordination Unit’s (PCU) review and consequent results of the initial
                         questionnaire, a beneficiary enterprise will need to fill out a more detailed auto-evaluation (or
                         parts of it) on its management system/measures, as well as submit the PCU any supporting
                         documentation. An environmental consultant hired by the PCU will be responsible for reviewing
                         this information and, as deemed necessary, contact the company for additional information and/or
                         agree on a site visit to verify the situation.

                         As necessary based on the initial socio-environmental screening, the beneficiary enterprises will
                         prepare site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) with technical
                         guidance from the UCP as an integral part of their sub-project proposal in order to participate in
                         the project and have access to funding. The ESMP, as applicable, will be included as a contractual
                         responsibility in each sub-grant agreement to be signed by the PCU and a project beneficiary.

                         Enterprise managers and operational staff will be trained on environmental and OHS requirements
                         during the foam conversions as necessary. Safety audits will be carried out before the start of
                         normal foam production using hydrocarbons. The UCP will provide the Bank regular reporting on
                         the project’s socio-environmental management within the regular project progress reports. Further,
                         the Bank’s implementation support missions will review and discuss implementation of the ESMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Some of the most typical mitigation measures will be the following:
                         -        Proper design and construction of foam workshops and proper chemical storages
                         -        Good practice of chemical handling; specifically, careful cyclopentane handling to avoid
                         uncontrolled reactions and conditions resulting in fire and explosion and careful MDI handling to
                         avoid inhalation and skin contact resulting in eye, respiratory system and skin irritation and
                         respiratory sensitisation
                         -        Communication and training workers about the potential risks
                         -        Preparation of appropriate emergency preparedness and response measures
                         -        Use of proper labor safety devices
                         -        Using of efficient and adequate extraction ventilation
                         -        Conduction of safety audit at each foam production workshop before foam production
                         start-up
                         -        Putting in place appropriate measures for solid waste collection as per national legislation

                         The ESMF describes the responsibilities of each stakeholder, including monitoring and reporting
                         on compliance. To secure PCU's capacity to conduct socio-environmental site visits to the
                         beneficiary companies of the project, a specialized environmental consultant will be hired by the
                         PCU on as-needed basis to secure proper socio-environmental management of the project.



                                                                    Page 9 of 11
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Because there are no likely negative impacts of the foam production enterprises that extend
Public Disclosure Copy




                           beyond the plant itself, the stakeholders from a socio-environmental perspective are the enterprises
                           themselves and their labor force. Technical meetings and workshops will be organized as deemed
                           necessary during the actual preparation of component 5.

                           The ESMF (in Spanish) has been appropriately disclosed within the country (http://www.industria.
                           gob.ar/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/MGAS-PROYECTO-HCFCs-VF-6.pdf) and in the World
                           Bank's InfoShop.

                           Annex 4 of the ESMF provides guidance on required consultation procedures as per different
                           types of sub-projects.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-May-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-May-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Argentina                                                        21-May-2013
                           Comments: See the document through the following link: http://www.industria.gob.ar/wp-
                                         content/uploads/2013/04/MGAS-PROYECTO-HCFCs-VF-6.pdf
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector          Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated    Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies

                                                                    Page 10 of 11
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Tuuli Johanna Bernardini
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Enos E. Esikuri (SM)                        Date: 24-May-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 11 of 11
