                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA360
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Feb-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Benin                                     Project ID:                        P117764
                              Project Name:                   Decentralized Community Driven Services Project (P117764)
                              Task Team Leader:               John Van Dyck
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 08-Dec-2011                                     Estimated Board Date:              03-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  AFTSP                                     Lending Instrument:                Adaptable Program Loan
                              Sector:                         Sub-national government administration (30%), Other social services (30%), Primary education (30%), Health (5%),
                                                              Water supply (5%)
                              Theme:                          Other human development (40%), Decentralization (40%), Social safety nets (20%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                           Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                             0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                   46.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                         46.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              To improve access to decentralized basic social services and to mainstream the CDD approach for such services.

                              3. Project Description

                              This project's predecessor, the Projet National d'appui au Developpement Conduit par les Communautes (PNDCC), has proven to be an efficient
Public Disclosure Copy




                              and effective structure to finance and implement local development projects and to foster community participation. However, as a parallel structure
                              operating outside of normal government systems, the PNDCC was conceived even at its inception in 2004 as a transitional structure, which would
                              fade away as its mission of mainstreaming community-driven approaches in Benin's decentralized structure was fulfilled.

                              The Decentralized Community Driven Services Project (PSDCC in French) represents an evolution from the projectized structure of the previous
                              project to one that aims to use and reinforce country systems, while at the same time capitalizing on the proven effectiveness of the CDD approach
                              in providing basic infrastructure and fostering participation. Given the need for a continuous engagement over a sustained period to build the
                              capacity of country systems, the project will be the first phase of a three-phase Adaptable Program Loan (APL) with three phases. The project
                              (phase I of the program) will have the objective of improving access to decentralized basic social services and mainstreaming the CDD approach
                              for such services. It will focus on building capacity at the central, commune, and community levels for development planning, fiduciary controls,
                              monitoring and evaluation, and community implementation of development projects, and piloting social accountability mechanisms. Phases II and
                              III will focus more explicitly on translating that capacity into increased responsibilities for communes to fulfill all of their mandates, and ensuring that
                              the involvement of central ministries in local service delivery is limited to their legal mandate. Phases II and III will also focus on making sustained
                              refinements to the transfer system, monitoring and evaluation arrangements, and scaling-up/mainstreaming of social accountability mechanisms.

                              The project will have three components:

                              Component 1: Service Delivery Grants to Communes ($36.0 million).

                              This component aims to strengthen the delivery of basic services at the decentralized level in line with the objectives of Benin’s SCRP-3 and
                              PONADEC. It will support increased levels of fiscal transfers to local governments (communes) to be used for investments that are included in
                              their Commune Development Plans. Eligible expenditures will include investment projects in the areas of education, health, water, and commerce
                              (public markets). Whereas under the PNDCC IDA funds flowing to subprojects went directly from the PIU to communes or communities, the
                              project resources would be transferred to communes periodically during the year through the FADeC fiscal transfer system.

                              Eighty percent of resources under this component will fund community-level investments that are consistent with Commune Development Plans in
                              the areas of education, health, water, and market infrastructure. For these relatively simple community-level investments, the responsibility for
                              implementation would be delegated by the communes to communities through the CDD approach. For more complex investments with a multi-
                              village scale, communes would retain responsibility for implementation. Twenty percent of the resources under Component One will support
                              commune-level infrastructure investment.

                              Unlike PNDCC, all 77 communes in Benin will receive support for commune and community subprojects in the new project. In PNDCC, the three

                                                                                                                                                                              Page 1 of 4
                         urban communes with special status (Cotonou, Porto Novo, and Parakou) had been excluded.

                         Component 2: Pilot Social Safety Net Program (IDA US$ 5.0 million)

                         Benin’s social safety net system was shown to be insufficiently developed to permit significant scaling-up to mitigate the impact on the poor and
                         vulnerable of the global food, financial, and fuel shocks experienced from 2008 to 2010, as well as the floods that struck the country in 2010.
                         Existing safety nets are small in scale (with the exception of school feeding), fragmented, poorly evaluated, and not easily scalable in times of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         crisis.

                         The July 2010 PNDCC Additional Financing set aside financing for technical assistance to help Benin strengthen its social safety net system. The
                         first phase of the technical assistance, a review of Benin’s existing social safety net programs including recommendations for strengthening safety
                         nets, was completed in May 2011. Among other recommendations, the review suggested that the Government consider developing a new safety
                         net program combining two windows: cash transfers for the chronic poor, particularly those households unable to provide labor, together with
                         labor-intensive public works for households with available labor. These windows should be capable of scaling up rapidly in times of crisis. In the
                         second phase of the technical assistance under PNDCC, which is currently underway, the Government is conducting a feasibility analysis for this
                         new safety net program.

                         This component would support a pilot phase of the new two-window safety net program re commended by the Review. The objective of the pilot
                         would be to test an approach to support the consumption of the poorest and most vulnerable households through a labor-intensive public works
                         program and a targeted unconditional cash transfer program. About 20% of communes in the country (about 15 communes) would be targeted for
                         the pilot program according to their levels of income poverty, contribution to national poverty, and their levels of food insecurity. A selected number
                         of the poorest villages in each commune will participate n the pilot.

                         Selected villages will carry out a Participatory Poverty Assessment (PPA) to enable them to identify the factors underlying poverty in their
                         community, identify the poorest and most vulnerable households, and prioritize their investment needs. Individual beneficiaries for the safety net
                         interventions would be selected from the poorest and most vulnerable households. It is expected that a small number of households would not
                         have any member available to work; these would receive unconditional cash transfers. Those households with an individual able to work (following
                         criteria such as age, physical ability to work, and others, to be defined in the Operations Manual) will be eligible to participate in public works.

                         Component 3: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (IDA $5.0 million)

                         Subcomponent 3.1: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building for MDGLAAT, CONAFIL, and sectoral Ministries. This sub-component will aim to
                         strengthen the performance of the FADeC and to ensure the necessary capacity is in place to supervise and mainstream the CDD approach.
                         Capacity building will be provided for CONAFIL to strengthen administration of the FADeC (for example, by improving the transparency of the
                         calculation of allocations, fiduciary controls, and monitoring and evaluation). MDGLAAT’s capacity to implement the project will be ensured by the
                         creation of the Secretariat for Decentralized Community Driven Services (SSDCC in French). Technical assistance will be given to prefectures to
                         strengthen their technical and financial capacity to ensure the quality of decentralized investments. Assistance will also be given to key sectoral
                         and cross-cutting Ministries to implement decentralization and deconcentration while incorporating and streamlining the CDD approach into their
                         regular operations.

                         Subcomponent 3.2: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building for Communes. This subcomponent builds on the capacity-building program for
                         communes supported by PNDCC. It will strengthen communes’ capacity to (i) improve participatory preparation of PDCs, (ii) implement poverty
Public Disclosure Copy




                         targeting; (iii) adopt the CDD approach for the implementation of small-scale community-level investment projects; and iv) implement social
                         protection projects (safety nets).

                         Subcomponent 3.3: Grassroots Management Training (GMT) for Communities. Capacity building of communities to participate in the commune’s
                         development planning process and to take on the responsibility for implementing development projects is a key element of the CDD approach.
                         This sub-component will support the expansion of the GMT program, which has already been successfully conducted in 1,518 communities under
                         PNDCC, to cover all 3,700 communities in Benin—regardless of whether they will implement a project through the CDD approach. Refresher
                         training will be offered to communities already reached.

                         Subcomponent 3.4: Social Accountability, Monitoring and Evaluation. This sub-component will support the roll-out of community scorecards in all
                         communities in Benin as part of the GMT. Through focus groups and facilitated meetings, the scorecard process will engage communities in
                         discussions with service providers on their performance, and on actions that can be taken to address performance shortcomings. The sub-
                         component will also support the monitoring and evaluation function of the SSDCC, periodic technical audits, and the impact evaluation of the
                         safety nets pilot.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The physical project activities would be carried out in all communes of Benin and well over a thousand local communities in Benin.Sub-projects
                         would include construction of schools, health clinics, wells and the extension of existing small water supply systems, latrines, rural roads, and
                         boutiques/market stalls/hangars. Labor intensive public works are expected to include soil and water conservation activities, natural resources
                         management, and small feeder roads rehabilitation. Other expected activities such as social safety nets cash transfers, capacity building and
                         technical assistance are not expected to have adverse social or environmental impacts.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS)
                         Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)




                                                                                                                                                                    Page 2 of 4
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes              Subprojects to be supported under Component One will include construction of
                                                                                                 schools, health clinics, wells and the extension of existing small water supply
                                                                                                 systems, latrines, rural roads, and boutiques/market stalls/hangars. The
                                                                                                 subprojects could trigger small-scale and site specific environmental impacts
                                                                                                 typical of category B projects. The menu of eligible public works under Component
                                                                                                 Two will likely include soil and water conservation activities, natural resources
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 management, and small feeder roads rehabilitation.
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      No
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                               No
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                          No
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11           No
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                    No
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              Yes              Land take or restriction of access to sources of livelihoods is not envisaged, but as
                                                                                                 due diligence the Resettlement Policy Framework from the preceding PNDCC has
                                                                                                 been revised and adapted for this project.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        No
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP        Yes              The water-related investments supported under the Project will consist of the
                               7.50                                                              construction of village wells and the extension of existing water supply systems to
                                                                                                 underserved villages. Since the project will be implemented on a community-
                                                                                                 driven basis, the number and location of water investments cannot be measured in
                                                                                                 advance at this time. As the water-related investments will be small-scale in
                                                                                                 nature, the impact on surface waters or groundwater reserves should not be
                                                                                                 significant and no appreciable harm is anticipated to the water resources of any
                                                                                                 neighboring countries. Still, the Project triggers the World Bank Operational Policy
                                                                                                 for Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) because some of the
                                                                                                 Project-supported water investments may be implemented in the basin of certain
                                                                                                 tributaries of the Niger River or transboundary aquifers. In accordance with OP/BP
                                                                                                 7.50, the Bank notified the Niger Basin Authority (NBA) about the project and
                                                                                                 received the no objection of the NBA to proceed with the project.
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60            No


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                   This project is a category B project. Its impacts are not expected to be large-scale, significant, or irreversible. The activities that will require
                                 closer supervision and application of environmental safeguards will be under components 1 (commune and community sub-projects) and
                                 component 2 (labor intensive public works). Safeguard issues in relation to dust, soil and water pollution, soil erosion, loss of vegetation and
                                 land acquisition have been identified as possible impacts that could arise from implementation of sub-projects.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                  Potential indirect and/or long-term impacts are not anticipated as a result of project activities.
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                  No other project alternatives were considered given that the impacts were considered small and reversible.
                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                                  and implement the measures described.
                                   For the previous project (PNDCC), the Borrower prepared (i) an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) which includes
                                 guidance for dealing with safeguards issues arising from project acitivities; and (ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to address potential
                                 issues that might arise due to the need for land acquisition. Implementation of the environmental and social safeguards throughout the PNDCC
                                 have been consistently satisfactory. The PNDCC ESMF and RPF have been revised and updated for this project and have been disclosed in-
                                 country and in the World Bank Infoshop.

                                 As oversight for the implementation of safeguards will pass from the PNDCC PIU to the Ministry of Decentralization, safeguards training will be
                                 provided under the project for this Ministry and for communes. The lessons from the soon to be finalized PNDCC Environmental and Social
                                 Audit will also be integrated into the safeguards framework for the new project.
                               5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                                  on potentially affected people.
                                   Key stakeholders include the communes, communities, the Ministry of Decentralization, technical ministries, international donor partners, and
                                 NGOs. The Government held consultations during the revision of the ESMF and RPF, and these document reflect the inputs gathered during
                                 the consultations. Since the Project triggers the World Bank Operational Policy for Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50), the Bank
                                 notified the Niger Basin Authority (NBA) about the project and received the no objection of the NBA to proceed with the project.

                               B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                               Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                                                                                                                                                                              Page 3 of 4
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                           Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              18-Jan-2012
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          23-Jan-2012
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           25-Jan-2012
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Directors
                             Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                           Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              18-Jan-2012
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          23-Jan-2012
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           25-Jan-2012
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            After disclosure of the ESMF and RPF in country and in the Infoshop, the Bank retroactively upgraded the mission of December 8-16, 2011 to
                            appraisal in the Appraisal Completion Note dated January 30, 2012.

                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the       Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                              Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                          Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language       Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for    Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same         Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    John Van Dyck
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Name:                                                                       Date:
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz (SM)                                           Date: 16-Feb-2012




                                                                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 4
