                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC4127

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Morocco                          Project ID:      P145529
                            Project Name:       MA-Rural Water Supply (P145529)
                            Task Team           Xavier Chauvot De Beauche
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           07-Oct-2013                      Estimated        30-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      MNSWA                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Water supply (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (80%), Water resource management (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         61.00                Total Bank Financing:       50.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      11.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         50.00
                              Total                                                                         61.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to provide access to safe and reliable water supply for
                           rural communities in targeted underserved areas, while supporting the Borrower’s shift towards
                           water service delivery through house connections in its service area.
                           C. Project Description
                           The origin of this project is an explicit request for Bank support to set-up the pre-financing
                           mechanism for service extension through HC at the scale of its service area, and intensify its support
                         for the latest phase of its GEP program. As such, the new project is proposed as a “repeater Project?.
                         It substantially builds on previous efforts to help a high-capacity borrower consolidate its RWS
                         mission in support of Morocco’s economic and social development.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed Project aims to continue the World Bank’s support to the latest phase of GOM’s GEP
                         program by intensifying its efforts to extend access to SP-service in areas that have none (component
                         1, consisting of 80% of Project investment costs), and by leveraging a household prefinancing
                         mechanism to accelerate HC-service deployment (component 2, consisting of 20% of Project
                         investment costs, half of which are allocated for the upgrading of upstream access networks that had
                         been under-sized), with additional resources allocated for technical assistance and capacity building
                         activities.

                         As such, the Project would include three components. Financing indicated below amounts to a total
                         Project cost of EURO 61 million, out of which EURO 50 million is financed by the Bank. This
                         corresponds to the actual cost estimates of ONEE, though the Government's official request
                         mistakenly indicated these amounts in US$. This will be corrected in the future.

                         Component 1: Extension of access to water supply through standpipes in four priority provinces
                         (Safi, Sidi Bennour, El Jadida and Skhour Rehamna).
                         The cost of this component, with contingencies, is estimated at EUROS 45 million (US$ 58 million
                         equivalent), of which EUROS 35 million (US$ 45 million equivalent) is financed by the Bank
                         (almost 80%) and EUROS 10 million (US$ 13 million equivalent) is financed by local counterparts.
                         This component consists of water production, conveyance and rural water supply in the Safi, Sidi
                         Bennour, El Jadida and Skhour Rehamna provinces. This infrastructure component is comprised of
                         three independent regional subprojects, or subcomponents, spanning respectively i) the Safi, Sidi
                         Bennour, El-Jadida provinces, ii) the Skhour Rehamna province, and iii) the Beddouza douar in Safi
                         province. Under each sub-component works will be contracted for the construction of storage tanks
                         (elevated or grounded), pumping stations, and rural conveyance laterals connecting the trunk line to
                         public standpipe delivery systems in targeted villages. It is estimated that this component will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provide new access to potable water to approximately 270,000 rural citizens in more than 600
                         villages (douars).

                         Component 2: Supporting the shift towards water service delivery through house connections.
                         The cost of this component, with contingencies, is estimated at EUROS 10 million (US$ 13 million
                         equivalent), of which EUROS 9 million (US$ 11.7 million equivalent) is financed by the Bank (90%)
                         and EUROS 1 million (US$ 1.3 million equivalent) is financed by local counterparts.
                         This component aims to respond to the demand of an increasing share of the rural population for HC
                         and will be implemented by ONEE throughout its service area (which does not include any of the
                         disputed areas in Morocco.) through two subcomponents:
                         a. Pre-financing mechanism: IBRD financing will contribute to an Infrastructure Development Fund,
                         set up as a revolving fund or pre-financing mechanism available to households who opt for HC-
                         service and request such facility. This pre-financing mechanism has been set up and is being
                         managed by ONEE under the on-going Rural Water Supply and Sanitation project, but with a
                         geographical limitation to households located in the project provinces. Under the proposed project,
                         ONEE is to scale-up such pre-financing facility to its entire service area. The design will remain the
                         same as under the ongoing project. Namely, the pre-financing mechanism will provide credits to
                         demanding households to pre-finance a share of up to MAD2,500 of their contribution to the cost of
                         their house connection (Full household contribution to its house connection is MAD3,500).
                         Households will refund this credit in installments over time through their water bills, according to a
                         pre agreed repayment schedule. The revolving fund will not directly finance any works or any
                         contract. ONEE’s involvement to develop HC service delivery in a given commune will be
                         conditioned by the following eligibility criteria: (i) commitment of at least 70% of the population to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         request a HC for water supply; (ii) the upfront payment by households of MAD 3,500 contribution to
                         the cost of their house connection (either upfront or using the pre-financing mechanism); (iii) the
                         payment by CR of a contribution of 50% of the investment cost; and (iv) households have or commit
                         to develop a satisfactory sanitation solution, as defined in ONEE’s sanitation standards (to be
                         reviewed during preparation). An environmental screening of each service extension through house
                         connections will be performed (Component 3) as a prerequisite for the extension, including the
                         existence of acceptable provisions for sanitation and to determine if local environmental and
                         technical conditions allow satisfactory sanitation through on-site sanitation systems. .
                         b. Works to increase the capacity of the regional access network in areas where villages are eligible
                         for HC service, but where the regional network installed in earlier stages of PAGER and GEP is
                         insufficient to provide an adequate service, due to lower design standards at the time (20 liters per
                         capita per day). In these areas, ONEE will study the best technical solution and will procure and
                         manage the works to implement it.

                         Component 3: Implementation Support and Capacity Building.
                         The cost of this component, with contingencies, is estimated at EURO 6 million (US$ 7.7 million
                         equivalent) entirely financed by the Bank.
                         This component will provide:
                         a. Technical assistance (TA) to ONEE’s project implementation to (i) enable efficient project
                         management & monitoring, (ii) strengthen participatory approaches to service provision including
                         helping communities prepare and organize for either SP-service or HC-service deployment and
                         operation, and (iii) the identification of the proper wastewater management solution for each village
                         and the promotion of sanitation to prevent any possible negative impacts from an inadequate disposal
                         of increased wastewater flows.
                         b. Capacity building (CB) through a series of studies informing its overall RWS program, increasing
                         its capacity to effectively manage the overall GEP program and improve the performance of RWS
Public Disclosure Copy




                         SP-service and HC-service operations.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project is located in three areas in the last most critically under-served Atlantic coast provinces:
                         a. villages in the Zemamra and Sidi Bennour areas, spanning Safi, Sidi Bennour and El-Jadida
                         provinces;
                         b. villages in the Skhour Rehamna area in Rehamna province; and
                         c. villages in the Beddouza area in Safi province.

                         Project environmental risks in these areas are deemed low and manageable for (i) construction
                         nuisances, (ii) facility locations, (iii) availability and quality of water resources for potable water
                         supply, (iv) treatment chemicals storage, and (v) residuals management. ONEE's past performance
                         managing these risks is generally satisfactory. It has developed and successfully applied project
                         ESMPs, with the support of the Technical Assistance to carry out these tasks, i.e. monitor the design
                         and implementation of the environment and social action plans, and provide regular updates in their
                         project progress reports. ONEE also has strict requirements in terms of the quality of the water
                         supplied, at their production sites and through the network. As any major operator, it has labs to
                         perform random quality measurements in accordance with regulations. In addition, risks are deemed
                         moderate and manageable with regards to additional greywater discharges generated by HC-service
                           development. A tested screening methodology will be applied to identify those villages that require
                           particular attention for greywater management, namely villages featuring flat impermeable soils,
                           with concentrated habitats or located within environmental sensitive areas. Proper sanitation will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           made a strict prerequisite to the deployment of HCs.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Direction Assainissement et Environnement (DAE) will be responsible for the environmental
                           screening, environmental assessment and environmental monitoring. There is no question of the
                           capacity and skill of DAE staff, though there may be some need to improve communications between
                           DAE and the Directions Regionales (DRs) in charge of implementing and monitoring subprojects.
                           These issues have been identified in current on-going Projects and are being addressed as DAE was
                           asked to review the implementation of environmental management plans and the implementation of
                           safeguards by contractors during works phases. The Project documents will make sure this situation
                           is fully resolved during preparation.

                           The Direction des Affaires juridiques (DAJ) will be responsible for the Land Acquisition Framework
                           and monitoring of Land Acquisitions which will be managed by the Directions Regionales (DRs).
                           There is no question of the capacity and skill of DAE staff, and workshops will take place with DAJ,
                           DEP and DRs to ensure the homogeneous application of Land Acquisitions procedures by all DRs, in
                           particular with regards to the scope of responsibility of ONEE relatively to the Communes.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (MNSSD)
                           Khalid Anouar (MNSWA)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The project is classified as Category B per
Public Disclosure Copy




                           BP 4.01                                              previous experience with similar projects. A
                                                                                draft environmental assessment (EA) has
                                                                                already been submitted to the Bank for no-
                                                                                objection, and includes an Environmental and
                                                                                Social Management Plan (ESMP). Public
                                                                                consultations will also be organized in any new
                                                                                area where no consultation has been recently
                                                                                organized (Skhour Rhamna/Benguerir), in order
                                                                                to inform the population and the different
                                                                                stakeholders concerned by the project's
                                                                                activities, to associate them to the assessment of
                                                                                the potential impacts of the project on
                                                                                environment and to allow them formulating
                                                                                comments and proposals.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           There will not be involuntary resettlement, but
                                 4.12                                                                                            there is likely to be permanent and temporary
                                                                                                                                 limited land acquisition. Based on recent
                                                                                                                                 experience, land acquisition most probably will
                                                                                                                                 not entail any physical resettlement or impact on
                                                                                                                                 residences or economic activities and that only
                                                                                                                                 the asset value of undeveloped land is
                                                                                                                                 concerned. Accordingly, the resettlement
                                                                                                                                 instruments that will be developed will be
                                                                                                                                 entitled Land Acquisition Framework and Land
                                                                                                                                 Acquisition Procedures, and will respond fully
                                                                                                                                 to the Bank's OP.P4.12 policy requirements in
                                                                                                                                 the context of this project.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 03-Oct-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The preparation of the EA and LAF has already begun as these documents will largely be based on
                                      updated and adapted versions of the documents used in the on-going Bank-funded rural water
                                      supply projects. At this stage, it is estimated that the documents will be finalized, including the
                                      consultation phase, by September 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Xavier Chauvot De Beauche

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Steven N. Schonberger (SM)                                                                                           Date: 17-Jul-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
