                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA1251
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Oct-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Indonesia                         Project ID:   P128832
                            Project Name:     NATIONAL PROGRAM FOR COMMUNITY EMPOWERMENT IN RURAL
                                              AREA (PNPM RURAL 2012-2014) (P128832)
                            Task Team         Susanne Holste
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       21-Sep-2012                         Estimated   11-Dec-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASID                                Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector:           Water supply (20%), Irrigation and drainage (20%), Rural and Inter-Urban
                                              Roads and Highways (20%), Pre-primary education (20%), Sub- national
                                              government administration (20%)
                            Theme:            Participation and civic engagement (45%), Rural services and infrastructure
                                              (35%), Social Inclusion (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                           Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                  3850.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      650.00
                              Total                                                                     4500.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           11.    The PDO for the proposed project is: For villagers in PNPM-Rural locations to benefit from
                           improved local governance and socio-economic conditions.
                            3. Project Description
                           PNPM-Rural 2012-2014 has been designed on the basis of proven success and experience in poverty
                           reduction generated through the PNPM-Rural series. The project supports the Government’s national
                           poverty alleviation and community empowerment program and has national coverage. The project
                           consists of the following three components:


                                                                      Page 1 of 7
                         Component 1: Kecamatan Grants ($3,723.77 million). This component will provide grants to
                         participating kecamatans to finance sub-projects identified by communities, which consists of block
Public Disclosure Copy




                         grants for:

                         (a)     Training and capacity building for communities for planning, implementation, and
                         management of kecamatan grants; preparation of sub-project proposals, and construction of basic,
                         socio-economic infrastructure;
                         (b)     Income generating activities through revolving loan funds (RLFs) for women’s savings and
                         loan groups;
                         (c)     Preparing for and responding to disaster, emergency or catastrophic events, as needed,
                         through sub-projects; and
                         (d)     Pilots and special programs: Currently there are two grant-funded special programs, PNPM
                         Generasi (with a focus on the delivery of health and education services) and PNPM Green (with a
                         focus on natural resources management). The GOI may also want to develop other initiatives to
                         support implementation of the PNPM Roadmap.


                         Component 2: Community Empowerment and Facilitation ($496.21 million). This component will
                         have three sub-components:

                         (a)      Community empowerment and facilitation;
                         (b)      Strengthening the existing RLF scheme to improve operational and fiduciary management;
                         and
                         (c)      Development of a viable strategy and implementation arrangements for economic inclusion
                         activities through participation in private and institutional markets.

                         This component aims to improve overall community participation and skill levels, with the intention
                         of strengthening the governance of the program. There will be a new grant-funded addition of legal
Public Disclosure Copy




                         services available for the use of both communities and PMD. Through an Enhanced Empowerment
                         Experiment this component will also test the impact of increased facilitation in various areas of
                         community participation, including the participation of those groups which may currently be
                         excluded (including women), and the expected outcomes of this investment.

                         Component 3: Implementation Support and Technical Assistance ($280.03 million). This component
                         will provide technical advisory services, training and other material support to strengthen PMD and
                         units at the sub-national levels. There will be a strong focus on strengthening the delivery system to
                         ensure that it can respond effectively to the demands of national delivery of the program, including
                         monitoring and evaluation, and enhanced financial audits.

                         Crisis response. PNPM’s platform, with its established structures (e.g., disbursement channels) and
                         operating systems (e.g., facilitators on the ground with local knowledge) and with its nationwide
                         presence, can provide a quick and effective response to emergency situations. In cases of extra
                         allocation of block grant funds to assist communities through a post-crisis response, PMD will hire
                         an extra technical facilitator to ensure rapid implementation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         PNPM-Rural 2012-2014 will continue financing a program that has national coverage and project


                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                           activities will take place in every rural kecamatan in the country and in over 60,000 villages across
                           Indonesia. The program covers a geographic area that encompasses great topographic, ecological,
                           biological, and social diversity.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Juan Martinez (EASIS)
                           Catrini Pratihari Kubontubuh (EASID)
                           Dennie Stenly Mamonto (EASID)

                            6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               This project will not create any large-scale, significant, or irreversible environmental or social
                              impacts, therefore the safeguard issues and impacts associated directly with the proposed project
                              are insignificant, non-irreversible, and site-specific. Mitigation measures are carried out through
                              community participation and community-based sub-project management. Safeguards guidelines
                              for PNPM-Rural are contained in the Implementation Guidelines for Social and Environmental
                              Safeguards (IGSES), which is an annex to the operations manual (OM). The IGSES was revised to
                              reflect recent lessons in implementing environmental and social safeguards and the set of
                              environmental code of practices for rural infrastructure.

                             Past project experience under PNPM-Rural/Kecamatan Development Project (KDP) project series
                             suggest the following focus areas:

                                                                        Page 3 of 7
                         Environment Assessment. Experiences from the ongoing PNPM-Rural projects have shown that
                         there are no significant, non-reversible negative environmental impacts resulting from activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implemented under the project. Any adverse environmental impacts are typically site specific and
                         small in scale. Typically, such impacts can be managed locally by adopting screening criteria,
                         good engineering designs and construction practices. This will also be the case for PNPM-Rural
                         2012-2014, which follows the same principles as its predecessors. Nonetheless, because of the
                         national scope of the program and its operation in environmentally and socially sensitive areas, it
                         is essential to ensure that sufficient attention is paid to the application of safeguard guidelines and
                         to ensure adequate monitoring and oversight of these safeguards.

                         Village grants are capped at a value of US$35,000 and average US$20,000. This means that
                         infrastructure developed under PNPM-Rural is generally small scale and has small potential for
                         negative environmental impacts. No PNPM-Rural sub-project reaches the minimum threshold that
                         would trigger the GOI's environmental assessment procedures. A 2006 review of 321 randomly
                         chosen villages and the 2012 Technical Evaluation that reviewed more than 1,200 sub-projects
                         found no cases of significant adverse environmental impacts.

                         The principle behind the management of environmental impacts under PNPM-Rural is to limit
                         potential negative impacts and to develop the positive impacts of any infrastructure construction
                         activity. As part of the planning process, a form indicating potential environmental issues is
                         included in the IGSES. Potential impacts are then monitored during and after implementation by
                         the village and technical facilitators.

                         Indigenous People. Indonesian communities covered by the World Bank’s policy on indigenous
                         people can generally be classified in two categories:

                         (a)       Masyarakat Adat /Adat communities/Customary law communities. These are based on
                         lineage or locality and are bound by customary law. Characteristics of these communities include:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (i) self-identification as a distinct indigenous cultural group; (ii) collective attachment to ancestral
                         territories and to the natural resources in the territories; and (iii) customary cultural, economic,
                         social, or political institutions; and

                         (b)      Komunitas Adat Terpencil (KAT)/Isolated and Vulnerable Peoples (IVPs). This is a
                         government-designated category of customary law communities that live in isolated areas. The
                         characteristics attributed to these communities include: (i) collective attachment to ancestral
                         territories and to the natural resources in the territories; (ii) customary cultural, economic, social,
                         or political institutions; and (iii) an indigenous language. They are also identified by government
                         as: (i) having a subsistence economy; (ii) using simple tools and technology; (iii) having a high
                         dependence on the environment and local natural resources; and (iv) having restricted access to
                         social, economic, and government services.

                         These two categories are included in the IGSES to ensure that the full participation of indigenous
                         communities, including the application of the principle of free prior and informed consultation
                         during sub-projects preparation.

                         This project follows best practice principles for indigenous peoples’ involvement from PNPM-
                         Rural IV. Based on recommendations of the Rapid Social Assessment (RSA) conducted during
                         project preparation; the IGSES has been improved by including criteria for screening locations for

                                                                      Page 4 of 7
                          the PNPM-Rural 2012-2014 by using the main findings of the RSA.

                          Investment activities financed by the project will be the same as those of the ongoing PNPM-Rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                          series in terms of types and scale of activities, the potential environmental impacts will likely be
                          insignificant, localized, not irreversible, and manageable through community-based approaches
                          with good engineering design and construction practices.

                           The PNPM-Rural 2012-2104 project will retain an Environmental Category B classification.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            There are no potential significant long-term adverse impacts triggered by this project. Mitigation
                           against any negative impacts can be managed through community-based approaches with good
                           engineering design and construction practices.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            During implementation of PNPM-Rural IV the borrower distributed the IGSES to all project
                           facilitators. During preparation of PNPM 2012-2014 consultations were held on implementation
                           experiences and these are reflected in the updated IGSES.

                          During project preparation a RSA was carried out to identify any barriers or challenges to the
                          application of the IGSES for indigenous peoples (IPs). The RSA identified: (i) the different
                          categories of IPs in Indonesia; (ii) ways for improving IP’s participation in the program so that
                          they receive the same benefits from the program as other villagers do; (iii) the potential social
                          exclusion of IPs and ways for creating synergy between potential stakeholders to create social
Public Disclosure Copy




                          inclusion for IPs. The preliminary outcomes of the RSA include very clear recommendations for
                          improving the IGSES and the facilitation process; and increasing capacity building to be achieved
                          through enhanced training modules.

                          The preparation of the revised IGSES included a series of discussions among the executing agency
                          Directorate for Village and Community Empowerment (PMD) within the Ministry of Home
                          Affairs (MoHA), the National Management Consultant, and safeguards team of the World Bank.
                          The updated version was also discussed with facilitators at several sample locations: Kabupaten
                          Buleleng - Bali Province on July 26-27, 2012, Kabupaten Karanganyar and Kebumen – Central
                          Java Province on August 1-3, 2012, and Manado – North Sulawesi Province on August 15-16,
                          2012. The IGSES was disclosed in Bahasa Indonesia on PNPM-Rural website: www.pnpm-
                          perdesaan.or.id on September 17, 2012.
                          PMD has 14 years experience implementing the KDP/PNPM-Rural series. MoHA is also
                          supportive of partnerships with NGOs, particularly NGOs skilled in training, facilitation, and
                          community based monitoring, which will be prioritized to work with indigenous people.

                          The ongoing PNPM-Rural project has a minimum of two facilitators in each kecamatan, one is a
                          civil engineer who assists the local communities on sub-project designs and implementation and
                          the other a social mobilizer. These facilitators need better training to assist the communities in the
                          implementation of safeguards policies, i.e., screening for possible environmental and social


                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                           impacts of proposed sub-projects, and providing guidance to the communities for developing and
                           implementing measures to address and mitigate the impacts.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders and decision makers (for the funding of sub-projects) are villagers in rural
                           areas themselves. PNPM-Rural social and environmental objectives and procedures are explained
                           at inter-village meetings and during community-level trainings for village facilitators and for the
                           TPKs (village level implementing bodies).

                           There are several ways in which PNPM-Rural addresses indigenous and vulnerable groups,
                           including through:
                           (a)      Developing dissemination and facilitation material in collaboration with local
                           communities;
                           (b)      Using appropriate, inclusive decision-making mechanisms in environments where
                           indigenous groups are politically and culturally marginalized (e.g., Jambi, Kampung Naga, Baduy,
                           etc…);
                           (c)      Finding ways to involve groups, such as women, that tend to be excluded from traditional
                           institutions; and
                           (d)      Addressing concerns that marginalized indigenous groups are especially vulnerable to
                           problems of elite domination and corruption. Adaptations include recruiting and training
                           facilitators from marginalized communities, providing specialized logistical support (higher
                           transport costs for facilitators to reach isolated areas), employing two village cadres (one man and
                           one woman) in all locations who are trained and mentored in order for them to gradually take
                           charge of village planning and accountability meetings, proposal writing, and oversight.

                           Furthermore, participatory consultation takes place in the form of inter-village, village, and sub-
                           village meetings. Environmental screening and mitigation measures are identified and agreed
                           among the beneficiaries during the preparation of the sub-project proposals and discussed during
Public Disclosure Copy




                           community meeting. The need and mechanisms for obtaining land are identified and agreed upon
                           by program participants through the consultation process during the preparation of sub-project
                           proposals. Facilitation and verification of these processes are documented in sub-project proposals
                           by project facilitators, though the quality of documentation remains to be improved and will be
                           closely keep monitoring under PNPM-Rural 2012-2014.

                           Disclosure is mandatory. The Operations Manual, including the updated IGSES, is disclosed in
                           Bahasa Indonesia on the PNPM-Rural website http://pnpm-perdesaan.or.id. An executive
                           summary of the IGSES in English will be also available through the Bank's InfoShop. Additional
                           English-language material is available upon request.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         30-Aug-2012
                          Date of "in-country" disclosure                                     17-Sep-2012
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      05-Oct-2012
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Aug-2012
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  17-Sep-2012
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Oct-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
                           ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Susanne Holste
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Jan Weetjens (SM)                            Date: 10-Oct-2012




                                                                       Page 7 of 7
