                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC589

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Aug-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                            Project ID:      P127035
                            Project Name:      Green Energy Schemes for Low-carbon City in Shanghai, China (P127035)
                            Task Team          Xiaodong Wang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          22-Oct-2012                      Estimated        05-Feb-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                            Lending          Financial Intermediary Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector:            Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (80%), Other Renewable Energy (15%),
                                               General transportation sector (5%)
                            Theme:             Climate change (60%), Other urban development (30%), Environmental policies
                                               and institutions (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           105.46
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        100.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                              4.55
                              Total                                                                        210.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to support Shanghai’s quest to become a low-carbon city by
                           developing green energy schemes, with a focus in Changning district, thereby reducing carbon
                           emissions.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project is designed as a fully blended IBRD and GEF project. The total project size is
                           expected to be $210 million, of which $100 million IBRD loan, $4.545 million GEF grant, and the
                           remaining $105.455 million counterpart funds from the district government, sub-borrowers, and the
                         participating bank. The GEF project design was approved by the Bank management, Chinese
                         government, and the GEF Council in May 2011.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project has two components: (1) technical assistance and capacity building component
                         funded by the GEF grant; and (2) low-carbon investments component funded by the IBRD loan. The
                         technical assistance component covers both Changning district and Shanghai municipality, with a
                         focus on pilots at district level and replication at municipal level, while the investment component
                         focuses on Changning district. The first component will be implemented by the Project Management
                         Office (PMO), while the second component will be implemented by Shanghai Pudong Development
                         (SPD) Bank.

                         Component 1. Technical Assistance and Capacity Building

                         1.1 Green buildings (indicative cost estimate: US$5.15 million, of which US$3 million from GEF
                         grant and US$2.15 million from counterpart funds): This includes both retrofitting existing buildings
                         and supporting new near zero-emission buildings. For building retrofit, the GEF funds will be used to
                         pilot (a) mandatory measures and additional financial incentives; (b) business models and financing
                         mechanisms; and (c) technical design of integrated technology renovation. For new near zero-
                         emission buildings, the GEF funds will be used to (a) cover part of the incremental costs (incurred
                         for EE, RE, and smart meters) above the municipal building codes, while the remaining incremental
                         costs will be covered by district government and project developers; (b) develop policies and
                         financing mechanisms to ensure sustainability and replication; and (c) support marketing campaigns
                         to attract suppliers, buyers, renters, etc. for near zero-emission buildings.

                         1.2 Low-carbon energy supply (indicative cost estimate: US$1.59 million, of which US$0.59 million
                         from GEF grant and US$1 million from counterpart funds): This includes both on-site distributed
                         generation (DG) from renewable energy and natural gas as well as trading of green electricity and
                         possibly carbon cap and trade. The GEF funds will support (a) feasibility studies to pilot DG
                         investments in Changning district, developing policies and innovative business models to support
Public Disclosure Copy




                         DG; (b) scale-up of the pilot purchase of green electricity schemes; and eventually (c) pilot carbon
                         cap and trade, as Shanghai is selected as one of the four cities and two provinces under the NDRC
                         pilot carbon cap and trade scheme.

                         1.3 Green mobility (indicative cost estimate: US$1 million, of which US$0.3 million from GEF grant
                         and US$0.7 million from counterpart funds): The GEF funds will primarily be used for technical
                         assistance for policies, financing mechanisms, and public-private partnership business models,
                         possibly in the following areas: (a) open-source transport data initiative to reduce empty trips of taxi;
                         (b) studying and eventually piloting car-sharing with electric vehicles program; and (c) improved
                         pedestrian infrastructure and services.

                         1.4 Integrating green energy schemes to achieve low-carbon objectives (indicative cost estimate: US
                         $2.26 million, of which US$0.655 million from GEF grant and US$1.605 million from counterpart
                         funds): This subcomponent will (a) integrate the above green energy schemes to achieve district's
                         low-carbon objectives, particularly the Measurement &Verification (M&V) methodology and system
                         to monitor and verify energy savings and CO2 emission reductions; (b) build capacity of key
                         stakeholders such as district and municipal government officials and implementing agencies to
                         ensure institutional sustainability; and (c) covering program management costs, donor coordination
                         activities, and administration including fiduciary duties.
                         Component 2. Low-carbon Investments

                         The low-carbon investments will focus on building retrofit and new low-emission buildings, with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         majority of the investments going to building retrofit.

                         2.1 Building retrofit (indicative cost estimate: US$120 million, of which US$70 million from IBRD
                         loan and US$50 million from counterpa rt funds): This component will finance (a) building energy
                         efficiency improvements in commercial and government buildings, such as lighting, HVAC (heating,
                         ventilation, and air conditioning) systems, energy management systems, building envelope insulation
                         measures (roof, walls, windows, and doors); (b) renewable energy applications in buildings (roof-top
                         solar PV, solar water heaters, and ground source heat pumps); (c) distributed generation from
                         renewable energy and natural gas to provide power, cooling, and heating services to buildings; and
                         (d) any other low-carbon initiatives proposed by counterparts and agreed by the Bank.

                         2.2 New buildings (indicative cost estimate: US$80 million, of which US$30 million from IBRD
                         loan and US$50 million from counterpart funds): This subcomponent will finance the incremental
                         costs of low-carbon measures, primarily energy efficiency, renewable energy, and smart meters, for
                         new buildings above municipal building code requirements (indicative cost estimate: US$5.15
                         million, of which US$3 million from GEF grant and US$2.15 million from counterpart funds): This
                         includes both retrofitting existing buildings and supporting low-emission new buildings. For
                         retrofitting existing buildings, the GEF funds will be used to provide implementation support for the
                         district to pilot (a) bolder policies to mandate higher energy efficiency or energy consumption quota
                         for existing buildings and provide additional financial incentives for retrofitting inefficient buildings;
                         (b) market-based mechanisms, business models and financing mechanisms to retrofit existing
                         buildings on a large scale; and (c) feasibility studies on integrated approach for comprehensive
                         technology renovation.
                         Framework Approach: Given that there will be many small-scale sub-projects (typically on average
                         of $500,000-$1,000,000 for each sub-project, even if some sub-projects might be greater) and sub-
                         borrowers for the investment component, a framework approach will be adopted for project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation. The implementing agency, SPD Bank, will develop an Operational Manual, which
                         outlines selection criteria for sub-borrowers and sub-projects, appraisal procedure and guideline,
                         technical evaluation framework, environmental assessment framework, and procurement and
                         financial management frameworks that are consistent with the World Bank and Chinese government
                         rules and procedures. The Changning district government and the Bank will evaluate and approve the
                         Operational Manual at appraisal. During project implementation, the implementing agency will be
                         responsible for identifying, appraising, and financing sub-projects that meet the criteria in the
                         Operational Manual and receive government approval.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the               safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Component one on technical assistance and capacity building will cover both Changning district and
                         Shanghai municipality, while component two on low-carbon investments will focus on Changning
                         District of Shanghai.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Environment
                         Currently, the Project Management Office (PMO) and SPD Bank do not have environmental
                         specialists on its staff who are familiar with Bank safeguard policies. The PMO has assigned a staff
                         member with a technical background (electrical engineering) to act as the environmental focal point,
                           and plans to use the safeguard experts in district government during project preparation period.

                           The Task Team will: (a) assess the capacity of the SPD Bank and the PMO to implement
Public Disclosure Copy




                           environmental safeguard requirement and responsibilities defined in the Environmental Assessment
                           Framework; and (b) as appropriate, propose a capacity development program for inclusion in the
                           project. The Task Team will also support the SPD Bank and PMO in preparation of any required
                           environmental assessment documentation.

                           Social/Resettlement
                           Currently, the PMO and SPD Bank do not have social safeguard specialists on its staff who are
                           familiar with Bank safeguard policies. The PMO has assigned a staff member with a technical and
                           legal background to act as the social safeguard focal point. The Task Team will: (a) assess the social
                           safeguard capacity of the PMO and SPD Bank to conduct due diligence review; and (b) as
                           appropriate, propose a capacity development program for inclusion in the project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Bernard Baratz (EASCS)
                           Youxuan Zhu (EASCS)
                           Xin Ren (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             Environmental Issues
                           BP 4.01                                              Project related environmental issues appear to
                                                                                be minimal. An Environmental and Social
                                                                                Management Framework (ESMF) will be
                                                                                developed as part of the Operational Manual.
                                                                                Detailed public consultations would normally
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                not be required but rather advanced public
                                                                                notification of the proposed project activities
                                                                                and a description of the manner in which
                                                                                safeguard issues would be addressed.

                                                                                For existing commercial buildings, the issues
                                                                                are occupational health and safety aspects
                                                                                associated with replacement of high energy use
                                                                                equipment and/or introduction of energy
                                                                                efficiency measures (e.g. low energy elevator
                                                                                motors, water sprays on existing air
                                                                                conditioning unit coils, reflective coatings on
                                                                                windows, boiler replacement/fuel switching
                                                                                etc.) management of old equipment (recycling,
                                                                                disposal etc.) and possibly the issue of removal
                                                                                and management of any hazardous materials (e.
                                                                                g. asbestos, PCBs).

                                                                                Due diligence review will be undertaken to
                         confirm that relevant Chinese environmental
                         and occupational health and safety laws and
                         regulations have been or are being followed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental specifications for the contractors
                         will be provided to manage the retrofitting
                         activities.

                         For new commercial buildings, where
                         investments would be to share incremental costs
                         (including EE, RE, and smart meters) of near
                         zero-emission and low-emission buildings, the
                         issues again would be occupational health and
                         safety aspects associated with installation of
                         EE/RE equipment and measures.

                         Any materials associated with EE/RE measures
                         and/or activities would have to be in full
                         compliance with Chinese international
                         obligations under the Montreal Protocol. In
                         particular, insulating materials for walls, piping
                         etc., and refrigeration fluids which have the
                         potential to include ozone depleting substances
                         (ODSs) must be compliant. In addition, use of
                         hazardous materials (e.g. asbestos for
                         insulation) would be excluded.

                         Environmental issues associated with new
                         building which may be considered a connected
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project would be related to construction
                         activities, including dust, noise, minor traffic
                         disruptions, and potential handling of
                         construction non hazardous waste. When
                         completed, the issues of wastewater and
                         municipal solid waste management would be
                         the chief concerns. Potential construction issues
                         are usually of limited duration, confined to
                         small areas and completely reversible after
                         construction activities are completed. Generally,
                         they can be minimized with standard procedures
                         for good engineering and construction. After
                         completion, solid and wastewater management
                         would most likely be the responsibility of
                         Shanghai Municipality.

                         For new buildings whose construction is yet to
                         start, an ESMF will be prepared prior to
                         appraisal. The ESMF will be prepared based on
                                                                applicable OP 4.01 and Chinese laws and
                                                                regulations. The preparation of the ESMF will
                                                                also take into account the relevant IFC
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS)
                                                                Guidelines on Community Health and Safety,
                                                                and Occupational Health and Safety to assess
                                                                their applicability to this project. The Task
                                                                Team has reviewed seventeen Chinese/Shanghai
                                                                Municipality environmental/OHS laws and
                                                                regulations for new building construction, and
                                                                found that taken collectively, this body of
                                                                requirements is generally consistent with the
                                                                IFC EHS Guidelines. A sample generic
                                                                Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be
                                                                included in the ESMF.

                                                                Institutional responsibilities for implementing
                                                                regulatory requirements during building
                                                                construction and operation are clearly defined in
                                                                the Shanghai Municipality body of regulations.
                                                                As indicated above, the Task Team will perform
                                                                due diligence on Shanghai Municipality and
                                                                SPD Bank performance in following procedures
                                                                specified in the ESMF for building construction
                                                                and operation.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No   Investments will be confined to urban areas,
                                                                therefore, will not trigger Natural Habitats
                                                                Policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No   All investments will be confined to urban areas
                         BP 4.11                                where Chinese permitting procedures would
                                                                prevent siting a project on or near areas of high
                                                                cultural value.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No   The Indigenous Peoples Policy will not be
                                                                triggered since all potential investments will be
                                                                located within Changning District in Shanghai
                                                                Municipality, where there are no concentrated
                                                                ethnic minority communities.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No   For the component of retrofitting existing
                         4.12                                   commercial and public buildings, since most
                                                                adopted measures are within the existing
                                                                buildings, no land acquisition and resettlement
                                                                will be required.
                                                                                                                                 For the component of supporting new near zero-
                                                                                                                                 emission buildings or new low-emission
                                                                                                                                 buildings, the Bank finance will only cover the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 incremental costs of EE/RE measures. No
                                                                                                                                 subproject requires land acquisition and the
                                                                                                                                 buildings selected for the project would have
                                                                                                                                 acquired the land (either purchase or made
                                                                                                                                 available by the government).

                                                                                                                                 Due diligence review of the land acquisition
                                                                                                                                 process is being undertaken in anticipation of
                                                                                                                                 the subprojects will be carried out to confirm if
                                                                                                                                 there are no outstanding issues in accordance
                                                                                                                                 with Chinese laws and regulations.
                                                                                                                                 Requirements on the due diligence review will
                                                                                                                                 be included in the ESMF.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Apr-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      September 2012
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Xiaodong Wang

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Vilija Kostelnickiene (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 29-Aug-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 23-Aug-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
