                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC5231

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Morocco                         Project ID:     P143689
                            Project Name:     MA-Clean and Efficient Energy Project (P143689)
                            Task Team         Roger Coma Cunill
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         09-Jun-2014                     Estimated       28-Aug-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    MNSEE                           Lending         Specific Investment Loan
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other Renewable Energy (50%), Transmission and Distribution of Electricity
                                              (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (90%), Infrastructure services for private sector development
                                              (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    155.00                   Total Bank Financing:       125.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    5.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     125.00
                              Clean Technology Fund                                                      25.00
                              Total                                                                     155.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           12. The PDO is to support the Borrower to increase supply of clean energy and to meet demand
                           more efficiently among targeted customers.
                           C. Project Description
                         2.      The project is expected to reduce network losses and peak load demand by introducing three
                         complementary demand-oriented activities: a demand-side management program, a renewables
                         dispatch desk and a mid-sized solar PV program. These activities and a technical assistance form the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         components of the project, which are detailed herewith:

                         •        Component 1 – Demand-Side Management (DSM) program: Given the high proportion of
                         low-voltage in total consumption during peak hours (63%), Morocco introduced an optional time-of-
                         use tariff system for residential, industrial and agricultural clients with monthly consumption above
                         500 kWh/month. The proposed project intends to support the installation of bi-hourly meters to all
                         ONEE clients consuming more than 500 kWh/month (49,000 residential and 11,000 industry/
                         agricultural clients) to contribute to shave the national peak load and, hence, to reduce expensive
                         fuel-oil use for power generation during peak hours. The bi-hourly meters will not only have bi-
                         hourly reading functions, but also smart meter features such as remote disconnection and fraud
                         detection.

                         •        Component 2 - Renewables dispatch desk: This component includes the supply and
                         installation of software and hardware to ensure optimal power dispatch and system protection in view
                         of the planned integration of intermittent large-scale renewable energy sources by 2020. Dispatch
                         optimization will be carried out according to supply/demand forecasts and hence, reduce investment
                         needs in generation and transmission. The renewables dispatch desk will be installed in the National
                         Dispatch Center located near Casablanca. This component will represent a significant step in the
                         modernization process of the National Dispatch Center.

                         •        Component 3 – Mid-size solar PV program: This component includes the construction and
                         the operation and maintenance (O&M) of several mid-size solar photovoltaic (PV) plants in the range
                         of 10-25 MW in Morocco’s south eastern region. This program aims to show the viability of
                         medium-scale distributed projects with optimal solar resources and closer to regional demand
                         centers, which are far from other generation assets. The coincidence of local demand with solar
Public Disclosure Copy




                         resource availability on a daily basis is expected to reduce the stress on the high-voltage network and
                         losses. The Clean Technology Fund (CTF) contribution to this program will ensure the economic and
                         financial viability of the first mid-size solar PV projects in Morocco and have a transformational
                         effect in a new market segment for renewable energies in the country. The CTF Morocco investment
                         plan will be updated accordingly.

                         •       Component 4 – Technical Assistance and Capacity Building: The technical assistance will
                         include support for (i) developing an awareness campaign to roll-out of bi-hourly meters within the
                         demand-side management program (Component 1) (ii) drafting bidding documents for mid-size solar
                         PV plants (Component 3) and (iii) training ONEE staff on IPP/PPP contracting structure to be
                         adopted in future phases of the solar PV program.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         3.       The national utility, the Office National de l’Electricité et de l’Eau Potable (ONEE) has pre-
                         identified several sites next to the towns of Missour, Arfoud and Zagora in the South-eastern region
                         of Morocco to develop mid-size solar PV plants. However, the precise sitting as well as the number
                         of the plants (three or four mid-size solar PV plants are planned at this moment) will be determined
                         at a later stage once the feasibility study is completed. The sites are likely to be located in rural areas.
                         The environmental and social context will be confirmed upon preparation of site-specific
                         environment and social impact studies.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           4.      The Office National de l’Electricité et de l’Eau Potable (ONEE) has an Environmental
                           Department, which has the responsibility for conducting impact assessments and monitoring
Public Disclosure Copy




                           environmental and social management plans. The Environmental Department has extensive
                           experience working with Bank projects, which has strengthened its understanding of the Bank’s
                           safeguards policies and enhanced its capacity to monitor and manage the implementation of
                           mitigation measures.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (MNSSD)
                           Suiko Yoshijima (MNSEE)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             Solar PV power generation does not produce
                           BP 4.01                                            any pollutant. Therefore, the proposed project
                                                                              will have limited environmental impacts during
                                                                              installation and operation of PV plants. The
                                                                              main concern is expected to be on workers
                                                                              safety issues. Such impacts will be of small
                                                                              scale and site-specific, and can be readily
                                                                              avoided/mitigated with good construction
                                                                              specifications and operational management
                                                                              rules. Therefore, the proposed project is
                                                                              Category B as per OP4.01.

                                                                              Since the number of the PV plants and their
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              locations are not known, the client will prepare
                                                                              an Environmental and Social Impact
                                                                              Assessment Framework (ESIAF) before
                                                                              appraisal. The ESIAF will include site selection
                                                                              criteria to avoid sensitive locations so that the
                                                                              Category remains B and other safeguards
                                                                              policies are not triggered. During
                                                                              implementation, and for each site, an
                                                                              Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                                                                              and EMP acceptable to the Bank should be
                                                                              prepared, reviewed and disclosed prior to
                                                                              construction.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No              Sensitive natural habitat areas will be avoided
                                                                              using the selection criteria prepared as part of
                                                                              the ESIAF.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No              It is unlikely that the PV plants will be
                                                                              established in the forests.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09            No              There will not be pesticides used.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            Physical cultural areas will be avoided using the
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         selection criteria prepared as part of the ESIAF.
                                                                                                                                 ESIAF will also include a chance finds
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 procedure in the case that PCR is found during
                                                                                                                                 the construction phase.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            The project area where the solar PV plants are
                                                                                                                                 proposed to be constructed are large extension
                                                                                                                                 of inhabited bare land. Hence, indigenous
                                                                                                                                 people will not be affected.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The specific sites or locations of project
                                 4.12                                                                                            activities are not fully determined, but the
                                                                                                                                 possibility of land acquisition and relocation
                                                                                                                                 remains a possibility to be confirmed during the
                                                                                                                                 project preparation. A Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                                 Framework (RPF) will be prepared as due
                                                                                                                                 diligence to specify the process for preparing,
                                                                                                                                 reviewing, approving and implementing
                                                                                                                                 subsequent Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
                                                                                                                                 for sub-projects before the relevant civil works
                                                                                                                                 are initiated.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 09-May-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Since the locations are unknown, an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Framework
                                      and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared before appraisal. The TORs have
                                      been drafted by the client and is being reviewed by the World Bank.

                                      During implementation, and for each site, an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and
                                      EMP and a Resettlement Action Plan acceptable to the Bank should be prepared, reviewed and
                                      disclosed prior to construction.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Roger Coma Cunill

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                                                                                            Date: 11-Sep-2013
                                 Coordinator:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (SM)   Date: 25-Sep-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
