                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA332
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Mar-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Congo, Republic of                       Project ID:                       P124085
                              Project Name:                   Forestry and Economic Diversification Project (P124085)
                              Task Team Leader:               Simon A. P. Rietbergen
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 28-Mar-2012                                    Estimated Board Date:             24-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  AFTEN                                    Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Forestry (60%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%)
                              Theme:                          Environmental policies and institutions (30%), Rural policies and institutions (30%), Land administration and
                                                              management (20%), Biod iversity (20%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                         Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                          22.60
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                 10.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                       32.60
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The project development objective is to increase the capacity of the Republic of Congo to: (i) promote better implementation of its forestry
                              legislation; and (ii) enhance the policy environment for participation of local communities and the private sector in sustainable forest management
                              and reforestation.

                              3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The project comprises three components: (i) strengthening the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Sustainable Development, Forest Economy
                              and Environment (MSDFEE); (ii) improving the enabling environment for private sector and smallholder activities in the sector; and (iii) enhancing
                              the participation of local communities in forest management.

                              Component 1 - Capacity building and institutional strengthening of the Ministry of Sustainable Development, Forest Economy and Environment

                              The project will strengthen the institutional capacity of the Ministry in four critical areas: (i) operational and management capacity; (ii) reinforcement
                              and implementation of the regulatory framework regarding forestry and nature conservation; (iii) environmental management; and (iv) sustainable
                              development.

                              Sub-component 1.1 - Strengthening operational and management capacity: Under this sub-component the project will support capacity building in
                              human resource and fiduciary management; in-service technical training for MSDFEE’s staff in forest policy and its legislative and regulatory
                              framework and strategies for forestry resource and environmental management and in-service administrative training for said staff; capacity
                              building for staff of the National Forest and Wildlife Resources Inventory and Management Center (CNIAF) in forest inventory and data processing;
                              development and operationalization, within MSDFEE’s department responsible for planning and studies, of a management information system for
                              planning, monitoring and evaluation, and provision of training in the application of this system; further development and improvement of the
                              articulation among forest information and management systems; strengthening of the MSDFEE’s communication capacity; and establishment of a
                              functioning national system of traceability of forest products.
                              The project will finance consulting services, refurbishment of existing government buildings, materials, equipment (including inter alia, vehicles,
                              global positioning systems, computer hardware and software) and operating costs including those at decentralized level.

                              Sub-component 1.2 – Strengthening of the forestry and nature conservation regulatory framework: The project will support strengthening of the
                              Republic of Congo’s forest management and nature conservation regulatory framework, including (a) review of the forestry legislation, as needed,
                              to assess consistency with the Forest Law Enforcement, Governance and Trade Voluntary Partnership Agreement (FLEGT VPA) and with sound
                              governance, environmental and social standards, and preparation and implementation of a community and media outreach plan to improve the
                              public’s knowledge and understanding of the legislation (as possibly revised to ensure consistency); (b) development in a participatory manner and
                              dissemination, and field testing of manuals detailing the procedures for forest gazetting and de-gazetting; (c) development and dissemination of
                              appropriate procedures for awarding forest concessions, including methods for consultations with affected local communities; (d) development and
                              adoption of a regulatory framework (and associated procedures) for taxation of forest activities and products, as well as for tax revenue benefit
                              sharing; and (e) operationalization of an inter-ministerial committee (IMCC) with mandate to address and facilitate resolution of land-use conflicts
                              over natural eco-systems.

                                                                                                                                                                            Page 1 of 7
                         The project will finance consulting services, training, materials, equipment, and operating costs.

                         Sub-component 1.3 - Strengthening environmental management: The project will support strengthened environmental management through (a)
                         preparation, adoption and dissemination of an appropriate regulatory framework for the Recipient’s environmental legislation; (b) development an d
                         dissemination of guidelines on the carrying out of environmental and social impact assessments, with a particular focus on the forestry, mining,
                         onshore petroleum, infrastructure, hydro-electric energy and agriculture activities, and provision of training to governmental staff and private firms
                         involved in said sectors on the preparation and evaluation of such assessments, as well as in monitoring environmental management plans; (c)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         carrying out of a feasibility study for an environmental quality monitoring laboratory, and establishment of the laboratory through refurbishment of
                         existing facilities and provision of training to laboratory assistants in its operation; and (d) carrying out of additional environmental studies and
                         assessments related to the forestry sector as necessary.
                         The project will finance consulting services, equipment and refurbishment costs.

                         Sub-component 1.4 - Promotion of Sustainable Development: The project will support the newly created General Directorate for Sustainable
                         Development (GDSD) and promote sustainable development within the MSDFEE and other government ministries through (a) preparation and
                         dissemination to the public of a national strategy designed to promote sustainable development, and a related action plan for the implementation of
                         the strategy; (b) carrying out of a program to enhance the capacity of the GDSD to raise awareness among other ministries of emerging
                         sustainable development issues (such as climate change, biodiversity, and soil degradation), and conducting awareness-raising activities on these
                         issues; (c) carrying out of preparatory studies on forestry and environmental issues, as needed to develop a national land use plan; and (d)
                         carrying out of studies to enable an active and effective role for MSDFEE on the IMCC.
                         The project will finance consulting services and equipment.

                         Sub-component 1.5 - Project Coordination: The project coordination will be integrated in the Directorate of Studies and Planning (DSP),
                         strengthening the DSP’s capacity to plan, coordinate, and monitor the project’s activities, as well as developing its capacity and efficiency in
                         planning and monitoring the MSDFEE’s activities as a whole, in accordance with its mandate. The project will provide DSP with staff, training and
                         goods (including inter alia vehicles, furniture, small field equipment and maps) required for Project coordination.

                         Component 2 - Improving the Enabling Environment for Private Sector and Smallholder activities in the Forest Sector

                         The project will contribute to the definition and establishment of organizational procedures, rules, technologies and socio-economic studies to
                         address knowledge gaps and constraints and assist the government in creating a more favorable environment for appropriate private sector and
                         smallholder investment in forests and agro-forestry. More specifically, the project will support improvement of the enabling environment for private
                         sector and smallholder activities in the sector through: (i) studies on the feasibility of private sector and smallholder plantations; (ii) capacity
                         building in timber processing and value-added chains for small and medium enterprises; and (iii) studies on the prospects for investment in
                         environmental services.

                         Sub-component 2.1 - Afforestation and Reforestation: The project will support a diagnostic study to identify constraints to private sector
                         investments in forest and agro-forestry plantations, and to evaluate and recommend environmentally, socially, financially and technically
                         appropriate options for addressing such constraints; a study on potential markets for plantation products; a study to identify, evaluate and
                         recommend appropriate legislative and regulatory measures designed to facilitate private investment in plantations and development of markets for
                         their products; development of a structured approach to implementing the National Afforestation and Reforestation Program (ProNAR), on the
                         basis of the studies carried out above under this sub-component; development of sound procedures and criteria for consultations with local
                         communities and indigenous peoples to facilitate identification and allocation of land for reforestation b y the private sector in a manner designed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to respect the land use rights of said communities and peoples; development of appropriate environmental and social guidelines for different
                         plantation types; establishment of a comprehensive data bank of information on plantations; training programs for government staff and non-
                         governmental organizations, in order to facilitate the environmentally, socially and technically sound establishment and management of
                         plantations; information campaigns to increase awareness of ProNAR, its activities and related legislative and regulatory framework; strengthening
                         the capacity of the Recipient’s staff to coordinate and supervise reforestation and afforestation activities, through the provision of computer
                         hardware and software, vehicles, small field equipment required for the coordination and supervision purposes; strengthening the capacity of the
                         Recipient’s staff to provide technical assistance to small holder tree planters in savannah zones, through the provision of vehicles and small field
                         equipment; and development of a strategy to protect forested areas against fires and other risks.

                         Sub-component 2.2 - Support to small and medium scale forest enterprises: The project will support (a)             reinforcement of the training
                         program for timber artisans in Pointe Noire and extension of the training program to Brazzaville, all through the refurbishing, furnishing and
                         equipping of the government’s woodworking buildings and technical expertise; (b) a participatory study with small and medium wood enterprises in
                         order to elaborate a development strategy for such enterprises; (c) design of an environmentally sustainable strategy for the development of
                         endangered non-timber forest products, such as Gnetum africanum and rattan.
                         The project will finance goods, services, and training for this component.

                         Sub-component 2.3 - Environmental Services: The project will promote environmental services in the Republic of Congo through (a) capacity
                         building of private and NGO developers of environmental services projects to develop such projects in compliance with legal requirements and
                         access financing for such projects, and of government agencies to oversee such projects; (b) economic evaluation of environmental services
                         provided by the Republic of Congo’s ecosystems and the costs associated with degradation of these ecosystems, and analysis of the potential of
                         environmental services initiatives; (c) information campaigns to raise awareness of environmental services and to inform interested parties on the
                         conditions for accessing funding for environmental services and identify potential project developers; (d) south-south exchanges to increase the
                         knowledge of government staff, civil society and private entities regarding environmental services initiatives outside the Recipient’s territory; (e)
                         technical assistance to local communities in their preparation of environmental services project proposals; and (e) consultations, committee
                         meetings and analytical studies required for the finalization of the Recipient’s REDD+ (Reduction of Emissions from Deforestation and forest
                         Degradation) strategy and implementation framework.
                         The project will finance goods, services and training for this component.

                         Component 3 - Enhancing the P articipation of Local Communities in Forest Management

                         This component will consist of a program designed to enhance local community participation and benefit sharing in the elaboration and
                         implementation of forest management plans, including (a) technical assistance to communities in the design of social responsibility contracts and
                         management plans for community development zones within forest concessions, and to enhance capacity of community development councils to
                                                                                                                                                                 Page 2 of 7
                         conduct negotiations of such contracts and plans; (b) information campaigns designed to promote awareness of local communities of their rights
                         and responsibilities relating to participation and benefit sharing in forest management, and provision of negotiation skills training to said
                         communities; (c) training of government staff, as well as non-governmental organizations, in forest management planning procedures and
                         negotiations and monitoring of social responsibility contracts and forest management plans; and (d) a study to review and clarify the forest
                         regulatory framework in respect of local community participation.
                         The project will fund consulting services, training, equipment and operating costs.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The majority of this Project’s components do not entail civil works. The Project is focused on providing technical assistance and capacity building
                         to the government for the development of technical and institutional capacities for effective management of the forest sector, for refining its
                         afforestation and reforestation strategy, and for stimulating the economy and private sector investment. Nevertheless, since the Project will help
                         refine the design of the National Afforestation and Reforestation Program (ProNAR), which will eventually include civil works, as well as
                         encouraging private sector investment, adverse physical impacts may be induced, but they will be location specific.

                         The ProNAR will focus mainly on the savannah regions of the country, which have limited suitability for farming as the soils are sandy and poor in
                         nutrients. The bulk of afforestation and reforestation activities will take place in species-poor, non-erosion prone savannas, and are expected to be
                         restricted to less than 10 percent of the surface area of this ecosystem. These areas are found in the central and southern parts of the country,
                         including the following departments: Plateaux, Pool, Bouenza, Niari, Kouilou, Lékoumou, Cuvette, and Cuvette-Ouest.
                         In-depth biophysical, social and economic studies of the two departments targeted by the government for the largest plantation operations
                         (comprising together nearly half of the planned plantation area) – Pool and Plateaux – will be carried out during the coming months. These studies
                         will include the participatory drafting of an indicative land-use plan, taking into account the various industrial and subsistence land uses in the area,
                         as well as its natural resources and environment protection areas. The studies will be conducted by the National Center for Forest and Wildlife
                         Resources Inventory and Management (CNIAF), which is well qualified both in cartography and in participative land demarcation, with support from
                         the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). It will, in addition, be supported by experts in land planning, including forestry
                         and social experts.

                         In-depth studies of the remaining departments will be carried out as needed during Project implementation.

                         A requirement to assess the environmental impacts, including on soil and water resources, of fast-growing plantations has been integrated into the
                         ESMF prepared during project preparation, in order to ensure future planted species are suitable to the area’s biophysical characteristics and to
                         minimize future adverse environmental and social impacts.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN)
                         Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes              The ESMF developed under the Project will be followed for ensuring that the terms
                                                                                           of reference for all studies and technical assistance under the Project in support of
                                                                                           ProNAR and other forest sector reforms adhere to the requirements of World Bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           safeguard policies.

                                                                                           In parallel with this project, the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
                                                                                           (SESA) to be funded by the 2nd Forest Carbon Partnership Facility grant, which is
                                                                                           to be carried out during project implementation, will also serve to identify, avoid,
                                                                                           and mitigate the potential negative environmental and social impacts associated
                                                                                           with activities to be supported by the final ProNAR of future forest sector reforms,
                                                                                           by providing guidance and key elements that will contribute to refinement and
                                                                                           implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                                                                                           and other key safeguard instruments. The SESA will also influence the final
                                                                                           ProNAR design, by ensuring that social and environmental risks are factors in its
                                                                                           preparation.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      Yes              The application of this policy seeks to ensure that all options proposed in the
                                                                                           ProNAR or other forest sector reforms take into account the conservation of
                                                                                           biodiversity, as well as the numerous environmental services and products that
                                                                                           natural habitats provide to human society.

                                                                                           Overall, afforestation / reforestation activities are expected to have positive
                                                                                           impacts on natural habitats as degraded land is reforested, new habitats are
                                                                                           created on afforested land, pressure on natural forests is reduced, and natural
                                                                                           landscapes are protected as an offset for commercial plantation activities. Any
                                                                                           potential negative impacts on natural ecosystems as a result of afforestation are
                                                                                           expected to be minimal as the bulk of afforestation and reforestation activities will
                                                                                           take place in species-poor, non-erosion prone savannas, and are expected to be
                                                                                           restricted to less than 10 percent of the surface area of this ecosystem. The project
                                                                                           is not financing afforestation/reforestation activities directly, but is building capacity
                                                                                           of and providing TA to the ProNAR Coordination Unit.

                                                                                           The ESMF addresses issues related to natural habitats and potential impacts of
                                                                                           the ProNAR and so will the SESA.



                                                                                                                                                                        Page 3 of 7
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                           Yes              Overall, Project activities are expected to have positive impacts on forest, in that
                                                                                             the main goal of the Project is to support better management of the country’s
                                                                                             forests, while contributing to the well-being of rural communities and thus reducing
                                                                                             pressure on natural forests. Potential larger scale impacts of the ProNAR and
                                                                                             other forest reforms on natural forests have been considered in the ESMF and are
                                                                                             expected to be further assessed through the SESA.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             The ESMF reflects the requirements of the Bank’s Operational Policy regarding
                                                                                             forest management and afforestation/reforestation and so will the SESA.
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                      No               While there is currently little use of pesticides in Congolese plantations, a strategic
                                                                                             study to be funded during the first year of project implementation will assess
                                                                                             whether this is likely to increase in the future. Depending on the outcome of this
                                                                                             study, the project may fund expertise to integrate guidelines consistent with Bank
                                                                                             policy for pest management and pesticide use in plantations into the support that
                                                                                             will be provided to the National Afforestation and Reforestation Program
                                                                                             Coordination (ProNAR) .

                                                                                             The SESA to be developed during project implementation will also address critical
                                                                                             issues related to pest management, as necessary.
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11       Yes              This policy is triggered since activities on the ground following from TA provided
                                                                                             under the Project in support of forest reforms or ProNAR activities could promote
                                                                                             actions in areas containing sites deemed physical cultural resources by local
                                                                                             populations (e.g. holy/secret sites such as sacred groves, sacred forests, etc.).
                                                                                             Therefore, though it is not anticipated that the Project will have negative impacts
                                                                                             on any such sites, the ESMF includes provisions for mitigative action if actions
                                                                                             following from TA provided under the Project were to involve physical cultural
                                                                                             resources..

                                                                                             The possible existence of any such sites throughout the areas targeted by the
                                                                                             ProNAR and other forest reforms, and the corresponding need to trigger this
                                                                                             policy, are expected to be thoroughly explored in the SESA as well.
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                Yes              It is likely that activities implemented as part of the ProNAR or affected by forest
                                                                                             reforms for which TA is proposed under the Project will take place in areas
                                                                                             inhabited by indigenous peoples. To ensure due diligence is exercised, an
                                                                                             Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) has been developed, setting out
                                                                                             principles and procedures for timely and effective mitigation of indigenous
                                                                                             communities’ concerns. This framework provides for the government to identify
                                                                                             indigenous peoples, consult with them properly, and ensure that they participate in,
                                                                                             and benefit from the ProNAR and other forest sector reforms. The framework will
                                                                                             be required to be reflected in the ToRs for all TA provided under the Project. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             IPPF will subsequently be refined through the SESA process.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12          Yes              This policy aims to avoid involuntary resettlement to the extent feasible, and to
                                                                                             minimize and mitigate its adverse social and economic impacts in cases where
                                                                                             resettlement or other involuntary restrictions cannot be avoided. Though the
                                                                                             Project will not involve land acquisition/involuntary resettlement, Project activities
                                                                                             are more likely to trigger this safeguard policy in situations involving involuntary
                                                                                             restrictions of access to forest management / reforestation areas and the natural
                                                                                             resources within. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has therefore been
                                                                                             prepared, establishing the frame of reference for sustainable use of said natural
                                                                                             resources. The preparation of the RPF was inclusive and participatory, promoting
                                                                                             community ownership and fostering social accountability, thereby contributing to
                                                                                             sustainable management of the relevant natural resources.

                                                                                             In addition, all issues related to land acquisition, involuntary resettlement, and
                                                                                             restriction of access in the forest sector are also expected to be identified through
                                                                                             the SESA process.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP    No
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60        No


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                   The overall environmental impacts of the project are expected to be positive. By building institutional capacity for the implementation of
                                 FLEGT (the European Union’s Forest Law Enforcement, Governance and Trade Action Plan) and timber legality certification, the project aims
                                 to support environmentally sustainable forest management. The project will also support the analysis and cross-sectoral reviews necessary to

                                                                                                                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                           resolve conflicts between over-lapping land uses, as well as the development of enhanced capacity for environmental assessment in a variety
                           of sectors, expected to include transport, hydro-electric energy, oil, mining, agriculture and industry.

                           Though the overall social impact of the project is expected to be positive, the potential for negative social outcomes nonetheless exists, in
                           particular if the project’s support in the following areas were to be inadequately managed: (i) Technical assistance (TA) for participatory
                           development of procedures for reservation/gazettement of forests, (ii) TA for assessment of overlapping land uses and for resolution of land-
                           use conflicts, (iii) TA to improve capacity for the identification and negotiation of land for reforestation, and (iv) TA to enhance the capacity of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           local communities to participate actively in the negotiation of forest concession social responsibility contracts. No large scale or irreversible
                           adverse impacts are expected for this investment.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                            See above.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                            N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                            The MSDFEE will act as the implementing agency for this Project and will in this capacity oversee the preparation of the safeguards work and
                           associated documents and monitor the implementation of the recommended mitigation measures during project implementation.

                           National institutional capacity for the monitoring and implementation of safeguards is very weak, at all levels (national, provincial and local) and
                           across Ministries. Though the government’s capacity to design, implement and monitor safeguard policies has improved somewhat through its
                           work on other recent World Bank projects, such as the Support to Economic Diversification Project, MSDFEE itself has no experience with
                           World Bank funded projects, and limited experience with managing donor-funded projects overall. This lack of experience translates into lack of
                           capacity with regards to safeguard policies. Special emphasis will therefore be placed on strengthening the government’s (and specifically
                           MSDFEE’s) capacity to conform with and uphold international safeguards standards in development projects in forest areas, including
                           conducting environmental and social impact evaluations. This will require development of procedures and regulations, which will subsequently
                           be applicable to projects in other sectors as well, and is of particular importance given the increase in prospective mining projects in forest
                           areas.

                           During the initial phase, the Project will support the Ministry through, consultants to, to strengthen the safeguards management capacity of its
                           Project Coordination Unit. s. Consultants were also hired, during project preparation, to support MSDFEE in conducting the necessary
                           safeguards studies. The consultants supported the MSDFEE to prepare three safeguards instruments: an Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework (ESMF); a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF). The three
                           instruments were cleared by the Bank and disclosed prior to appraisal.

                           An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared for the project and disclosed. The environmental
                           management plan (EMP) of the ESMF, the RPF and the IPPF all include grievance handling procedures and arrangements for monitoring its
                           implementation. In parallel with the project, the 2nd Forest Carbon Partnership Facility grant managed by the World Bank will fund a Strategic
                           Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA).
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
Public Disclosure Copy




                            on potentially affected people.
                             The principal project stakeholders include: public and private sector, but also civil society. Particularly, policy makers, ministry employees and
                           forest technicians, whose skills will be enhanced, smallholder investors benefiting from an improved enabling environment for investment, and
                           local communities (including indigenous peoples) in forest concession areas where improved social responsibility contracts will be negotiated,
                           in and around plantations, as well as in Environmental Services initiatives.

                           About 10 percent of Congo’s population (about 300,000 people) is constituted of indigenous pygmy communities, some of them with specific
                           semi-nomadic lifestyles and a particular relationship to the forest. Congo has progressive legislation guaranteeing their rights, and in some
                           forest concessions, appropriate tools have been developed which help them to participate in forest management planning so that their interests
                           are met. In supporting participative processes for land-use decision-making, the project specifically identifies the need to ensure that the rights
                           and aspirations of indigenous pygmy communities are respected, and defines measures to meet this goal.

                           The project builds the capacity of forest communities, including indigenous pygmy groups, for participation in preparation and implementation of
                           forest management plans and social responsibility contracts, and helps to improve their understanding of the rights and responsibilities they
                           have with regard to forest land management. More broadly, by aiming to improve the enabling environment for small and medium–scale forest
                           product enterprises, the project aims to facilitate participation of a broader range of people in economic development. The focus of the
                           operation on information dissemination and transparency aims to ensure broader civil society engagement in forestry. By supporting FLEGT
                           implementation, the project will help ensure that local communities will benefit from forestry activities.

                           The project will not finance major civil works and will not directly finance investments requiring land acquisition. The project will not directly
                           finance plantations, but will support the analysis and consultations necessary to ensure that plantations are developed in an environmentally
                           and socially responsible manner. ProNAR already has a consultation process in place to engage local people in land allocation processes for
                           plantations. The project will support and enhance the level of local engagement and transparency in this process.
                           The EMP includes grievance handling procedures and arrangements for monitoring its implementation. Public consultations on the ESMF have
                           been held, and it has been made publicly available. In addition, in recognition of the potential social impacts, the involuntary resettlement and
                           Indigenous Peoples safeguard policies are triggered, and these risks will be mitigated through the application of the consultative, participatory
                           and transparency measures defined in the ESMF, the RPF and the IPPF prepared for the project. These measures include grievance handling
                           procedures and arrangements for monitoring their implementation. Public consultations on these documents have been held, and they have
                           been made publicly available. The Recipient will be required to ensure that the ToRs for all studies conducted and other TA provided under the
                           project are consistent with, and pay due attention to these safeguard frameworks, and to the Recipient’s safeguard legislation. To this end, the
                           Recipient will provide all ToRs for such activities under the project to the Association for its prior approval.


                                                                                                                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    16-Feb-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                19-Mar-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 09-Mar-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    24-Feb-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                19-Mar-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 09-Mar-2012
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    26-Feb-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                19-Mar-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 09-Mar-2012
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]

                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                           If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                           habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                           Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on               Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                           cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                           If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by           Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                           the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                           If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the             Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                           plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                           Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for              Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                           certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                           Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                     Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]

                           Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language             Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                           that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                           Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for          Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                           the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                           Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                     Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]

                           Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard           Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                           impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                           Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same               Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                           been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?



                                                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 7
                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                  Simon A. P. Rietbergen
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)       Date: 23-Mar-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Sector Manager:                    Name Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough (SM)   Date: 23-Mar-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                           Page 7 of 7
