                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                   Report No.: ISDSC582

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-May-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Tanzania                          Project ID:       P127241
                            Project Name:       Intermodal & Rail Development Project (P127241)
                            Task Team           Henry Des Longchamps Devi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           05-Nov-2012                       Estimated         02-Apr-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTTR                             Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:         Railways (80%), General transportation sector (20%)
                            Theme:          Trade facilitation and market access (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                     150.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                           150.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to: (a) restore a viable rail operation with a minimum level of
                           reliable intermodal service, and (b) rehabilitate the rail line to be functional and enable an acceptable
                           level of maintenance. The project focus will be on improving the train operations of the intermodal
                           container business in order to facilitate trade, economic productivity and efficiency and global
                           competitiveness for Tanzania and neighboring countries.

                           The main factors to be addressed are the poor state of the rail infrastructure and equipment, and the
                           operational weaknesses in all components of the logistics chain, starting at the port (long customs
                           clearance processes, long operating delays and insufficient intermodal facilities).

                           By contributing to increase the port capacity in Dar-es-Salaam, by setting up new logistics services
                         and standards along this railways line (and up to Mwanza and Kigoma), this corridor upgrade will
                         directly benefit Tanzania transport sector.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Operations improvements for the container business will also positively disseminate to the regional
                         economy and other sectors, by facilitating trade and providing a more regular and reliable transport
                         system, and contribute to :
                         •        economic productivity and efficiency,
                         •        improve Tanzania global competitiveness,
                         •        tackle road congestion and lower stress on existing or new road network (and therefore
                         overall road maintenance budget)
                         •        offer low-carbon emission transport solutions and therefore contribute to improving
                         environmental conditions.

                         A number of recent news articles and studies have pressed for Tanzania to re-engage on the Central
                         corridor and help the development of its landlocked neighbors. This corridor provides a shorter and
                         more direct link to these countries: a recent East African Corridor Diagnostic Study (CDS) indicates
                         that a price of a Twenty-Foot Equivalent Unit (TEU) container from Dar-es-Salaam to Bujumbura
                         would be 50 percent cheaper than the similar movement by road from Mombasa.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed project has been earmarked for an IDA credit of US$150 million, and It is important to
                         link the business development model supporting the rehabilitation of the rail network and the rolling
                         stock with the issues facing the port operations and its future development. The market assessment
                         and business planning and the Land Bridge Concept interim reports, have shown that the project
                         should be designed around the following four components:

                         Component A (Railway Track Rehabilitation – about US$123 million): Emergency rehabilitation to
                         key sections of railway track infrastructure and other infrastructure improvements to guarantee a
                         reliable service between Dar-es-Salam and Isaka. It will involve the procurement of rails, sleepers,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and related engineering works (alignments, laying of track, rebuilding of bridges and culverts).

                         Component B (Rolling Stock Rehabilitation – about US$20 million): The rehabilitation of
                         locomotives and selected rolling stock to deliver service at the level identified above in key results.
                         Most of this equipment will be dedicated to the new intermodal services, although the improvement
                         in TRL’s traction capacity is expected to have a positive impact on existing services.

                         Component C (Terminals Improvement – about US$2 million): The re-design and upgrading of rail
                         exchanges on the port and particularly in and around the two container depots in the port and the
                         Isaka terminal. This is expected to allow for more efficient modal transfers to rail.

                         Component D (Capacity Building – about US$5 million). This component will focus on: (a) Training
                         programs for management and/or outsourcing of management capacities that will span over at least
                         three years to reach the project objectives and facilitate the required management adjustment and
                         transition. This training will be related to overall intermodal operations management, as well as
                         specific train operations management, with focus on delivering quality and reliability of services. (b)
                         This will also integrate the development and set up of a management accounting information system.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the              safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           The project will cover about 240 km of railway line along the core corridor from Dar es Salaam to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Mwanza through important towns of Morogoro, Kilosa, Dodoma, Manyoni, Tabora, Isaka and
                           Shinyanga. The railway line runs from the coastal area to the upland central part of Tanzania and
                           eventually to the lake zone in Mwanza. According to the preliminary environmental screening, there
                           are about 10 vegetation types in the project area, both miombo and planted tree species. The
                           vegetation around Pugu and Ruvu stations in coast Region include one threatened species, Baphia
                           Kirkii. It is most likely that railway construction activities will involve clearing of vegetation, which
                           could lead to temporary soil erosion. The project has triggered Safeguard Policy OP/BP 4.01
                           Environmental Assessment however, since most of the activities will involve rehabilitation,
                           envisaged negative impact will be limited. The project will prepare an Environmental Management
                           Plan to mitigate the likely negative impacts during the project implementation.
                           OP 4.12 was triggered for the number of reasons. Even though the works under component one are
                           rehabilitations, there is still the possibility of the need for land for, among other things, access roads,
                           depots and structures to store the equipment and parts, among others. In addition, the main economic
                           activities along the railway line are agriculture and livestock keeping. According to the screening
                           report for the environmental assessment, in the rural areas there is encroachment on the right of way
                           along the sections of the railway and the most common crops planned are rice and cassava. The
                           report indicates that since the encroachment has weakened the strength of the formation due to the
                           presence of permanently stagnant water used for vegetable irrigation, measures should be taken to
                           prohibit agricultural activities within the railway reserved area to avoid land use conflict and damage
                           to the railway line. This then has consequences on the livelihoods of the people living along the
                           railways. According to the same report, in cities and small towns there have been great changes in
                           land use, especially on the periphery of the towns affecting the railway reserve. Rapid growth of
                           cities and towns results in serious encroachment on the railway reserve, since there are no clear
                           boundaries where the 15m railway reserve ends and the 30m railway reserve out of the cities or
                           towns.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Once the detail design is ready, a Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared and disclosed in the
                           country and infoshop before appraisal. If the detail design is not ready before the appraisal, then a
                           Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared and disclosed in the country and Infoshop by the
                           appraisal.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Borrower has in place an Environmental Management Act (2004) and required regulations to
                           guide environmental and social management of development activities for all sectors. The legislation
                           calls for the establishment of a Sector Environmental Unit for all Ministries. The Ministry of
                           Transport has an Environmental Unit, which is capable of coordinating and supervising the
                           implementation of the Environmental Management Plan. At the national level, the Borrower has an
                           established mechanism for addressing environmental management through the National Environment
                           Management Council (NEMC). NEMC will collaborate with the Ministry of Transport will ensure
                           that the project implementing entity has the necessary capacity to implement the EMP for the project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS)
                           Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTN1)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      Yes
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jul-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The safeguard related-studies will be launched on May 15, 2012 and should be completed by end
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      of June, 2012
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Henry Des Longchamps Devi

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 27-Jul-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (SM)                                                                                            Date: 24-May-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
