                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC3027

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                            Project ID:      P133114
                            Project Name:      Heilongjiang Cold Weather Smart Public Transportation System (P133114)
                            Task Team          Binyam Reja
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          04-Oct-2013                      Estimated        25-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Urban Transport (100%)
                            Theme(s):          City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (70%), Infrastructure services for
                                               private sector development (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    493.00                     Total Bank Financing:        200.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                Financing Gap:                  0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     293.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        200.00
                              Total                                                                        493.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The PDO is to improve the convenience, reliability, safety and energy efficiency of the public
                           transport systems in Harbin and Mudanjiang.
                           C. Project Description
                           Component 1. Public Transport Corridor Improvement (62 percent of total project cost). This
                           component will finance the improvement of three designated public transport corridors in Harbin and
                         five in Mudanjiang by: (a) improving pavement conditions and developingnew lane configurations
                         within the current pavement width (i.e., without widening) to provide bus-priority lanes, bike lanes,
                         and pedestrian facilities; and (b) installing bus-bays and providing heat preserving shelters at bus
Public Disclosure Copy




                         stops.

                         Component 2: Public Transport Fleet Renewal and Operations Improvement (25 percent of total
                         project cost). This component will finance: (a) the procurement of cleaner-fuel and accessible buses
                         to increase usage of cleaner-fuel vehicles and introduce accessible buses to be used by people with
                         disability; (b) implementation of enterprise office automation system to improve business operation
                         within bus companies; (c) establishment of fleet supervision, control and management system to
                         schedule, dispatch, monitor and coordinate fleet operation and manage maintenance need; (d)
                         installation of GPS based on-board unit and surveillance equipment on fleet vehicles; (e) deployment
                         of real-time passenger information system at bus stops along proposed corridors; (f) construction of
                         passenger hubs, terminal, depots/garages, maintenance facility; and (g) bus driver training facility.

                         Component 3. Traffic Management and Safety Improvement (Seven percent of total project cost).
                         This component will finance the procurement of equipment, consulting services and training for: (a)
                         traffic control system, including traffic signals with bus priority function to ensure bus priority and
                         pedestrian crossings safety; (b) traffic control center equipment and integrated comprehensive
                         management platform software, (c) real time traffic information system through Variable Message
                         Sign on traffic conditions; (d) traffic surveillance and violation enforcement system; and (e) traffic
                         safety education center.

                         Component 4. Emergency Response and Road Maintenance (Three percent of total project cost).
                         This component will support Harbin Municipality to develop an effective emergency response and
                         road maintenance system. The project will finance (a) consulting services for the development of a
                         comprehensive emergency management strategy to respond to severe weather conditions; (b)
                         procurement of emergency rescue equipment and specialized road maintenance equipments; and (c)
                         procurement and installation of a geographic information system and other equipments to develop a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         comprehensive inventory of urban roads, bridges, underground pipes, and to assess the condition of
                         these assets and determine the repair and maintenance requirements.

                         Component 5. Institutional Reform and Capacity Building (Three percent of total project cost). This
                         component will support improvements to the institutional and financing framework within which
                         public transport services are developed and operated. The project will finance consulting services to:
                         (a) develop an updated bus route structure and schedule, taking into account the changing land use
                         patterns in the project cities and the need to integrate with the new metro lines in Harbin; (b) improve
                         the ownership and regulatory structure in Harbin, including better integration of private and public
                         sector operators, and clarifying and separating the government’s role in service operation and
                         regulation; (c) improve the enforcement of the current concession agreement in Mudanjiang through
                         better performance agreement and development of the government’s regulatory capacity; (d) study
                         and develop policy options for the establishment of a new financing and funding arrangement for
                         urban transport in Harbin, including through identification and earmarking of transport user fees for
                         the development of a sustainable urban transport and increasing market-based financing for public
                         transport improvement; this will also include strategy for improving revenue and reducing and better
                         targeting of subsidies; (e) study and develop an integrated air quality and transport plan for Harbin
                         including the establishment of air quality monitoring system, building on the GEF supported project.
                         The project will also finance consulting services for project management, and domestic and
                         international training and study tours, as well as consulting services for design and supervision of
                           civil works, and preparation and implementation of relatedenvironmental and social safeguard
                           documents.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)
                           The project involves two cities in Heilongjiang Province, the northeastern most of China. Harbin, the
                           provincial capital and the largest city in the Province with an urban population of nearly 6 million, is
                           located in the central plain by Songhuajiang River, the third longest river in China. Mudanjiang, a
                           medium sized city about 300 km southeast of Harbin with 960,000 urban dwellers, is bisected by
                           Mudanjiang River, the second largest tributary of Songhuajiang River. Both cities are in the cold
                           temperate climate zone with annual precipitation around 580 mm and snowing season from
                           November to January. The temperature in Harbin averages around 3.6 ºC annually and in the coldest
                           month (January) ranges from -13 ºC to -24 ºC, whereas those for Mudanjiang are slightly higher.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Although the two project cities have little experience with the Bank projects and its safeguard
                           policies, the provincial PMO has been in charge of a recent Bank project on rural dairy development.
                           The borrower has engaged a qualified institute to carry-out environmental assessment (EA) for both
                           cities. Initial work of this EA consultant team on preparing Term of Reference (ToR) for EA
                           demonstrates adequate capability. Training on the Bank safeguard policies and relevant guidelines
                           has been provided by the Bank team to the project entities and their EA/SA consultant, and will
                           continue throughout the preparation process to enhance their capacity for environmental management
                           of the project’s impacts.

                           The PMOs and their related government agencies have extensive experience in managing social and
                           environmental issues in government-financed projects, having carried out large infrastructure
                           programs in their respective cities that require significant environmental and social impact
                           management as per government rules and policies. Therefore, although the cities are new to Bank
                           safeguard polices, they have experience in government environment and social safeguard rules, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           these experiences can be leveraged to build up their capacity in complying with Bank complying
                           with Bank policies. The Bank team has already provided training on Bank policies to the PMO and
                           relevant environment and safeguard agencies, as well as to the selected consultants. Both PMOs
                           have hired experienced and reputable consultants (with experience in Bank projects) to help them
                           prepare the safeguard documents. The PMOs will also hire project implementation support
                           consultants for supervising safeguard implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Songling Yao (EASCS)
                           Xin Ren (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project’s component on improvement of
                           BP 4.01                                               transportation corridors will be all undertaken
                                                                                 within the existing right-of-way. The
                                                                                 component on public transport facilities
                                                                                 involves construction and rehabilitation of bus
                                                                                 depots and terminals etc. Other components
                                                                 involve mainly procurement and installation of
                                                                 equipment and consultancy work. Overall
                                                                 adverse environmental impacts will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 moderate, mostly temporary and construction-
                                                                 related, such as noise and dust, construction
                                                                 waste disposal, soil erosion at water front work,
                                                                 sewage discharge, traffic impact, social
                                                                 disturbance and safety. Major impacts during
                                                                 operation include air pollution, noise, road
                                                                 safety and wastewater from bus depots etc.
                                                                 These negative impacts could be readily
                                                                 avoided and mitigated by sound project design
                                                                 and construction management.

                                                                 As per requirements of regulation in China, the
                                                                 impacts will be analyzed comprehensively
                                                                 through environmental assessment (EA) process
                                                                 for each project city and reviewed/approved
                                                                 domestically by competent environmental
                                                                 authority. Based on the EA, Environmental
                                                                 Management Plans (EMP) will be prepared for
                                                                 both cities detailing mitigation and monitoring
                                                                 measures to address these impacts, according to
                                                                 the Bank safeguard policies. With the help of
                                                                 the Bank team, ToR for the EA/EMP has been
                                                                 developed by the client’s EA consultant.

                                                                 The only potentially linked activity is apartment
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 buildings that may be built on top of the
                                                                 proposed underground bus garage at the existing
                                                                 bus depot at Xiangfang road, Harbin. However,
                                                                 the client may decide to forego the buildings
                                                                 altogether due to internal reasons, as indicated
                                                                 during project preparation. In case the
                                                                 apartments be built concurrently, due diligence
                                                                 would be required as per the Bank’s
                                                                 requirement.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    The project will take place in built-up area in
                                                                 both cities with no natural habitats as defined by
                                                                 this OP in the vicinity of any project sites.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    Not applicable

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    Not applicable

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   One historical building was seen near the
                         BP 4.11                                 proposed project corridor during site visit of
                                                                 identification mission. Further systematic
                                                                investigation during the EA process is needed to
                                                                determine if the OP will be triggered.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No    The project activities are all within constructed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                urban areas, where there is no ethnic minority
                                                                community present, so the policy is not
                                                                triggered
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   The project Components 1,2 and 3 will involve
                         4.12                                   civil works, such as bus terminals and depots,
                                                                management centers; and install or make
                                                                available overpasses and passage tunnels along
                                                                the proposed corridors. For these works, land
                                                                occupation may be required, also construction
                                                                of these civil works also may require temporary
                                                                land acquisition. As a result, OP 4.12 is
                                                                triggered.

                                                                The main civil works requiring land in Harbin
                                                                are relates to two bus end-terminals and one
                                                                comprehensive bus depot. The land for these
                                                                sites are already available.

                                                                The main civil work in Mudanjiang component
                                                                includes three comprehensive transfer terminals,
                                                                15 bus end-terminals, and three bus depots. The
                                                                land for these sites is mostly available, but new
                                                                land may be required.

                                                                Other activities in the two cities may need small
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                pieces of land, but this can only be identified
                                                                during detailed design stage not prior to project
                                                                appraisal.

                                                                Based on above information, it is recommended
                                                                that an RPF for each city is prepared, with due
                                                                diligence review on the land already acquired.

                                                                RP for Mudanjiang City is needed for several
                                                                sites where land is to be acquired.

                                                                Non safeguard related social impacts will be
                                                                assessed in a standalone Social Assessment.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No    Not applicable

                         Projects on International        No    Not applicable
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No    Not applicable
                         7.60
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The preparation of safeguard-related studies is underway, and the draft EA/SA and related reports
                                      will be ready before appraisal (expected in December 2013).
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Binyam Reja

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 13-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
