                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA3948
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Ethiopia                           Project ID:    P133133
                            Project Name:     Sustainable Land Management Project-II (P133133)
                            Task Team         Edward Felix Dwumfour
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         16-Aug-2013                        Estimated   22-Nov-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTN3                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal         Land degradation
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), Forestry (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Other environment and natural resources management (30%), Water resource
                                              management (30%), Biodiversity (20%), Climate change (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      62.96           Total Bank Financing:                 50.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                50.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                          12.96
                              Total                                                                                      62.96
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           2. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)



                                                                      Page 1 of 12
                            A. Project Development Objective(s)
                            Project Development Objective (PDO) and Global Environment Objective (GEO)
                            The Project's Development and Global Environment Objectives is to reduce land degradation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                            improve land productivity in selected watersheds in six regions in Ethiopia. The objective would
                            be achieved through the provision of capital investments, technical assistance and capacity
                            building for small holder farmers in the watersheds and government institutions at national and
                            sub-national levels.
                            B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                            Project Development Objective (PDO) and Global Environment Objective (GEO)
                            The Project's Development and Global Environment Objectives is to reduce land degradation and
                            improve land productivity in selected watersheds in six regions in Ethiopia. The objective would
                            be achieved through the provision of capital investments, technical assistance and capacity
                            building for small holder farmers in the watersheds and government institutions at national and
                            sub-national levels.
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed SLMP-2 is one of the projects within the Sahel and West Africa Program (SAWAP) in
                         support of the Great Green wall Initiative (GGWI) and that it builds on TerrAfrica Platform for
                         Sustainable Land and Water Management (SLWM). The Project would build on the experiences and
                         lessons learnt as well as progress made under the World Bank/GEF financed support and other
                         similar initiatives in the country and elsewhere. It would focus a significant level of investment in
                         critical watersheds in six regional states in Ethiopia. The Ministry of Agriculture has selected the
                         project watersheds, based on detailed selection criteria.

                         The proposed Project will support activities related to integrated watershed and landscape
                         management, capacity building and knowledge management, and rural land administration. Within
                         this framework, activities such as climate resilient land use and farming practices and interventions
                         that internalize climate risks by small-holder farmers with a special emphasis on female farmers
Public Disclosure Copy




                         would be supported.

                         The proposed SLMP-2 will have the following four components:

                         Component 1 - Integrated Watershed and Landscape Management
                         The Component will support the scaling up of tested best practice land and water management
                         models including watershed management, afforestation/reforestation, biodiversity conservation and
                         protection of ecologically critical ecosystems, climate smart agriculture, and pasture management in
                         selected watersheds in the country. The performance indicators for this Component would include:
                         (i) total number of land users (households) adopting sustainable and climate-smart/resilient land
                         management practices on individual lands disaggregated by gender; (ii) total rehabilitated land area
                         in hectares (individual and communal) brought under a climate-smart watershed management system
                         as a result of the project; (iii) amount of carbon accumulation in biomass in 10 selected watersheds
                         below and above ground (ton Carbon/ha) as a result of the project; and (iv) increase in per cent of
                         households adopting and applying backyard crop (including fruit trees, vegetable gardens), agro-
                         processing and livestock management practices in the targeted watersheds.

                         Component 2 – Institutional Strengthening, Capacity Development and Knowledge generation and
                         Management
                         The goal of this Component is to complement the on-the-ground activities to be implemented under


                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                         Component 1 by strengthening and enhancing capacity at the institutional level and building relevant
                         skills and knowledge of key stakeholders, including government agencies, research organizations and
                         academia involved in the sustainable management of natural resources, as well as the private sector,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         community leaders and small holder farmers. This will be achieved through the revision of existing
                         policies, legislation and regulations related to (i) watershed management and protection such as the
                         CBPWDG, (ii) reward and incentive schemes for market-based instruments such as carbon finance,
                         (iii) payments for ecosystem services (PES), and (iv) policies on rural land use planning, benefit
                         sharing, mechanisms for dispute resolution, etc.. In addition, this component would support a
                         comprehensive training program that will include regular training events and exchange programs to
                         enhance the capacity of local communities and institutions at national and sub-national levels in: (a)
                         climate smart watershed and landscape management/protection; (b) biodiversity and ecosystem
                         protection; (c) participatory rural land administration and certification; (d) participatory land use
                         planning; (e) participatory resource assessment; community governance; operation and maintenance
                         of communal infrastructure; climate smart production technologies and value chains. Under this
                         Component, project funds would also be used to facilitate private sector involvement, for example, in
                         supplying marketing and extension services such as veterinary shops, bull station service, private
                         nurseries, etc. in the project areas.

                         The expected performance indicators for this Component will include: (i) increase in number of
                         beneficiaries satisfied with services delivered; (ii) increase in the number of land users (small holder
                         farmers disaggregated by gender) trained in planning and implementation of techniques of
                         sustainable land management practices, entrepreneurship, business development/management, and
                         land rights and registration awareness; (iii) the number of key service providers (disaggregated by
                         gender) trained in community-based watershed management, cadastral surveying, rural land
                         administration, certification and land use planning, M&E, financial planning and procurement and
                         other cross-cutting issues; (iv) the number of woredas with well-equipped information centers on
                         sustainable and climate smart/resilient land management practices as a result of the project; and (v)
                         the number of SLM related policies/instruments developed or improved.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3 - Rural Land Administration, Certification and Land Use
                         The objective of this Component is to enhance the tenure security of small-holder farmers in order to
                         increase their motivation to adopt sustainable land management practices on communal and
                         individual land. It will support an ongoing national program providing land certificates to all
                         landholders, by enhancing rural land certification and administration as well as local level land use
                         planning at watersheds or kebeles assisted by the project. It will support the use of low-cost
                         appropriate geo-referenced mapping technologies including hybrids of technologies aimed at
                         assisting in cadastral surveying and delineating various rural land parcels and thus at strengthening
                         tenure security for small-holder farmers in the project areas while stimulating investments by farmers
                         in sustainable land and water management practices. The Component will build on lessons and
                         experiences emerging from the Government's own land certification activities, SLMP-1 and the
                         Government of Finland-supported rural land certification initiatives in the Regional State of
                         Benishangul-Gumuz and the Lake Tana sub-basin. The expected performance indicators will include:
                         (i) total targeted communal lands issued with geo-referenced map-base land certificates; (ii)
                         individual land parcels covered with geo-referenced maps; (iii) number of households in the
                         intervention areas issued with geo-referenced map-base land certificates; and (iv) local level
                         participatory land use plans prepared and implemented at kebele level within the intervention areas.

                         Component 4 - Project management
                         This Component will partially finance the operation of the SLM Support Unit to support the Ministry

                                                                       Page 3 of 12
                         of Agriculture (MoA) in ensuring efficient delivery of project resources to achieve the PDO, as well
                         as adequately documenting progress and results. The component focuses on project management
                         arrangements and mechanisms including support to project governance structures, coordination with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         other SLM partners, as well as monitoring and evaluation (M&E), preparation of implementation-
                         related plans and fiduciary responsibilities such as procurement, financial management and safeguard
                         compliance. In addition, the funds allocated to this component include the procurement of essential
                         goods and equipment such as vehicles, motorcycles, field equipment, office equipment and furniture,
                         imagery, software and other accessories for all public agencies involved in project implementation at
                         the central, regional and district level. To strengthen project management, funds will be available to
                         finance selected technical assistance such as financial management specialists, procurement
                         specialists, and monitoring and evaluation specialists at all levels. The key output/outcome of this
                         component will be the effective implementation of project activities with due diligence and integrity.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Ethiopia is a hotspot for many diverse ecosystems types characterized by significant differences in
                         micro-climate, soil properties (soils are inherently erodible and fragile), vegetation types, agricultural
                         potential, biodiversity and water resources both surfaceand underground. SLMP-2 will be located in
                         the so-called productive ecological areas within the six (6) regional States of Tigray, Amhara,
                         Oromia, Benshangul-Gumuz, Gambella and SNNPR. Project sites may be found on both highland
                         (high- and mid-highlands) and lowland areas with steep slopes and terrains that are undulating and
                         susceptible to the forces of erosion and formation of gullies caused by rain water. Unattended to,
                         these areas could easily be degraded, resulting in soil fertility loss. Severe erosion as a result of the
                         highly erosive rainfalls causes sedimentation of water bodies, including rivers and streams, dams and
                         irrigation channels.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS)
                         Asferachew Abate Abebe (AFTN3)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes               Generally, the Sustainable Land Management
                          BP 4.01                                              Project (SLMP-2) would provide positive
                                                                               environmental and social benefits. However, the
                                                                               EA policy is triggered, predicated on the fact that
                                                                               the proposed Project would finance small scale
                                                                               infrastructure sub-projects some of which could
                                                                               result in environmental risks and social threats
                                                                               and therefore require environmental and social
                                                                               management. These sub-projects may include the
                                                                               construction or rehabilitation of physical
                                                                               structures for water catchment management such
                                                                               as check-dams, water harvesting structures, small
                                                                               dams and boreholes, small-scale water supply and
                                                                               irrigation facilities, small feeder roads and
                                                                               bridges, forest set-asides, enclosures, etc. An
                                                                               ESMF has been prepared, consulted upon, and
                                                                               disclosed for this Project.



                                                                       Page 4 of 12
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes             Project areas are likely to encompass some
                                                                         natural habitats which are protected by law.
                                                                         Hence, it is necessary to reflect this OP/BP in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         ESMF and to ensure that sub-projects are
                                                                         screened against this OP/BP and that appropriate
                                                                         preventive or mitigation measures are formulated
                                                                         and executed.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes             Project areas are likely to encompass some
                                                                         forests which may be for production or
                                                                         protection. The Project will not finance any
                                                                         activities that could result in the major clearance
                                                                         of forests of any nature - communal, public,
                                                                         private, etc. The project will ensure that sub-
                                                                         projects are screened against this OP/BP and that
                                                                         appropriate preventive or mitigation measures are
                                                                         formulated and executed.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes             The triggering of this OP is predicated on the
                                                                         assumption that the Project intends to support the
                                                                         introduction of high value crops, new and high-
                                                                         yielding crop varieties and animal breeds which
                                                                         may lead to increased application of
                                                                         agrochemicals (insecticides, acaricides,
                                                                         herbicides, fertilizers, etc.). The ESMF includes a
                                                                         description of Integrated Pest Management (IPM)
                                                                         approaches. It is known that the Ministry of
                                                                         Agriculture and its offices at the regional and
                                                                         woreda levels have sufficient knowledge and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         capacity to provide IPM approaches to small-
                                                                         holder farmers through its extension system.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             There are few areas in the Ethiopian highlands
                         BP 4.11                                         and lowlands that constitute cultural resources in
                                                                         the sense described in OP. 4.11. Execution of the
                                                                         micro-projects under the Project would be
                                                                         unlikely to involve excavation or inundation of
                                                                         any sort. Furthermore, activities will be carried
                                                                         out only in areas selected by local people through
                                                                         a broader consultative process that includes prior,
                                                                         free and informed consent that would give great
                                                                         importance to safeguarding their cultural
                                                                         resources. Nonetheless, the policy is triggered,
                                                                         predicated on the assumption that there could be
                                                                         “chance find?, as explained in the ESMF. No sub-
                                                                         project that might have negative impacts on
                                                                         cultural property will be funded without
                                                                         acceptable mitigation measures prepared prior to
                                                                         execution of any such sub-project. There are



                                                                 Page 5 of 12
                                                                        national procedures and guidelines for reporting
                                                                        chance finds to be followed, and a national
                                                                        authority for coordinating and facilitating the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        archiving, safekeeping and documentation of
                                                                        physical cultural resources. The Project would
                                                                        work closely with this national authority, should
                                                                        any chance find issues arise. At the ground level
                                                                        any “chance find? would be reported to the
                                                                        appropriate government agency.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes             The Project draws heavily on the results of the
                                                                        screening in five regions of Ethiopia that found
                                                                        that the vast majority of the target population met
                                                                        the criteria detailed in OP4.10 and the fact that
                                                                        the Ethiopia Constitution recognizes the presence
                                                                        and rights of many ethnic groups including the
                                                                        under-served groups, OP 4.10 was triggered and
                                                                        the Project conducted Social Assessment and in-
                                                                        depth consultation process with project
                                                                        beneficiaries and project affected peoples,
                                                                        including identified vulnerable and under-served
                                                                        groups, meeting the OP 4.10 criteria, to seek
                                                                        broad support for the project from these groups.
                                                                        The findings of the enhanced social assessment
                                                                        (the identified social risks and risk mitigation
                                                                        measures), the process used in fostering free,
                                                                        prior, and informed consultations and achieving
                                                                        broad community support as well as culturally
                                                                        appropriate mitigation measures, including
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        grievance redress mechanisms and benefit sharing
                                                                        have been reflected in the social appraisal section
                                                                        of the PAD, in the risk matrix and the Project
                                                                        Implementation Manual (PIM).
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             This OP/BP is triggered, based on the
                         4.12                                           assumption that implementation of SLMP-2
                                                                        interventions may potentially involve acquisition
                                                                        of land and/or restriction of access to communal
                                                                        natural resources. Alongside the ESMF, a
                                                                        Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been
                                                                        prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed in-
                                                                        country to ensure that appropriate mitigation
                                                                        measures, including grievance redress
                                                                        mechanisms are in place in the event of
                                                                        involuntary land take and restriction of access.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        Yes             No new construction and/or rehabilitation of
                                                                        large dams is anticipated to be financed under the
                                                                        proposed SLMP-2. There will possibly be
                                                                        construction of small dams under the Project,


                                                                Page 6 of 12
                                                                                particularly for irrigation of small-farm holdings,
                                                                                they will be less than 4.5 meters high with a few
                                                                                water carrying capacity and may not require
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                special procedures that are normally applied for
                                                                                large dams to follow. In cases of small dams
                                                                                construction (less than 4.5 meters) and water
                                                                                holding capacities of a few hundred cubic meters,
                                                                                project implementers will be advised to use the
                                                                                FAO ‘Manual on Small Earth Dams, A Guide to
                                                                                Siting, Design and Construction’ (FAO Irrigation
                                                                                and Drainage Paper # 64, Rome, 2010. Available
                                                                                at FAO website: www.fao.org). In addition, the
                                                                                guideline for small dam construction prepared by
                                                                                the Ethiopian Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) will
                                                                                be used to ensure safety of small dams.
                            Projects on International           No                Activities under Component 1 of the project are
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                aimed at better watershed and pasture land
                                                                                management, afforestation and reforestation,
                                                                                biodiversity conservation as well as climate smart
                                                                                agriculture. These activities will contribute to
                                                                                reducing soil erosion and rejuvenate degraded
                                                                                landscapes hence lesser siltation of rivers and
                                                                                streams in the targeted watersheds. None of the
                                                                                project activities will therefore adversely change
                                                                                the quality or quantity of water flows to the other
                                                                                riparians of the Nile and its tributaries or any
                                                                                other international waterway and no actual works
                                                                                will be financed on or along the river system. In
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                addition, based on the assumption that
                                                                                investments under the Project that are likely to be
                                                                                spread over six regional States including in
                                                                                Amhara, Tigray, Oromia, Southern Nations,
                                                                                Nationalities & Peoples, Benshangul-Gumuz and
                                                                                Gambela, they are unlikely to affect the overall
                                                                                hydrological balance of any of the international
                                                                                waterways or tributaries. This OP/BP will
                                                                                therefore not be triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   The proposed Project would not be implemented
                            7.60                                                in any disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                This is a new Project and not one to be restructured. No adverse large-scale impacts or
                              irreversible negative environmental risks and social impacts are expected from Project activities,



                                                                        Page 7 of 12
                            given that, in the event any risks occur, they may be limited in scope and space, reversible, timely
                         2. and  cost-effectively
                             Describe                  indirectand
                                                  manageable
                                        any potential              community-based
                                                                and/or                 by nature.
                                                                        long term impacts     due to anticipated future activities
                            in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The overall impact of SLMP-2 on both the biophysical and social environments is expected to be
                            positive because the Project would focus on rehabilitation of degraded lands through appropriate
                            and best-fit land and water management technologies and practices. These practices would include
                            well-tested physical and biological measures that conserve soils and water, increase groundwater
                            and aquifer recharge, protect the land from erosion and gully formation, increase vegetation cover,
                            reduce CO2 emissions and sequester carbon in above and below ground. Potential negative
                            impacts, although ephemeral, reversible and easy to mitigate, may emerge during civil works work
                            related to the construction of small scale irrigation facilities, water ponds, boreholes, rural feeder
                            roads, etc. There are no likely long-term negative impacts associated with the Project.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                            impacts.
                             The alternative that was discussed but discarded was to put all these lands (watersheds) under
                            strict protection devoid of crop and livestock production. This alternative was found to be
                            unfeasible, as these productive lands provide means of agricultural production for the small-holder
                            farmers, supporting their livelihood needs and providing them with income source. Also, putting
                            all these lands under protection would mean relocating a large number of people to other areas
                            where they could practice their 'trade'. Socially, this would be untenable and would lead to
                            agitations, social grieve, disputes and complaints, etc. It would also involve complicated
                            arrangements for compensation payments. It is worth noting that this is quasi a 'repeater' Project
                            that is based on the achievement and successes of the predecessor SLMP-1, which is being
                            implemented in different watersheds but within the same ecological zones within the same six
                            regions as before. The other alternative that was discussed but dropped was to have no
                            continuation of the SLMP-1 beyond September 30, 2013. This alternative was also discarded
                            because having no project would result in increased degradation of water and land, and
                            sedimentation of water bodies, resulting in reduction in land and agricultural productivity, food
Public Disclosure Copy




                            insecurity among already impoverished rural farmers and reduce their resilience to climate change
                            and variability.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                            assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             There is staff in place at the regional and woreda levels to manage safeguard issues, albeit not
                            effectively deployed. For ensuring due diligence and utility of safeguards instruments, more
                            expertise would need to be deployed at all levels. There was no designated staff at the federal
                            coordination office to manage safeguards implementation and monitoring during implementation
                            of SLMP-1. The Government has already taken steps to correct this by appointing or hiring a
                            safeguards specialist to be based in the federal project office to coordinate and facilitate the
                            implementation and to ensure compliance with safeguards. Importantly, staff at all levels will be
                            provided further training to strengthen their capacity in the application of the safeguard
                            instruments prepared for the Project, including social and environmental impact assessments,
                            particularly for vetting/screening and monitoring the implementation of sub-projects as well as
                            implementation and monitoring of safeguards as a whole. As the vast majority of people in the
                            project area meet the criteria for OP 4.10, the Borrower has conducted a comprehensive Social
                            Assessment (SA) that assess key socio-economic factors that require consideration during project
                            implementation, identifies vulnerable and historically under-served groups, and recommends
                            appropriate mitigation measures. At the design stage, the Borrower ensured that extensive


                                                                      Page 8 of 12
                           stakeholder consultations with project affected persons were carried out on the basis of prior, free
                           and informed consent with aim to build awareness and secure broad community ownership and
                           support.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Key stakeholders include the following:
                           - small-holder farmers in rural areas practicing crop and livestock production within critical
                           watershed areas susceptible to land degradation;
                           - kebele administration;
                           - woreda administration with all the relevant woreda level sectoral offices such as water, land
                           administration and use, agriculture, health and nutrition, finance, the zonal offices as intermediary
                           between the regional administration and the woreda administration;
                           - regional administration with all its relevant offices such as water, land administration and use,
                           agriculture, health and nutrition, finance, etc.;
                           - federal government including the Ministries of Finance & Economic Development, Agriculture,
                           Environmental Protection & Forests, Water, Irrigation & Energy, National Meteorological
                           Agency;
                           - private sector; and
                           - civil society, including research and academia, consultants, non-profit organizations,
                           development partners.
                           The Project would create coordination/platforms at each of the administration levels for
                           implementation of the activities under the Project. These would include the Watershed
                           Development Committees at kebele and woreda levels), Watershed Teams (at kebele level),
                           Technical & Steering Committees (at woreda, regional and federal levels), and the federal level
                           Rural Economic Development and Food Security Platform that brings together a large spectrum of
                           stakeholders including public, research and academia, development partners, etc. Thus, safeguards
                           policy and implementation issues would be discussed and handled at each level with opportunities
                           for escalating issues to the next hierarchical level for quick redress. It is unlikely that
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation of activities under the Project would result in any significant adverse risks for any
                           group of people in the project areas.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         06-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      06-Sep-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                            06-Sep-2013
                           Comments: An ESMF has been prepared under broad-based consultations, based on prior, free
                                         and informed consent with project beneficiaries and project affected people. The
                                         ESMF has been cleared by the Africa Regional Safeguards Advisor. The cleared
                                         version has been up-loaded in the Ministry’s website (www.moa.gov.et) and also
                                         made available in libraries and accessible locations at the federal Ministry of
                                         Agriculture (MoA), regional Bureaus of Agriculture (BoAs), Environmental
                                         Protection, Land Administration and Use Authorities (EPLAUAs) and Woreda
                                         Offices of Agriculture (WOAs).


                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           06-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        06-Sep-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                              06-Sep-2013
                           Comments: The Ressetlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared under active
                                         consultation, based on prior, free and informed consent with project beneficiaries and
                                         project affected people. The RPF has been cleared by the Africa Regional Safeguards
                                         Advisor. The RPF has been up-loaded in the Ministry’s website (www.moa.gov.et)
                                         and also made available in libraries and accessible locations at the federal Ministry
                                         of Agriculture (MoA), regional Bureaus of Agriculture (BoAs), Environmental
                                         Protection, Land Administration and Use Authorities (EPLAUAs) and Woreda
                                         Offices of Agriculture (WOAs).
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           26-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        06-Sep-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                              06-Sep-2013
                           Comments: The vast majority of people in the project area meet the criteria for OP 4.10. The
                                         target population identifies itself as under-served. The Project has prepared an
                                         enhanced Social Assessment under active consultation of project beneficiaries. The
                                         RPF has been up-loaded in the Ministry’s website (www.moa.gov.et) and also made
                                         available in libraries and accessible locations at the federal Ministry of Agriculture
                                         (MoA), regional Bureaus of Agriculture (BoAs), Environmental Protection, Land
                                         Administration and Use Authorities (EPLAUAs) and Woreda Offices of Agriculture
                                         (WOAs).
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                        NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        NA
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                              06-Sep-2013
                           Comments: No separate Pest Management Plan was prepared. An Integrated Pest Management
                                         Framework (IPMF) was annexed to the Environmental and Social Management
                                         Framework (ESMF) that was prepared for the Project. The cleared ESMF has been
                                         disclosed in-country and at the Bank's InfoShop.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment


                                                                    Page 10 of 12
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?



                                                                     Page 11 of 12
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Edward Felix Dwumfour
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Regional Safeguards Name:                                                Date:
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name:                                                Date:




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
