                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                   Report No.: ISDSC593

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Mar-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Mozambique                        Project ID:       P127303
                            Project Name:       Mozambique - Integrated Growth Poles Project (P127303)
                            Task Team           Ganesh Rasagam
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           08-Jan-2013                       Estimated         26-Mar-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTFE                             Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:             Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (25%), Other industry (25%), General
                                                industry and trade sector (25%), General transportation sec tor (15%), General
                                                energy sector (10%)
                            Theme:              Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (40%), Infrastructure services for
                                                private sector development (40%), Other urban developm ent (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                     100.00
                              Total                                                                           100.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the performance of enterprises and
                           smallholder farms in Tete and Nampula.
                           C. Project Description
                           The growth poles strategy and the choice of pilot growth poles have been widely discussed with
                           stakeholders in Mozambique at both national and provincial levels. The strategy consists of
                           establishing an integrated, multi sector, spatially-defined platform of interventions that target several
                           concurrent constraints to private sector-led local economic development through deployment of a
                           critical mass of reforms, infrastructure investments and skills around industries and locations of high
                         growth potential. Tete and Nampula provinces were selected as the pilot growth poles based on (i)
                         demonstrated private sector interest and growth prospects: the rapidly increasing FDI inflows,
                         increasing demand for goods and services and opportunities for leveraging spillovers; (ii) potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                         impact on large populations: Nampula is the most populated province in Mozambique while the
                         population in Tete is increasing rapidly from migration, and in both provinces development
                         indicators have not improved substantially; (iii) pressing development challenges: the provincial and
                         local authorities in Tete are facing severe capacity challenges in effectively managing the socio-
                         economic impacts of the Vale and Rio Tinto/Riversdale as coal mining investments and social
                         tensions are increasing while in Nampula authorities are facing challenges in optimizing the
                         development outcomes from FDI inflows including in the Nacala SEZ; (iv) supporting the Beira and
                         Nacala Corridor/Spatial Development Initiatives: the project will support the deepening (linkages)
                         and densification (provision of feeder infrastructure) agenda of these two high priority development
                         corridors. The project can be rolled out to other provinces learning from the impact evaluation of
                         these two pilot growth poles.

                         The project intends to support selective, targeted, integrated interventions in the Tete and Nampula
                         provinces to improve the business social-environment, improve access to infrastructure and skills and
                         strengthen the capacity of both public sector institutions and the domestic private sector. The
                         proposed project will include the following four components with preliminary estimates of
                         allocations: (1) Strengthening the Enabling Social-/Socioeconomic Environment (US$10 million),
                         (2) Priority Infrastructure Program (US$50 million), (3) Innovation and Demonstration Grant Facility
                         (US$35 million), and (4) Project implementation and Impacts Evaluation (US$5 million).

                         Component 1 - Strengthening the Enabling Environment (US$10 million)
                         The objective of this component is to provide technical assistance, goods and services to: (i) improve
                         the business social/socioeconomic environment through implementation of targeted reforms, (ii)
                         strengthen the institutional capacity of the Provincial authorities and selected Municipalities in Tete
                         and Nampula provinces to support urban and provincial planning, private-public partnerships on
                         infrastructure, establishing effective mechanisms for private-public dialogue, social accountability
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and coordination of sector initiatives, improving the quality of Municipal urban services and
                         improving management of fiscal resources and regulatory capacity, and (iii) strengthen the capacity
                         of national/regional agencies including MPD, GAZEDA, ZVDA and MIC to enhance their
                         institutional and service delivery capacity. Given the plethora of regulatory reforms required, the
                         project support for business social/socioeconomic environment reforms will need to be selective,
                         pragmatic, readily and easily implementable, sequenced and based on a sub-national business
                         environment assessment that will include business licenses, construction permits, labor regulation,
                         property registration, trade facilitation, access to land and contract enforcement. This component will
                         also support the Nacala SEZ in implementing a world class SEZ institutional, regulatory and
                         business regime as a pilot for a national SEZ program.

                         Component 2 - Priority Infrastructure Program (US$50 million)
                         The objective of this component is to support the local infrastructure development plans of the Tete
                         and Nampula provinces. This will include upgrading of selected roads, utilities, municipal facilities
                         and logistics facilities including for cross-border trade facilitation through private-public partnerships
                         where feasible. Incremental capital can also be provided under this component to rather make single-
                         use infrastructure (for example those under the large mining inves tments) multi-use. The specific
                         infrastructure projects to be supported will be identified prior to project approval based upon the
                         priorities identified by Government counterparts including ANE as well as drawing upon the on-
                         going analytical work on spatial planning and the agriculture strategy support. The focus of this
                         component is to support private-public partnerships where feasible and to provide viability gap
                         financing for critical infrastructure investments that would not be otherwise be readily attractive to
                         private investors. A detailed assessment of the infrastructure needs of each province will be carried
Public Disclosure Copy




                         out during project preparation to identify a pipeline of infrastructure projects prior to Project
                         approval.

                         Component 3 - Innovation and Demonstration Grant Facility (US$35 million)
                         The objectives of Component 3 are (i) to provide demand-driven cost sharing grant support on a
                         competitive basis to eligible private enterprises to catalyze investments through business linkages
                         between SMEs/smallholding farms and large investors, and (ii) to provide grant support on a
                         competitive basis for private-public partnerships in the delivery of high quality, demand driven skills
                         and technology support services focusing on the provinces of Tete and Nampula. This component
                         will also support the costs of a private service provider managing the grant facility (US$2 million) as
                         well as the costs of technical assistance (US$3 million) to potential grant beneficiaries for pipeline
                         development. The grant support is targeted at addressing market and institutional failures arising
                         from market distortions, externalities, asymmetric information, uneven initial wealth distribution and
                         factor immobility.

                         The grant facility will provide grant support on a competitive basis for (i) business development
                         services including training and capacity building, market development, productivity, quality and
                         technology improvements for business proposals that are submitted jointly by large investors and
                         formal domestic enterprise, (ii) business development and extension services, farm inputs,
                         community-level infrastructure (feeder roads, small scale irrigation and power) and value-adding
                         facilities for commercial agribusiness proposals that incorporate smallholder farmers and are
                         submitted jointly by commercial investors and formal groups of farmers (building upon the
                         experience of the successful investment models of the Beira Agricultural Growth Corridor, the Africa
                         Enterprise Challenge Fund and the Bank funded China Agricultural Technology Transfer Project and
                         Vietnam Agriculture Competitiveness Project), (iii) business development services for business
                         proposals from financial and non-financial institutions to develop innovative financing instruments
Public Disclosure Copy




                         such as index-based weather insurance or warehousing receipt schemes to expand agribusiness
                         finance, and (iv) business development services, training, upgrading of facilities and equipment for
                         business proposals submitted by existing public skills training institutions or public agencies
                         providing technology services such as standards, testing, quality and measurement (STQM) services
                         that incorporate private participation and/or foreign public or private technology partnerships.

                         The Grant Facility will be managed by a third party private entity under the oversight of a Grant
                         Review Committee in each province. The private entity will also provide technical assistance for
                         pipeline development of proposals, coaching and mentoring of firms and training/technology service
                         providers for the preparation of bankable proposals, fiduciary management of the grant facility and
                         monitoring and evaluation. The eligibility criteria, size of individual grants, eligible expenditure to be
                         financed, procurement and disbursement procedures will be determined prior to project approval
                         based on a demand assessment and drawing upon lessons from the Mozlink, PACDE and other Bank
                         grant schemes.

                         Component 4 - Project Coordination and Impact Evaluation (US$5 million)
                         Project coordination units will be establish ed in Tete and Nampula to coordinate the implementation
                         of project activities, fiduciary management, monitoring and evaluation and reporting. A small
                         Technical Unit will also be established in MPD to act as the focal point for the program and to
                         facilitate coordination and oversight across line Ministries through the existing Inter Ministerial
                           Technical Working Group under MTC. Monitoring and impact evaluation including the use of
                           randomized trials will be a key element built into the program design especially for the grant facility
                           in order to determine allocation of funds between different windows based on the results of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impact evaluation.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the                safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The Project will be located in the provinces of Tete and Nampula. The exact location of the specific
                           investments to be supported under the Project cannot be pre-determined prior to implementation.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Over the past years, the Ministry of Environment Cooperation (MICOA) has shown a strong grasp of
                           the national legislation and has gained a growing amount of experience and exposure through its
                           involvement in the preparation and implementation of World Bank funded investments. Though
                           much effort is being made on the ground, MICOA has still a limited technical capacity for
                           monitoring World Bank social and environmental safeguards impacts and enforcing compliance of
                           safeguards policies and regulations. The Project will provide technical assistance and capacity
                           building, especially at the Provincial and district levels, to strengthen institutional capacity as well as
                           complement ongoing initiatives through other Bank funded projects to build capacity in MICOA and
                           other related government agencies, such as MMAS (Ministry of Women Affairs) and INGC
                           (Instituto Nacional de Gestao das Calamidades). To address these knowledge gaps the Borrower will
                           prepare three safeguards instruments, namely an Environmental and Social Management Framework
                           (ESMF), a Pest Management Plan (PMP) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) respectively
                           as prescribed by the triggering of the following operational social and environmental safeguards
                           policies OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP 4.09 (Pest Management) and OP/BP 4.12
                           (Involuntary Resettlement). Each of these safeguards documents to be disclosed both in-country and
                           at the World Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal will outline/prescribe/recommend a capacity building
                           plan to be implemented by the Borrower under the guidance of the World Bank safeguards team.
                           The project will also draw on the SEAs being prepared in a number of areas across the country and/
Public Disclosure Copy




                           or prepare an SEA that examines how environmental and social issues would affect and inform the
                           government's program.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
                           Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTN2)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              The policy is triggered because of the proposed
                           BP 4.01                                                infrastructure and agribusiness investments
                                                                                  under the grant facility. Since the physical
                                                                                  locations of the proposed activities are unknown
                                                                                  at this stage, the Borrower will prepare an
                                                                                  Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                  Framework (ESMF). It would build upon the
                                                                                  ESMFs/ESIAs prepared by the ongoing World
                                                                                  Bank funded operations in the Tete and
                                                                                  Nampula provinces. The ESMF would provide
                                                                 an Environmental and Social Screening Form
                                                                 (ESSF) to be applied for each subproject and set
                                                                 forth the principles and procedures/directives to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 be followed by the Borrower once the physical
                                                                 locations of the proposed activities will be
                                                                 known. Once completed, the ESMF will be
                                                                 reviewed and cleared by the Bank and then
                                                                 ultimately disclosed both in-country and at the
                                                                 InfoShop prior to appraisal.. The project will
                                                                 also draw on the SEAs being prepared in a
                                                                 number of areas across the country and/or
                                                                 prepare an SEA that examines how
                                                                 environmental and social issues would affect
                                                                 and inform the government's program.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   Potential tourism or agribusiness investments
                                                                 supported under the grant scheme could trigger
                                                                 this policy. This will be determined during
                                                                 project preparation and included in the
                                                                 environmental and social management
                                                                 framework (ESMF) of the project, as necessary.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    No investments in forests will be supported
                                                                 under the Project.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   A Pest Management Plan would be required
                                                                 given the potential magnitude of the
                                                                 agribusiness investments that the grant scheme
                                                                 could support throughout the life of the project.
                                                                 Like the ESMF, the PMP will also be reviewed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 and cleared by the Bank and then
                                                                 ultimatelydisclosed both in-country and at the
                                                                 InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   This policy is not expected to be triggered by
                         BP 4.11                                 any of the Project activities. Nevertheless, the
                                                                 team will further assess this during preparation
                                                                 and if found viable, it would be addressed in the
                                                                 ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    Based on the World Bank definition of
                                                                 Indigenous Peoples, this policy will not be
                                                                 triggered by any of the Project activities.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The policy is triggered because of the proposed
                         4.12                                    Infrastructure and Agribusiness investments
                                                                 under the grant facility. Since the physical
                                                                 locations of the proposed activities are unknown
                                                                 at this stage, and because of the land acquisition
                                                                 constraints especially in the Tete and Nampula
                                                                 (Nacala) areas, the Borrower will prepare a
                                                                 detailed Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
                                                                                                                                 It would build upon the RPFs/RAPs prepared by
                                                                                                                                 the ongoing World Bank funded operations in
                                                                                                                                 the Tete and Nampula provinces. The RPF
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 would set forth the basic principles and
                                                                                                                                 procedures/directives to be followed by the
                                                                                                                                 Borrower for the preparation of the
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) once the
                                                                                                                                 physical locations of the proposed activities are
                                                                                                                                 known. Like the ESMF and the PMP, the RPF
                                                                                                                                 will also be reviewed and cleared by the Bank
                                                                                                                                 and then ultimately disclosed both in-country
                                                                                                                                 and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This policy is not expected to be triggered by
                                                                                                                                 any of the Project activities.
                                 Projects on International                                         TBD                           This policy is not expected to be triggered by
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            any of the Project activities. Nonetheless,
                                                                                                                                 because of the agribusiness activities, the team
                                                                                                                                 will further assess the rationale for triggering or
                                                                                                                                 not this OP.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This policy is not expected to be triggered by
                                 7.60                                                                                            any of the Project activities.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Apr-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      The preparation mission is expected to be completed in early April 2012 by which time the TORs
                                      for the required safeguards instruments, namely ESMF, PMP and RPF, and, if necessary, the
                                      SEAare expected to be carried out through a Project Preparation Advance and completed after
                                      series of participatory public consultation workshops. The safeguards instruments will
                                      subsequently be disclosed both in-country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal. Should a new
                                      SEA be required for this project, the ToRs will be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed before
                                      appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Ganesh Rasagam

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 27-Mar-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Irina Astrakhan (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 20-Jul-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
