                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA2814
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Africa                            Project ID:    P130888
                            Project Name:     Building Resilence through Innovation, Communication and Knowledge
                                              Services (P130888)
                            Task Team         Stephen Danyo
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       22-Apr-2013                         Estimated   16-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTN3                                Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Focal Area:       Multi-focal area
                            Sector:           General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%), General agriculture,
                                              fishing and forestry sector (20%), Agricultural ex tension and research (20%),
                                              Irrigation and drainage (10%)
                            Theme:            Climate change (20%), Environmental policies and institutions (20%), Land
                                              administration and management (20%), Biodiversity (20%), W ater resource
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              management (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      4.63                      Total Bank Financing:         0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                            4.63
                              Total                                                                        4.63
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           To improve accessibility of best practices and monitoring information within the SAWAP portfolio
                           on integrated management of natural resources, climate change and natural disasters.

                                                                      Page 1 of 5
                         3. Project Description
                         There are three components organized thematically: (1) Knowledge management, (2) Program
                         monitoring support, and (3) project management. These are as described below.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1 - Knowledge management. The outcome of this component is: Operational knowledge
                         inside and outside the SAWAP portfolio is regularly exchanged through a regional learning hub that
                         networks institutions and individuals that are implementing 12 country investment operations.

                         Activities. This component finances goods, services, operating costs, travel, and training to support
                         the following activities:
                         a.       Networking country project teams and key stakeholders for structured learning, which
                         includes (CILSS leads , $1,000,000):
                         i.       Establishing a regional decision support web portal ($200,000),
                         ii.      Identifying and disseminating best practices ($200,000),
                         iii.     Holding regular south-south learning events, training, and periodic study tours for the 12
                         SAWAP project teams ($600,000),
                         b.       Providing competitive regional innovation grants for technical assistance to develop
                         information and communication tools (CILSS leads, $200,000),
                         c.       Establishing an operations services facility for SAWAP projects on key implementation
                         topics related to environmental public goods:
                         i.       Facilitation and brokering of expertise (CILSS leads, $100,000),
                         ii.      A technical peer review panel (OSS leads, $200,000),
                         iii.     An operations support pool (IUCN leads, $200,000),
                         d.       Carrying out a series of regional environmental economic analyses (such as benefit-cost,
                         ecosystem valuations) (CILSS leads but CILSS, OSS, and IUCN each have a research budget line of
                         $100,000. Total: $300,000).
                         e.       Strategic communication (IUCN leads, $400,000).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2 - Program monitoring support. There are two outcomes from this component. First,
                         additional monitoring tools and training are deployed at regional and country levels to track
                         processes and impacts from the portfolio of projects. Second, the SAWAP portfolio is regularly
                         monitored against a set of thematic and process indicators.

                         Activities. This component finances goods, services, operating costs, travel, and training to support
                         the following activities:
                         a.       Aggregating and benchmarking results and M&E system development support in the
                         SAWAP portfolio of 12 projects (OSS leads, $300,000),
                         b.       Delivering participatory training and expert support on M&E to country project teams.
                         Special emphasis will be placed on measuring biophysical change and carbon flux in land use and
                         management systems in the portfolio, and providing support to country project teams on applying
                         M&E tools (OSS leads, $300,000),
                         c.       Monitoring, modeling and mapping land and water resources and land use change in the
                         regional portfolio, including carbon modeling to help estimate the portfolio’s contribution to carbon
                         storage in biomass and soil, using existing monitoring and geospatial tools. This activity also
                         includes establishing an inter-agency GIS Services Team and opportunities for networking and
                         capacity building for project teams and regional actors, development of a regional digital atlas on
                         land and water resources and climate risks, and development of a regional data platform to provide
                         near real-time remote sensing data and analyses in appropriate formats to country project teams on


                                                                      Page 2 of 5
                           the ground (OSS leads, $900,000).
                           d.      Establish and promote an impact evaluation platform. (CILSS leads $240,000).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Component 3 - Project management. The outcome of this component is that the management of the
                           regional BRICKS Project is carried out efficiently and effectively.
                            Activities. This component will finance goods, services, operating costs, travel, and training for all
                           three implementing agencies (CILSS, OSS, IUCN) to provide administrative functions including
                           monitoring of BRICKS activities to ensure that the project remains focused on providing useful and
                           demand-driven services to the project portfolio. The component will establish a Project Coordination
                           Unit hosted by CILSS who will compile and aggregate project fiduciary and results reporting from
                           all three agencies. (Total $489,630 GEF. This breaks down as $289,630 to CILSS, $100,000 to OSS,
                           and $100,000 to IUCN).
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           N/A

                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Svetlana Khvostova (AFTSG)

                            6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


                                                                        Page 3 of 5
                                N/A
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                N/A
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                N/A
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Stephen Danyo
                            Approved By


                                                                      Page 4 of 5
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Hocine Chalal (SM)      Date: 03-Apr-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           Page 5 of 5
