                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                    Report No.: ISDSA4602

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Sep-2013
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Sep-2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Montenegro                       Project ID:    P145399
                                                      Parent         P107992
                                                      Project ID:
   Project Name:     Montenegro Energy Efficiency Additional Financing (P145399)
   Parent Project    Energy Efficiency (P107992)
   Name:
   Task Team         Jari Vayrynen
   Leader:
   Estimated         24-Jul-2013                      Estimated   07-Nov-2013
   Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    ECSEG                            Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                      Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (92%), Public administration- Energy and
                     mining (8%)
   Theme(s):         Climate change (80%), Other social development (15%), Pollution management
                     and environmental health (5%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:       6.60           Total Bank Financing:               6.60
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                    Amount
     Borrower                                                                              0.00
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                 6.60
     Total                                                                                 6.60
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?



                                            Page 1 of 7
 2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   The project development objective is to improve energy efficiency performance in public sector
   buildings to provide a demonstrated basis to improve energy efficiency implementation practices
   and capacity in public institutions and service providers in Montenegro.
 3. Project Description
The proposed additional financing (AF) would scale up project activities to enhance the impact of a
well performing project and finance costs associated with the retrofitting of important health sector
facilities in the country to make them more energy efficient. The AF would finance 15-16
subprojects at hospitals and health care centers throughout the country, and at the Clinic Center
Montenegro in Podgorica.

The Project Development Objective (PDO) would not change, but the results framework would be
updated to reflect the scaled up number of subprojects. As all the proposed AF subprojects are in the
health sector, the Ministry of Education would not continue to be part of the institutional and
implementation arrangements of the AF; minor changes to the procurement approach and methods
are also proposed. It is expected that all the subprojects as well technical and social monitoring and
evaluation would be completed by January 2017, and the closing date is therefore proposed to be
extended to March 30, 2017, i.e., by three years from the current MEEP Closing Date of March 30,
2014.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The energy efficiency investments are targeted all over Montenegro, focusing on energy efficiency
improvements in hospital buildings.

At the present stage locations of activities are expected to include, among others, hospitals and/or
health centers in Podgorica, Kotor, Bar, Cetinje, Budva, Ulcinj, Niksic, Danilovgrad, Kolasin,
Berane and Andrijevica. While the MEEP subprojects have been tentatively pre-identified, the
preparation and disclosure of the subproject EMPs can only be meaningfully done after the detailed
energy audits and technical designs become available (there are detailed designs for a part of the
works at the Clinic Center Montenegro but only for about half of what the subproject measures will
eventually cover). The EMP variations can in some cases be significant; e.g., some of the buildings
may previously have had low-radioactivity fluorescent lighting rods, some asbestos containing
materials, old oil tanks etc. Therefore, disclosure of EMPs when the scope of works is not yet fully
known would likely require further changes to EMPs in later stages and re-disclosure of the updated
documents.

MEEP AF will therefore follow the approach already used in MEEP where an agreed generic sample
EMP is adjusted, as needed, for each subproject. Site-specific EMPs will be prepared for each
specific sub-project only after or in parallel to detailed design stage. These will be based on already
adopted Environmental Management Framework Document, which was prepared for the Project in
2008.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                                             Page 2 of 7
Nikola Ille (ECSEN)
Sandra Schlossar (ECSSO)

6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes            Project is rated category B. Environmental
BP 4.01                                         Management Framework has been prepared for
                                                the Project and disclosed in 2008. The
                                                implementation of the energy efficiency measures
                                                on retrofitting public buildings is not expected to
                                                have any significant negative environmental
                                                impact. The issues related to this type of activities
                                                include noise, dust, vibrations, and management
                                                of construction waste during civil engineering
                                                activities - which could be successfully managed
                                                and mitigated by application of good engineering
                                                practices. In some cases, however, the presence
                                                of asbestos, crude oil and old fuel tanks may
                                                require specific handling procedures, which will
                                                be defined in site-specific EMPs. As required by
                                                the EMF, the implementing groups in the
                                                Ministry of Healthwill ensure that construction
                                                contracts will include clauses that will require
                                                contractors to comply with building safety rules
                                                in Montenegro and safeguards standards of
                                                Montenegro as well as of the Bank. No new
                                                constructions are envisioned under the project.
                                                The responses in Section II-C of this ISDS refer
                                                to the Environmental Framework Document,
                                                prepared and disclosed during 2008 for the
                                                original Project. This document will continue to
                                                be used for the Additional Financing Project, as it
                                                remains adequate and fully relevant for it.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No             No works within or near protected habitats are
                                                anticipated.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                No             No works within or near forests are anticipated.

Pest Management OP 4.09           No              Not relevant

Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No             During project preparation it will be confirmed
BP 4.11                                         whether any of the buildings chosen for
                                                rehabilitation are designated cultural property. As
                                                provided for in the sample EMP, in these cases
                                                the site-specific EMPs will include clauses
                                                related to heritage protection and conservation.
                                                The civil engineering works will have to be
                                                reviewed and approved by competent national
                                                cultural heritage institutions.


                                        Page 3 of 7
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No                Not relevant.

   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               The EE measures implemented at the subproject
   4.12                                                sites include retrofitting of existing structures and
                                                       equipment and do not require land acquisition or
                                                       resettlement, or lead to loss of access or income.
                                                       Accordingly, no social safeguards issues related
                                                       to land acquisition or resettlement issues are
                                                       foreseen under the AF. Energy efficiency
                                                       measures are done through retrofitting of systems
                                                       and installations; therefore, no job losses are
                                                       envisaged and instead a positive employment
                                                       impact is expected in the construction sector.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               Not relevant.

   Projects on International        No                   Not relevant.
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   Not relevant.
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
     Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
       The implementation of the energy efficiency measures is not expected to have any significant
     negative environmental impact. The issues related to this type of activities include noise, dust,
     vibrations, and management of construction waste during civil engineering activities - which could
     be successfully managed and mitigated by application of good engineering practices. In some
     cases, however, the presence of asbestos, crude oil and old fuel tanks may require specific
     handling procedures, which will be defined in site-specific EMPs.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
       There will be no long-term negative environmental impacts if project activities are executed as
     designed. The minor temporary negative effects (noise, vibrations, dust, construction waste) are of
     limited duration and can be successfully mitigated by application of good engineering practices
     and application of site-specific EMPs, which will be based on Environmental Framework
     Document and tailored for each specific site.

     The positive environmental impacts will be manifested by reduction of fuel consumption and
     consequential reduction of air pollution load, improved comfort and working conditions for the
     patients and hospital/health center staff.
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.
      Project design and specifications will ensure that materials and equipment used in retrofitting



                                               Page 4 of 7
   comply with requirements of the EMP, which will be included in the bidding documents and
4. contract
    Describe  work.
            ofmeasures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
   assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
    An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) including a sample Environmental
   Management Plan (EMP)/Checklist was prepared for the Project and adopted in 2008. The Project
   implementation team prepared site-specific EMPs for each of the sub-projects executed up to now,
   which were reviewed and approved by the Bank.

  Monitoring and reporting on contractor’s compliance with site-specific EMPs on the existing
  Project is undertaken on a monthly basis by the supervising engineer and reports sent to the
  Project Implementation Team. Reporting from PIT to the Bank is undertaken twice per year, and
  more frequently in case of particular issues or problems. Review of the environmental compliance
  monthly reports and reality check on sample sub-projects is undertaken by the Bank’s safeguards
  specialist at least once per year, during the regular implementation support missions. Until now
  there were no major deviations from the measures determined in the site-specific EMPs.

  While undertaking the above activities, the Project’s implementation team has developed an
  understanding and capacity to successfully deal with the environmentally-related activities, which
  was documented during Bank’s regular implementation support missions.
  The Additional Financing part of the Project will continue to use the same arrangements for
  preparation, implementation and monitoring of site-specific EMPs as already used on the Project.
  This will include (i) preparation of draft site-specific EMPs by the Project Implementation Team;
  (ii) review and approval of site-specific EMPs by the Bank’s team; (iii) inclusion of site-specific
  EMP as a part of the Bidding Document, and subsequent contract; (iv) execution of EMP-related
  measures by the respective contractor(s); (v) monitoring and reporting of compliance with EMP-
  related measures by supervising engineer (to the Project Implementation Team); (vi) reporting on
  compliance with EMP to the Bank (by the Project Implementation Team).
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    Consultation on the EMF was carried in 2008. In country disclosure of the EMF was completed
  on July 25, 2008. The EMF was submitted for disclosure in the World Bank infoshop on July 31,
  2008.

  The existing EMF will continue to be used for the Additional Financing part of the Project. While
  the MEEP subprojects have been tentatively pre-identified, the preparation and disclosure of the
  subproject EMPs can only be meaningfully done after the detailed energy audits and technical
  designs become available. Accordingly, disclosure of site-specific EMPs will be done in parallel
  or on completion of design activities for each particular sub-project. The public disclosure
  activities will be coordinated with the social team and undertaken simultaneously.

  Project-related activities are to be implemented within the existing foot-print of the building(s),
  and as such interested stakeholders are limited to building users, administrators and immediate
  neighboring community. However, in case where the buildings may be under some regime of
  protection, the wider audience of stakeholders can be interested.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                           28-Jul-2008

                                              Page 5 of 7
     Date of submission to InfoShop                                   31-Jul-2008
     For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
     Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
   "In country" Disclosure
     Montenegro                                                       28-Jul-2008
     Comments:
   If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
   respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
   Audit/or EMP.
   If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
   OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    report?
    If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
    Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the credit/loan?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:      Jari Vayrynen
   Approved By




                                              Page 6 of 7
Regional Safeguards Name:                 Date:
Advisor:
Sector Manager:     Name:                 Date:




                            Page 7 of 7
