                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                   Report No.: ISDSC733

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Apr-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Nigeria                           Project ID:       P130865
                            Project Name:       NG-Polio Eradication Support (FY13) (P130865)
                            Task Team           Dinesh M. Nair
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           00-undefined-0000                 Estimated         03-Jul-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTHE                             Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:         Health (100%)
                            Theme:          Child health (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                               0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                     95.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                           95.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the proposed Project is to assist, as part of a global polio eradication
                           effort, the Government of Nigeria to achieve its goal of interrupting the transmission of wild polio
                           virus, and to sustain these efforts througheffective OPVcoverage of the target population. The IDA
                           credit will finance oral polio vaccine supplied by UNICEF.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project is a repeater project to the Partnership for Polio Eradication Project (P080295) scheduled
                           to close on April 30, 2012. The proposed project complies with the requirements for a repeater
                           project i.e. (i) it is consistent with current CAS objectives; (ii) the previous project has demonstrated
                           tangible results; (iii) the previous project was rated as satisfactory for the past 12 months; (iv) there
                           are no unresolved fiduciary, environmental or safeguard issues; and (v) there is demonstrated client
                         support for Bank participation in this final effort to eradicate polio.

                         As described above, the FGN has introduced a number of new and improved procedures to better
Public Disclosure Copy




                         achieve the objectives of the project. In addition the FGN is committing very substantial funds to
                         polio eradication to pay for the increased intensity of the polio campaigns i.e. additional field teams,
                         increased remuneration in focus states, additional and better trained supervision and independent
                         monitoring staff, expansion of the GIS mapping.

                         A number of other institutions (WHO, UNICEF, BMGF) are working closely with the FGN to
                         intensify the efforts to eradicate polio; the FGN also continues to closely follow the regular advise
                         provided from the International Expert Review Committee with regards to the type of vaccine to use,
                         frequency of immunization rounds, research to be conducted and strategies to be followed to achieve
                         program objectives.

                         UNICEF is the sole supplier of polio vaccine to all countries which still have cases of polio. Globally
                         there are only a few producers of polio vaccine and as the epidemic is coming to an end, these
                         producers are increasingly reluctant to continue their production. It is, therefore, essential that
                         Nigeria is able to transfer funds to UNICEF in time to secure the required OPV for Nigeria. Likewise
                         UNICEF must know that they have adequate funding for vaccine for them to negotiate with the
                         vaccine producers regarding both price and delivery schedules.

                         The project does not trigger safeguards policies as the vaccine does not involve medical waste and
                         the aggregate environmental impact of incinerating used vials is minimal and localized. The empty
                         vials are taken to the state by the State Technical Facilitator (contracted and supervised by WHO) as
                         part of the vaccine accountability together with the unopened vials. The unopened vials (vials which
                         have not been used and whose VVM and Expiry dates are still viable) are taken back into the cold
                         storage at the State Cold Store. The empty used vials are boarded at the state level and incinerated.
                         National and local laws regulate the management of these used vials.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project will continue to make use of the IDA buy-down mechanism like the previous
                         project (P080295). In a ‘Buy Down’ mechanism donors pay off all or part of the IDA credit on
                         behalf of the government, contingent on results achieved. Under the previous credit the advance
                         purchase of the IDA credit resulted in a discount for the FGN of close to 50%. The proposed project
                         will continue to make use of the buy-down arrangement but with a reduced but still substantial
                         discount. Donors including Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF), Rotary International and
                         the US Centers for Disease Control (CDC) have expressed initial interest in setting up a buy-down
                         financing mechanism for the project . If set up the indicator which will trigger the buy-down will be
                         i.e. Immunization coverage of SIAs; (Target: At the end of the credit, immunization coverage of oral
                         polio vaccine of at least 80 percent is reached in each endemic state. (Tool: cluster sample survey
                         according to WHO approved methodology). Following the recommendations of the Independent
                         Evaluation of Performance and Lessons Learned in the IDA buy-downs for Polio Eradication
                         Projects (World Bank, 2008), the performance on this trigger will be measured through an
                         independent performance audit undertaken by IDA. Performance on the trigger, and thereby
                         eligibility for the buy-down, will be assessed through an independent performance audit
                         commissioned by IDA.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the              safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will take place across the country.
                               E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                               The client has considerable knowledge of World Bank Safeguards Policies requirements. It has
                               successfully prepared and implemented several safeguards instruments, including for category A
Public Disclosure Copy




                               projects.
                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Caroline Mary Sage (AFTCS)
                               Joseph Ese Akpokodje (AFTN1)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No                            The project does not trigger safeguards policies.
                                 BP 4.01                                                                                         The project funds are only used for procurement
                                                                                                                                 of vaccine. These vaccines does not involve
                                                                                                                                 medical waste and incineration of used vials is
                                                                                                                                 regulated by national and local laws and
                                                                                                                                 procedures. In addition, the project will not be
                                                                                                                                 financing the construction of any facilities.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 17-Apr-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Not applicable - The project does not trigger safeguards policies.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Dinesh M. Nair




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Approved By:
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 27-Apr-2012
                         Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Jean J. De St Antoine (SM)    Date: 06-Jun-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
