                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC2660

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Mar-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Lebanon                          Project ID:      P133226
                            Project Name:      Lebanon Fiscal Management Reform 2 (P133226)
                            Task Team          Wael Mansour
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          00-undefined-0000                Estimated        14-Nov-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSPS                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Central government administration (100%)
                            Theme(s):          Debt management and fiscal sustainability (25%), Macroeconomic management
                                               (25%), Public expenditure, financial management and procur ement (25%),
                                               Other public sector governance (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      4.00                     Total Bank Financing:           4.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                Financing Gap:                  0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         4.00
                              Total                                                                         4.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed development objective of this operation is to improve the allocation of public financial
                           resources, enhance the efficiency and transparency of the government financial management
                           systems, and tighten the control environment through:
                           (i)     Institutionalizing policy functions at MoF and improving macroeconomic programming and
                           policy analysis to guide fiscal choices and facilitate the integration of planning and budgeting
                         functions.
                         (ii)    Deepening ongoing reforms in the areas of debt analysis, debt recording and management,
                         and debt operations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (iii)   Increasing the efficiency and transparency of public expenditure management practices, and
                         enhancing risk management within MoF to reduce waste and corruption.
                         C. Project Description
                         LFMR 2 is a US$2 to 4 million investment lending operation to continue supporting the GoL’s
                         public financial management reform efforts. With support from the World Bank, MoF is currently
                         developing several strategies and action plans to implement reforms activities. These are: (i) A PFM
                         Reform Strategy (2013-2017) prepared by MoF’s PFM Reform Steering Committee, and expected to
                         be approved by MoF in February 2013 ; (ii) A budget execution reforms strategy and implementation
                         plan ; and (iii) A FMIS implementation strategy that is expected to be delivered and adopted in April
                         2013 after the approval of the PFM strategy. These strategy documents and action plans form the
                         basis for the improvement of core PFM functions within the next five years. The current LFMR 2
                         Project is expected to support most of the key reform and change management activities.

                         The operation builds on the existing EFMIS project and adopts the same modalities of engagement.
                         After the successful implementation of the EFMIS project, MoF senior management has asked to
                         maintain similar engagement framework in the upcoming project. As a result, the LFRM 2, a client
                         executed project, is expected to finance technical assistance and training activities provided by
                         international and local experts. These experts are expected to engage with different working groups
                         of MoF staff on relevant topical reforms. These activities and experts will be coordinated by a
                         dedicated Project Management Unit (PMU) located within MoF premises and financed by the loan
                         proceeds. The technical counterpart for the PMU will be the PFM Reform Steering Committee,
                         while the Minister and Director General will play a strategic guidance role. Furthermore, the World
                         Bank team will play a supervisory and consultative role. It will monitor the project’s deliverables,
                         provide no-objection on the various activities, and engage with MoF’s senior management, technical
                         staff, PMU and hired experts; to advise on the direction and priorities of the reforms.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will be structured into two broad complementary components. A Macro-fiscal Analysis
                         and Public Debt Management component that focuses on building the policy functions at MoF. This
                         component is divided into a macro-fiscal analysis sub-component and a debt management one. A
                         Public Expenditure Management Component that focuses on reforms of various practices and
                         processes within the budget cycle. This component is divided into three sub-components, expenditure
                         programing and budget preparation reforms, budget execution, and internal control and internal audit.

                          Component 1: Macro-Fiscal Analysis and Public Debt Management

                            Sub-component 1.1: Macro-Fiscal Analysis

                         The Macro-Fiscal Department (MFD) has gone a long way since it was formally established in
                         March 2012. The team is in-place, being trained, producing reports and conducting basic macro-
                         fiscal forecasting – a first to be carried out by ministry staff. This positive impetus has to be
                         maintained to ensure sustainability. In fact, the development of a fully operational and effective MFD
                         is a major endeavor that requires a long-term commitment from MoF.

                         Despite the positive developments in such short period of time, the MFD remains a fragile
                         experience. The progress recorded might be dissipated and the young team orphaned once the
                         EFMIS project draws to a close in June 2013. The MFD team members have limited relevant
                         experience and until a year ago were not exposed to macro-fiscal issues and empirical modeling. As
                         such, on-the-job coaching by international experts complemented by a variety of training courses will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         make a large difference in the development and productivity of the team. The work that was initiated
                         under EFMIS will require further and in-depth support to become sustainable. This is to be carried by
                         the new proposed project.

                         The envisioned activities under a future World Bank project aim to produce a well-trained team that
                         is composed of dedicated individuals who are able to conduct empirical and policy-related analysis.
                         The tools and instruments – such as the forecasting model - should also become more robust and
                         detailed with the aim of supporting the senior leadership at the Ministry in their design of different
                         PFM policies and measures.

                            Sub-component 1.2: Public Debt Management

                         With support from EFMIS project, the Public Debt Directorate (PDD) has finally been operational
                         and is expected to engage on further debt management functions going forward. In accordance with
                         Law 17 (2008) a PDD was established. As of end 2012, the PDD consists of a middle and back
                         office. The main responsibility of the middle office is the preparation of a medium term debt
                         management strategy, and monitoring and management of risks to the government debt. The main
                         responsibility of the back office is debt recording, and initiation of payment son the debt. A front
                         office function, responsible for implementing the debt management strategy, is being established,
                         and debt management functions currently undertaken by the UNDP team, such as planning and
                         issuance of Euro-bonds, are planned to be transfer red to PDD in 2013.

                         While impressive progress has been made by PDD in a short period of time, it is still in its infancy
                         when compared with a fully functioning debt management office. Therefore continued in-depth
                         support is required. A debt management component of LFMR 2 would have as main objectives to (i)
                         enable PDD to update the medium term debt management strategy annually, based on detailed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis of cost and risk; (ii) strengthen debt management strategy implementation; (iii) increase
                         transparency in debt management and establish an investor relations function; and (iv) expand the
                         scope for debt management to include contingent assets and liabilities.

                          Component 2: Public Expenditure Management

                            Sub-component 2.1: Expenditure Programing an d Budget Preparation

                         With support from EFMIS, important milestones for strengthening the budget preparation process in
                         Lebanon have been introduced. Key deliverables have been produced notably (i) a modern draft
                         budget law that aims to replace the outdated 1963 Public Accounting Law, and (ii) the introduction
                         of the 2001 GFS classification system along with related line ministries application guidelines. As a
                         result, the budget preparation process is expected to change considerably starting with the 2014
                         budget cycle, and further World Bank support will therefore be merited. LFMR 2 activities are built
                         around these new changes. They aim to assist MoF in the implementation phase of these reforms.

                         Additionally, gaps within the institutional framework of the budget preparation process need to be
                         addressed. This framework, namely of the budget directorate, lack the human resources and the
                         structure is not optimal to meet the requirements of the new budget law. The coordination model
                         with line ministries is still defined by the previous framework. The budget preparation process, albeit
                         more comprehensive than before, continues to face irregular practices such as treasury advances to
                         ministries. Finally, the new law, yet to be tested, may warrant possible revisions to the
                         implementation decrees as well as new preparation guidelines that are mapped to the new legislative
Public Disclosure Copy




                         framework.

                         As such, additional reform measures are required to build on the previous successes with the aim of
                         developing an optimal MoF organizational and governance model, with clear functions and
                         processes, which is equipped with the required and trained human resources to prepare budgets along
                         the new law and the GFS classification. The objective of the new measures is also to engage and
                         support line ministries and government agencies to adopt the new system and work towards
                         minimizing practice irregularities and widening the comprehensiveness of the budget.

                            Sub-component 2.2: Budget Execution

                         Important progress has been made in budget execution reforms during the first EFMIS project,
                         notably on the review of legal and regulatory framework, improving cash planning and management
                         functions, commitment control and monitoring, review and strengthening of accounting and
                         reporting, capacity building, as well as the functional review of the IT systems.

                         Major outputs of the EFMIS project include: (i) pilot implementation of the action plan in selected
                         ministries for strengthening treasury management and cash management functions; (ii) the approval
                         of new Public Ac counting Law and preparation of guidelines; (iii) the revision of the budg et
                         classification in line with GFS 2001; (iv) strengthening the institutional capacity in cash
                         management, commitment control, and accounting; (v) the IT audit of the MoF’s information
                         systems and practices; and (vi) the development of the PFM reform strategy and FMIS
                         implementation strategy.

                         Despite all these developments, a number of challenges in the implementation of public expenditure
                         reforms remain, including: (i) inefficient (or sometimes lack of) processes and procedures; (ii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         inadequate capacity to implement budget execution reforms in line ministries; (iii) lack of
                         information systems to support new functions; (iv) overstretched IT unit; and (v) insufficient
                         integration between the various information system modules. The public expenditure management
                         component of LFMR 2 project would therefore tackle these issues.

                           Sub-component 2.3: Internal Control and Internal Audit

                         LFMR 2 will also address accountability and oversight issues at the Government level, but starting
                         with the internal accountability within MOF. The objective of this sub-component is to raise
                         awareness of control and audits in the public sector; streamline and strengthen the internal control
                         environment and procedures at MOF; and establish an internal audit function in compliance with
                         international standards. The expected outcome is increased accountability and transparency of MOF
                         operations, enhanced risk management, and availability of an independent and objective assurance of
                         the efficiency and effectiveness of its internal controls, all of which will contribute to proper use of
                         public funds and reducing waste and corruption.

                         A phased approach will be followed for the implementation of this sub-component that ensures
                         needed sequence and capacity of MOF to contribute to the activities and absorb the change brought.
                         Reforms will be guided by experts on control and audit and benefit from consultation with the
                         international, regional and local professional and academic society, in addition to relevant line
                               ministries and governmental accountability and oversight institutions. This will not be limited to
                               Lebanon only, but good and relevant practices will be identified throughout the world to bring a
                               pragmatic lens to this important reform aspect.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               LFMR 2 project is expected to be appraised in the third quarter of 2013.
                               D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                               analysis (if known)


                               E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 23-Jun-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Not applicable. No safeguard-related studies are foreseen.
                         IV. APPROVALS




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Wael Mansour

                         Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)   Date: 25-Mar-2013
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Guenter Heidenhof (SM)      Date: 25-Mar-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
