                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC757

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-May-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Congo, Democratic Republic                P129713
                                                                          Project ID:
                                               of
                            Project Name:      DRC Urban Development Project FY13 (P129713)
                            Task Team       Mahine Diop
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       28-Jan-2013                          Estimated        28-Mar-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTUW                                 Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:            Sub-national government administration (50%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads
                                               and Highways (25%), General water, sanitation and flood pr otection sector
                                               (25%)
                            Theme:             Municipal governance and institution building (75%), Decentralization (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                     100.00
                              Total                                                                         100.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project is the first sectoral intervention supported by the World Bank in the urban
                           sector, following a number of post-conflict operations with emphasis on emergency measures
                           through the rehabilitation and reconstruction of infrastructure. Increased attention will have to be
                           paid to strengthening the institutions and organizations charged with providing basic services and to
                           ensuring the sustainability of investments. The context is also marked by the emerging process of
                           decentralization of resources and devolution of competencies to the provinces and municipal level.
                           With this in mind, the proposed PDO is to improve delivery of basic services through strengthening
                           the performance of municipal-level institutions of the targeted cities. This would also include
                         improving the national- and provincial-level support systems and institutions.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Achieving the PDO will require strengthening of the legal and regulatory framework and capacity
                         building (technical, organizational, financial) of the principal actors at all levels (central, provincial,
                         and municipal) charged with planning and delivering basic services, and should be accompanied by
                         limited investments in infrastructure. The project cities (Bukavu, Kalemie, Kikwit, Kindu, Matadi,
                         and Mbandaka; aggregate population of about 1.3 million), selected based on a set of criteria
                         established with the government during the identification mission and confirmed by letter to the
                         Bank, will be at the heart of the operation. The project will be based on two components: urban
                         governance and infrastructure. Given the needs for dialogue at the strategic level to lay the
                         groundwork for institutional change, accompanied by targeted capacity strengthening at the central
                         and local levels, the project would be implemented over 5 or 6 years.

                         The urban governance component (US$55M) will comprise activities to strengthen capacities of
                         national and local level actors to plan and implement activities in the sector. Systemic improvements
                         to provision of urban services will be attained through the implementation of a performance-based
                         approach to financing neighborhood infrastructure, included in local development programs flowing
                         from a participative process. Performance measurement of local authorities, based on clear criteria
                         set out in a municipal contract, will foster the accountability of mayors and urban council towards the
                         urban population and support a social contract between local authorities (city mayors and commune
                         bourgmestres) and the urban dwellers.

                         At the national level, activities will flow from an institutional and organizational sector diagnostic to
                         be carried out as part of project preparation, with specific measures targeted at mitigating identified
                         capacity shortcomings in the Ministry of Infrastructures, Spatial Planning, Urban Planning and
                         Housing (MISPUPH) , e.g. support to staff/consultant recruitment or delegated contract management.
                         Specific support will be provided to enhancing statistical capacity and sector M&E, and to allow the
                         MISPUPH (with the Ministry responsible for Decentralization ) to measure performance of cities, to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         determine the funding envelope cities will receive to fund neighborhood infrastructure. Activities at
                         the national level will also potentially cover land management and land titling, with the interlocutor
                         being the Ministry of Land Affairs. At the central level, relevant provincial structures will receive
                         capacity building to enable them to play their role and adequately fulfill their dual mandate as
                         supervisor of and advisor to project cities. The project cities will also be subjected to financial and
                         organizational diagnostics to determine the exact nature of capacity-building activities to be included
                         in the project, based on each city’s specific needs. Technical assistance and capacity-building will
                         require about US$10M in funds, given the needs.

                         Municipal contracts, to be signed between the municipal authorities and the provincial or central
                         level authorities (TBD during preparation), will contain performance criteria in the areas of urban
                         and municipal management, which the local authorities will receive support to attain, but for which
                         they ultimately hold the responsibility of respecting. The municipal contracts will contain the basic
                         elements of a performance-based system to allocate funds. The project will support increased
                         transparency and efficiency of municipal management (e.g. revenue collection, budget process,
                         selection of investments) and civil society will in turn receive support to place them in a better
                         position to demand good governance. The project will also support the participatory process to
                         elaborate local development plans (containing the investments to be funded by the project), using
                         local NGOs to mobilize citizens, and support citizen engagement in actual construction. The annual
                         envelope available to finance neighborhood infrastructure, as prioritized by the population, will
                           depend on the respect, by the municipal authorities, of the specified performance criteria set out in
                           the municipal contracts and evaluated on an annual basis, by independent auditors. The overall
                           envelope earmarked for neighborhood infrastructure is US$45M.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The primary infrastructure component (US$45M) will fund primary infrastructure to support
                           structuring of the urban space, with a view to strengthening economic growth, and could cover roads
                           and transport, drainage, markets, water, and electricity. Investments will be determined based on
                           urban diagnostics carried out as part of project preparation, and drawing on analytical work carried
                           out by the Bank-financed Growth Poles Project, under preparation. Creation of temporary work
                           through the use of labor-intensive construction techniques will be an integral part. No performance
                           criteria will be specified for this component, and the allocation of funding between project cities will
                           be based on demography.

                           Funding allocation
                           The investment part (US$90M) of the available IDA envelope (US$100M) will be split roughly
                           evenly between investments in neighborhood infrastructure (US$45M, based on local development
                           plans) and primary infrastructure (US$45M, determined based on urban audits). Each component
                           would thus provide investments of about US$7 per capita per year in the project cities (US$14 per
                           year total per capita). The allocations will be adjusted as the results of the urban diagnostics become
                           be available, and to also assure that the incentives for the municipal administrations to perform and
                           deliver services are substantial, given pressure from the local population, and that the relevant
                           authorities can be strengthened to adequately maintain infrastructure. Finally, a substantial envelope
                           (around US$10M) will be allocated to activities related to capacity building and strengthening
                           national-level institutions.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the              safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will fund infrastructure investments in the cities of Bukavu, Kalemie, Kikwit, Kindu,
                           Matadi, and Mbandaka. Investments will comprise primary infrastructure (mainly in the areas of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           roads and transport, drainage, markets, water and electricity, to be determined based on urban
                           diagnostics carried out as part of project preparation) and neighborhood-level infrastructure (to be
                           determined based on citizen priorities).
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           This operation is a category B project. Institutional capacities remain weak for ensuring a sound
                           supervision of safeguards. Government has adopted (or is in some cases still working on) various
                           texts for environmental protection, but enforcement remains weak.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTN1)
                           Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The Project will mainly finance the
                           BP 4.01                                               rehabilitation of: (i) main, secondary and
                                                                                 tertiary feeder roads including bridges, drainage
                                                                                 and sanitation works, (ii) water supply; and (iii)
                                                                 commercial facilities, integrated health centers,
                                                                 primary schools, and other municipal
                                                                 infrastructure. Project funds will be spent on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 infrastructure in 6 cities, and are not sufficient
                                                                 to fund major new construction. Some new
                                                                 construction might be funded by the project, but
                                                                 this will take place mainly under the urban
                                                                 governance component, meaning that
                                                                 communities will participate in selecting
                                                                 infrastructure investments that will only affect
                                                                 local neighborhoods, and will not involve major
                                                                 or irreversible environmental and social
                                                                 impacts. The overall environmental impact of
                                                                 the project is expected to be positive. As
                                                                 investments under the urban governance
                                                                 component will not be known at the time of
                                                                 appraisal, an ESMF for the overall project will
                                                                 be prepared to ensure that all investments will
                                                                 be adequately screened for environmental and
                                                                 social impacts, and that correct procedures are
                                                                 followed to mitigate and minimize any risk or
                                                                 negative through ESMP as necessary.
                                                                 Environmental and Social Impacts Assessments
                                                                 (ESIAS) will be carried out for the investments
                                                                 in primary infrastructure, most of which will be
                                                                 known at appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Given the selected cities, there is likelihood that
                         BP 4.11                                 physical cultural resources could be affected,
                                                                 triggering OP4.11.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   Depending on the specific locations for works in
                                                                 the project cities, OP4.10 could be triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The activities likely to be undertaken may
                         4.12                                    impact on livelihoods, restrict access and may
                                                                 involve land take. Most involuntary resettlement
                                                                 will be limited, and should mainly be temporary
                                                                 (such as for the rehabilitation of markets).
                                                                 Given the potential for land acquisition in the
                                                                 project, the government will prepare a
                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to guide
                                                                 the response to any potential social impacts.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No
                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Sep-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The studies will be undertaken from June to August 2012.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Mahine Diop

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 28-May-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Alexander E. Bakalian (SM)                                                                                           Date: 30-May-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
