                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA252
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Sep-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Brazil                             Project ID:    P127245
                            Project Name:      Rio de Janeiro Strengthening Public Sector Management Technical Assistance
                                               Project (P127245)
                            Task Team          Rafael Chelles Barroso
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       15-Oct-2012                           Estimated   28-Feb-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: LCSPE                                  Lending     Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:            Sub-national government administration (40%), Primary education (20%),
                                               Health (20%), Public administration- Other social services (2 0%)
                            Theme:             Managing for development results (20%), Public expenditure, financial
                                               management and procurement (20%), Education for all (20%), Hea lth system
                                               performance (20%), Climate change (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                              Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                       16.20
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                          16.20
                              Total                                                                          32.40
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective is to support the strengthening of institutional
                           capacities in the Municipality of Rio de Janeiro to promote public sector efficiency and effectiveness
                           in service delivery, including health, education, environmental management and other high priority
                           public services.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project would be a US$16.2 million Technical Assistance Loan which aims to support
                           the strengthening of institutional capacities in the Municipality of Rio de Janeiro to promote public


                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         sector efficiency and effectiveness in service delivery, including health, education and environmental
                         management. The government would provide US$16.2 million of counterpart funding towards the
                         US$ 32.4 million total project cost.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Improving Medium Term Fiscal and Public Investment Management (US$ 1.5
                         million). This component aims to provide support for the development and incremental
                         institutionalization of (a) elements of Medium Term Expenditure Frameworks (MTEFs) and of (b) a
                         system for the selection and appraisal of public investments. While the MoRJ has introduced initial
                         steps to strengthen its medium term fiscal management, additional efforts are needed to strengthen
                         both top-down and bottom-up elements of a MTEF process. Regarding top-down elements, the
                         municipality aims to (i) develop criteria to assess and account for fiscal risks; (ii) further develop and
                         build capacity for the formulation of macro-fiscal estimates for a multi-year period; and (iii) develop
                         baselines and strengthen capacity for stipulating sector ceilings over a multi-year period. For each of
                         these elements the consultancy would also assist the MoRJ to develop and implement the necessary
                         processes to incorporate these into the budget planning and execution process

                         Regarding bottom-up elements, the central concern is to develop costing methodologies to identify
                         and estimate the cost of existing and future policies and programs. This would be done on pilot-basis
                         for health and education programs, as well as for city maintenance activities. The municipality would
                         like to develop a proposal for institutionalizing the MTEF process, in line with the Brazilian planning
                         and budgeting procedures.

                         In the area of public investment management, building on the initial procedures for screening of
                         investment projects introduced by the municipality, the activities to be supported aim at developing
                         additional regulations for the screening process, including manuals (for project preparation and
                         screening) and methodologies/criteria for costing of operation and maintenance (O&M) costs. An
                         improved estimate of the O&M costs of the current investment portfolio of the municipality (e.g.
                         World Cup and Olympics) would also be developed, using more rigorous parameters. Finally, project
                         would support capacity building activities for investment project preparation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Innovating in Service Provision (US$18.2 million, US$ 10.2 million of Bank
                         financing). This component aims at providing further support to innovations introduced by the
                         municipality over the past two years and that have proven effective in improving health and
                         education service delivery.

                         Subcomponent 2.1: Health (US$ 16 million, US$ 8 million of Bank financing). The activities to be
                         supported in the health sector focus mainly on promoting increased quality and efficiency in the use
                         of the health network. They include activities in three areas:
                         a.       Improving Information Technology (IT): The municipality asked the Bank's assistance to
                         strengthen its IT systems to allow for improvements in the following aspects of the healthcare
                         system: (i) Regulatory function and central health appointment scheduling unit; (ii) monitoring of
                         chronic diseases; and (iii) supply chain logistics and medicine distribution.
                         b.       Family Health Care Clinics Accreditation Program: Given the increased importance of
                         Family Clinics in health service provision in the municipality, the government is committed to
                         continuing this program, expanding if necessary, and it wants to develop a program to evaluate and
                         certify the quality of service provision units. The Municipal Health Secretariat aims to develop a
                         municipal accreditation program in line with international accreditation standards. The municipality
                         would provide counterpart funding for the continued operation and expansion, if necessary, of the
                         program. The Bank would finance the development and initial implementation of the accreditation

                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                         program.
                         c.       Impact Evaluation Studies of Selected Health Sector Reform Elements: The municipality
                         would like to design and implement evaluations of the following elements of its health reform
Public Disclosure Copy




                         program: (i) the implementation of the Family Health Program through the Family Health Care
                         Clinics; (ii) the UPAs model for urgent and emergency care; (iii) the reform of the hospital entrance
                         procedures; and (iv) the home healthcare program.

                         Subcomponent 2.2: Education (US$12 million, US$3.0 million of Bank financing). Activities under
                         this subcomponent will support the education secretariat's ambitious program to: i) raise education
                         quality system-wide through a stronger focus on results and evidence-based policy design - activities
                         (a) and (b), ii) expand the coverage of good quality early child development services for the city's
                         most disadvantaged children  activities (c) through (f) and iii) make teachers more effective in the
                         classroom through better training and support.
                         a.       Strengthening capacity for learning assessment (US$ 420.000). The Secretariat has greatly
                         expanded its use of student learning assessments, testing all students at regular intervals and
                         administering standardized tests in key grades at the end of each school year. These assessments
                         provide essential feedback for teachers and schools to help identify and target remedial support to
                         students before they fall behind and are forced to repeat grades, which has been a major source of
                         inefficiency in the Rio system.
                         b.       Results tracking, policy planning and research (US$ 580.000). The SME's comprehensive
                         student assessment system is generating a large amount of student learning data, which the SME
                         currently lacks the capacity to analyze and exploit; it has only two part-time staff working on data
                         analysis and results monitoring and no institutional "home" for these functions. This component will
                         support the establishment of a new Office for Strategic Information Management (Gerncia de
                         Informao Estratgica), managed by a full-time director with education policy and planning
                         expertise, and supported with a small team of two full-time statistician/economists, one database
                         manager and high-performance IT supplies and statistics software.
                         c.       Rio Crche Monitoring System (US$ 250,000). The SME is putting in place one of the first
                         systems in Brazil for regular monitoring of the institutional quality of ECD centers (crches). The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         program will support consultant assistance for: i) finalizing the instrument (being adapted from the
                         ECERS instrument used in OECD countries); ii) baseline application; iii) design of the template for
                         regular feedback reports to each Crche (starting in 2013); iv) and design and implementation of a
                         comprehensive crche monitoring system, which will integrate the crche quality assurance data with
                         system financial and HR data.
                         d.       Rio Child Development Monitoring System (US$ 30,000). The SME is also proposing the
                         first use in Brazil of an internationally-validated tool to monitor child development. The program
                         will support six months of consultant assistance to adapt and refine the internationally-validated
                         "Ages and Stages Questionnaire" (ASQ) for Monitoring Child Development for use in the Rio
                         context. It will also support preparation of a manual to guide Rio crche personnel in the application
                         of the instrument.
                         e.       Early Child Education (ECE) management system (US$ 100,000). This activity will support
                         the design and implementation of an integrated quality assurance system based on data emanating
                         from the new Crche Quality Monitoring program and the Rio Child Development monitoring
                         system.
                         f.       Integrated Early Childhood Services - Primeira Infncia Carioca (US$ 620,000). The final
                         challenge for the Rio municipal government in raising the quality of ECD services is to ensure
                         adequate integration of education, health and social assistance services targeted to young children
                         (pregnancy through 6 years old) and their families. This is a major institutional challenge for all
                         governments providing ECD services, whether at the national, state or municipal level. Quality

                                                                     Page 3 of 10
                         support to infants and their families during the crucial first years of life requires comprehensive
                         services and effective coordination of these services at the household level, yet secretariats of health,
                         education and social assistance almost universally maintain distinct systems of patient/student
Public Disclosure Copy




                         identification and data management, geographic districts, and institutional hierarchies that make it
                         very difficult to ensure that the information gathered from and services provided to a single family by
                         these different government agencies is ever consolidated and coordinated.
                         g.       Escola de Formao (US$ 1.0 million) The SME in 2012 opened a new training center for
                         teachers, which will deliver not only short courses to upgrade the skills of teachers already in service,
                         but also aims at building a completely new program to prepare higher quality teachers for the future.
                         Like other education secretariats in Brazil, the Rio SME views the teacher training currently offered
                         in Brazilian universities as of low academic quality, highly theoretical, and divorced from teaching
                         practice. The SME believes that the current system is failing both to attract talented students to go
                         into teaching and to prepare them to be effective in the classroom. The component will also finance
                         the ITC and VC equipment needed to establish a network of satellite facilities that will be able to
                         deliver distance education and hybrid (combined face-to-face, online and VC) courses to teachers
                         across the municipality.



                         Component 3: Strengthening Social Governance and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$11.5 million,
                         US$3.3 million of Bank financing).

                         Subcomponent 3.1: Social UPP Program (US$0.7 million, US$0.5 million of Bank financing). This
                         component would focus on strengthening the management systems of Social UPP Program, as well
                         as on promoting innovations in the way sectoral policies are coordinated in order to promote the
                         integration of pacified favelas with the rest of the city.
                         a.        Strengthening Social UPP management systems: The Social UPP program's managerial and
                         operational procedures are being developed as the program is rolled out across more than twenty
                         favelas. The TAL would finance: (i) annual strategic assessments of all operational procedures and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         managerial systems of the institutional and territorial management units, and provide
                         recommendations, customized training and capacity building to improve their efficiency and
                         effectiveness; (ii) technical assistance in information technology services for the continuous
                         development of institutional management practices and online tools currently used by the program;
                         (iii) pilots of new field methodologies to promote effective community participation and improve
                         information collection and monitoring in the pacified territories. The impact evaluation of the
                         program would be financed through the second sub-component described in section 3.2.
                         b.        Improving the implementation of sectoral policies in pacified territories: Social UPP
                         Program requires traditional sectoral policies designed for regular service provision in the rest of the
                         city to give priority attention to demands from pacified favelas, and to adjust their "technologies" of
                         service provision to the distinct realities of favelas. Therefore, the effectiveness of Social UPP lies to
                         a large extent in its capacity to mobilize other secretariats to act in a different way than they are
                         accustomed to in these territories. The TAL would finance technical assistance services to help
                         Instituto Pereira Passos (IPP) coordinate with other urban and social sectors at the municipal level in
                         order to improve practices and procedures and close the service gap with the rest of the city in
                         selected policy areas. Specifically, activities would include: (i) technical assistance to review current
                         approaches being employed by sectors, producing annual assessments of available sectoral policies
                         in selected areas (e.g. urbanization and land regularization, income generation activities,
                         consolidation of the pacification process, etc.) and proposing improvements, priority challenges and
                         targets; (ii) annual workshops to discuss a work program for the identified sectoral policy, bringing

                                                                       Page 4 of 10
                         together IPP and Social UPP counterparts to the projects in the selected areas; (iii) technical
                         assistance to improve the implementation and coordination of the sectoral policies in the selected
                         thematic areas, including the preparation of working papers presenting good practices and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         alternatives for new policy strategies and annual seminars focused on the specific policy areas.

                         Subcomponent 3.2: Monitoring and Evaluation (US$10.8 million, US$2.8 million of Bank
                         financing). This component will focus on strengthening evidence-based policy-making in the
                         municipality by building IPP's technical expertise for monitoring and impact evaluation (M&IE).
                         Since Social UPP coordinates interventions across eight municipal sectors (Education, Finance,
                         Health, Housing, Maintenance, Public Assistance, Public Order, and Urbanism), in pacified--
                         stabilized through the deployment of special police forces--slums, it affords IPP the convening
                         power to engage a large number of actors in a pilot for M&IE. In addition, since IPP has been a
                         qualified player in geo-statistical analysis in Brazil, reinforcing these skills towards M&IE activities
                         was identified as the next step of institutional development for the municipality. Hence, this
                         subcomponent will support a pilot for policy-relevant monitoring and evaluations in the Social UPP
                         areas. The results from this pilot will directly promote the development of a monitoring and feedback
                         system for the municipality. The activities will build IPP's role as a hub for M&IE in the
                         municipality. The subcomponent's activities may be divided in three areas:
                         a.       Building Territorial-Based Data Systems. This activity will provide support to integrate
                         IPP's geo-data collection expertise with socioeconomic data by developing the institute's experience
                         in collecting household and individual-level survey data. The skills developed will include selecting
                         indicators and designing new survey instruments and sampling strategies to monitor and evaluate
                         selected programs. The data thus collected will allow for territorial tracking of key indicators in
                         Social UPP territories and for rigorous impact evaluation of selected programs in the Social UPP
                         territories (through longitudinal, in-depth household and individual survey), thus feeding information
                         to the municipality programs to improve service-delivery targeting and performance.
                         b.       Design of a Monitoring and Feedback System for the municipality. This activity aims to
                         develop IPP as a hub to support decentralized administrative data collection efforts by the sectors,
                         consolidate the collected data, and develop tools to create accountability feedback loops. Ultimately,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         this activity will provide Casa Civil with cross-sector and territorial statistics to continuously inform
                         the City Strategic Planning (2013-2016). The component will support IPP in designing an integrated
                         monitoring and evaluation system; this will require IPP to work across secretaries. IPP will exploit its
                         geo-expertise to produce territorially-based feedback on the quality of service delivery. To enhance
                         the value of the information collected and secure feedback loops, the M&IE system will feature user-
                         friendly accountability tools (e.g., report cards and scorecards, web and mobile-based interfaces to
                         map indicators, and analytical bulletins). As the Social UPP is IPP's in-house client, the program will
                         receive particular attention in the form of a pilot to use accountability tools for improved service
                         delivery performance.
                         c.       Impact Evaluation for Evidence-Based Policy-Making. This activity will build IPP's
                         technical skills to lead impact evaluation work. IPP will carry out a rigorous evaluation of the overall
                         impact of the UPP and Social UPP programs. In addition, during joint IPP-World Bank missions,
                         four areas/programs were preliminarily identified that would yield policy-relevant impact
                         evaluations: different collective action mechanisms in place by Social UPP Program ("Vamos
                         Combinar"); impact of giving Formal Address to households in Social UPP areas; and mechanisms
                         of social accountability. This activity will exploit IPP's comparative advantages while developing
                         new analytical abilities. As IPP's mandate combines program coordination and the provision of data
                         and analytical services, it has a comparative advantage in leading policy-relevant work. In particular,
                         combining cartographic and socioeconomic analyses will move IPP from a planning role to
                         providing actionable policy recommendations to improve municipal programs.

                                                                      Page 5 of 10
                         Component 4: Innovations in Environmental Management (US$1.2 million).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 4.1: Implementation of Rio's Climate Data Bank and GHG Monitoring System. This
                         subcomponent would consist in the implementation of the GHG emissions monitoring strategy that
                         was developed in partnership with SMAC, COPPE, and WRI. The objective of this monitoring
                         system is to track and report on the progress in meeting Rio's commitment, as stated in the municipal
                         climate change law, to avoid 20 percent GHG emissions with respect to the year of 2005 by 2020,
                         through the implementation of various mitigation actions in key sectors (e.g. energy, transportation,
                         waste). The TAL will finance the development of the city's repository GHG gas emissions data, as
                         well as the implementation of an accurate, reliable and transparent emissions monitoring system,
                         which is consistent with international standards. This will involve:
                         a.        Setting up the institutional framework for the implementation of this system, as per the
                         recommendations of the completed strategy, including:
                         i.        Establishing the scope, protocol and methodology for data collection and reporting;
                         ii.       Establishing roles and responsibilities of the various agencies involved, including: IPP,
                         whose responsibility will be to collect the data following agreed procedures, and estimating overall
                         emissions in Rio on the basis of the agreed methodology; SMAC, responsible of the technical review
                         of the process carried out by IPP and of the results of the inventory compilation; and the Prefeitura
                         do Rio, whose involvement will ensure multi-sectoral participation in the climate monitoring efforts,
                         and which will integrate climate data and indicators into the RBM system and;
                         iii.      Instituting coordination mechanisms for all agencies involved, ensuring the adequate
                         operation of the system.
                         b.        Financing the technological needs for the set up and operation of the system, including the
                         purchase of software and equipment needed to set up and operate the monitoring system and Rio's
                         Climate Data Bank, as per recommendations of the COPPE-WRI strategy; and
                         c.        Financing the capacity building needs across sectors to ensure accurate, timely and effective
                         data collection, modeling, reporting, and M&E.
                         Subcomponent 4.2: Development of an Interactive Communication System for the Municipality's
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Policy on Climate Change and Sustainable Development. The Project will support the development
                         and implementation of an information system to promote the dissemination of environmental
                         information by the Rio municipality. The overall objectives of this sub-component are to: (i) raise
                         public awareness on climate change and other activities that promote sustainable development in the
                         city; (ii) increase accountability on the part of the Government for its policies to reduce GHG
                         emissions; and (iii) promote GHG reductions as a result of community and market pressures
                         generated by information disclosure.
                         The Project will finance the development of an online portal that would compile all of the
                         information available on climate change developments and other sustainable development efforts that
                         the city of Rio is underaking. It would (i) be organized by sectors (i.e. solid waste management,
                         transport, energy); (ii) include information on ongoing initiatives under implementation in each
                         sector; (iii) present data collected through the monitoring system in a way that is accessible to the
                         public; (iv) keep track of city progress relative to the emissions reduction targets established by the
                         climate change law; and (v) provide options for the public to engage in activities coordinated by the
                         city. The Project will finance consultants to design and assist SMAC and IPP in the design and
                         implementation of the information platform. Maintenance of the site would be done by IPP, under
                         the advice and technical review of SMAC.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                                                                      Page 6 of 10
                         The Project will be implemented within the municipality of Rio de Janeiro. It will not be
                         implemented nor will it affect any of the Protected Areas within these limits. Most of the work will
                         focus on improving efficiency of fiscal and public management. In the health sub-component the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project will support the implementation of Emergency Health Units throughout the municipality
                         which raises the issue of health care waste management. The collection of Health Care Waste (HCW)
                         is outsourced to a third party who makes the collection in especially designated trucks which is then
                         taken to a treatment plant where the HCW is autoclaved before being disposed of as common
                         residue.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN)
                         Rodrigo Serrano-Berthet (LCSSO)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               The project will not support construction or any
                         BP 4.01                                             other activity that demands an Environmental
                                                                             Impact Assessment with exception of the Health
                                                                             Sub-Component which will focus mainly on
                                                                             promoting increased quality and efficiency in the
                                                                             use of the health network. One of the vehicles for
                                                                             this increased efficiency is the Primary Health
                                                                             Care Units which generate a modest amount of
                                                                             health care waste (HCW). Final disposal of health
                                                                             care waste is the responsibility of the generator.
                                                                             According to Brazilian legislation each Health
                                                                             Care Facility is obligated to prepare a Health
                                                                             Care Waste Management Plan (PGRSS) which is
                                                                             approved by the State Environmental Agency.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             Compliance with this aspect is a requirement for
                                                                             the Health Facility to obtain operating clearance
                                                                             from the Environmental Agency and satisfies
                                                                             Bank Safeguards.

                                                                             The collection of HCW is outsourced to a third
                                                                             party who collects the HCW in especially
                                                                             designated trucks which then takes their load to
                                                                             the treatment plant where the HCW is autoclaved
                                                                             before being disposed of as common residue.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               No project activities have the potential to cause
                                                                             significant conversion (loss) or degradation of
                                                                             natural habitats, whether directly (through
                                                                             construction) or indirectly (through human
                                                                             activities induced by the project).
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               The project will not sponsor forest sector
                                                                             activities nor other interventions that have the
                                                                             potential to impact significantly upon forested
                                                                             areas.



                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No                 The project does not envisage the procurement
                                                                                 of pesticides or pesticide application equipment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No                 It is not anticipated that Project activities will
                            BP 4.11                                              affect physical cultural resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No                 There are no indigenous peoples in the project
                                                                                 area nor are potential adverse impacts on
                                                                                 indigenous peoples anticipated.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No                 The project will not induce physical relocation
                            4.12                                                 nor any loss of land or other assets resulting in:
                                                                                 (i) relocation or loss of shelter; (ii) loss of assets
                                                                                 or access to assets; (iii) loss of income sources or
                                                                                 means of livelihood, whether or not the affected
                                                                                 people must move to another location. The
                                                                                 project will also not impose the involuntary
                                                                                 restriction of access to legally designated parks
                                                                                 and protected areas resulting in adverse impacts
                                                                                 on the livelihoods of the displaced persons.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No                 The project will not be involved in the
                                                                                 construction of any dam nor is it dependent upon
                                                                                 an existing dam.
                            Projects on International           No                 The project is located totally within the
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 municipality of Rio de Janeiro and does not have
                                                                                 any international boundaries.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                    Project activities are confined to clearly defined
                            7.60                                                 areas such as existing infrastructure that does not
                                                                                 have any dispute.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The project will not generate direct impacts given the focus on technical assistance for efficiency
                              and quality of public services and improving planning within the Rio de Janeiro Municipality.
                              The Health Sub-Component will focus mainly on promoting increased quality and efficiency in
                              the use of the health network at the system level. One of the vehicles for this increased efficiency
                              is the Primary Health Care Units which given their role of a first point of contact with the
                              community with no major health interventions do not generate significant amounts of health care
                              waste (HCW).
                              Furthermore the Project will not entail any construction works. The project will support
                              greenhouse gas monitoring and inventory which should provide benefits for the local and global
                              environment.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                The project will support the accreditation of clinics which includes environmental management
                              as one of its parameters. The accreditation program in association with a capacity building effort


                                                                         Page 8 of 10
                           supported by the project will provide the clinics the conditions to be fully compliant with
                           environmental legislation including that which relates to health care waste.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.
                             N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The Health Secretariat is working closely with each of the primary care clinics to fulfill their
                           obligation under Brazilian legislation of preparing a Health Care Waste Management Plan
                           (PGRSS). These will be submitted to the Environmental Agency in order for them to obtain their
                           operating clearance. During preparation these two agencies have worked together to arrive at an
                           agreement on implementation. The health care waste is collected and disposed of by a third party
                           using autoclave technology which is an improvement over the previous use of a landfill.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders are the Environment Secretariat (SMAC), the Municipal Health Secretariat
                           (SMSDC) and the community they serve. Considering that health care waste is being disposed of
                           adequately through a third party the communities surrounding the clinics are not affected by it.
                           Nevertheless the clinic staff are in constant contact with the community they serve through their
                           health agents who are typically from that community offering easy acceptance. Consultations
                           thereby are relatively easy to organize.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          20-Sep-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                      25-Jan-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       20-Sep-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         Technical Assistance Project
                         For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
                         indicate type of document disclosed, if any.
                         Each Primary Health Care Clinic in order to obtain its operating license prepares a Health Care
                         Waste Management Plan (HCWMP). This new legislation stipulates that these HCWMP need to be
                         in place by 2014. The project will support clinics to become compliant through the system wide
                         accreditation program.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         Given the nature of the project, the anticipated minimal impact of health care waste, Brazilian
                         legislation which requires those that generate health care waste to prepare a Health Care Waste
                         Management Plan and that the Project will support the fulfillment of this obligation the in country
                         disclosure will occur as these are prepared and finalized prior to the 2014 date.


                                                                    Page 9 of 10
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
                           ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Rafael Chelles Barroso
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Auguste Tano Kouame (SM)                     Date: 25-Sep-2012




                                                                      Page 10 of 10
