                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA3353
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Albania                           Project ID:    P102733
                            Project Name:      Water Sector Investment Project (P102733)
                            Task Team          Stephen George Karam
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          28-May-2013                       Estimated   25-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSUW                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Water supply (60%), Wastewater Collection and Transportation (35%), Sub-
                                              national government administration (5%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (15%), Pollution management and environmental
                                              health (20%), Other public sector governance (18%), Urban se rvices and
                                              housing for the poor (34%), Decentralization (13%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      86.44           Total Bank Financing:                  86.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    0.44
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      86.00
                              Total                                                                                      86.44
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To (i) improve the quality of water and wastewater services in the Durres Utility Service Area; and
                           (ii) improve the financial performance of Durres Water Utility.



                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                          3. Project Description
                         The Durres Water Utility Service Area comprises Durres City and 4 other municipalities, plus 10
                         communes that together have a residential population of around 330,000. This number increases to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         over 400,000 during the summer months, as Durres is a coastal city that accounts for a substantial
                         share of Albania's tourism receipts. Durres was selected as the Government's priority location for
                         piloting its institutional and policy reform agenda, coupled with critical investment financing.
                         Investments in water supply will help address a critical water supply deficit of some 30,000 m3 daily
                         within the service areas. Investments in wastewater network rehabilitation will improve sanitation
                         conditions and collection for appropriate treatment and disposal so as to minimize impact on the
                         environment. Project components include:

                         Component 1: Priority Water Supply Investments. This component will finance: (i) water supply
                         production wells and a bulk water supply transmission pipeline that will provide up to 630 l/s
                         additional supply capacity to address the acute water shortages in the Durres Utility Service Area; (ii)
                         ancillary investments, including elevated reservoirs, linking municipalities/communes within the
                         Durres area and along the transmission pipeline route to the water supply system in a sustainable
                         manner; and (iii) priority investments in the water distribution network in Durres, as well as
                         provision of leak detection equipment and pressure reducing valves to reduce losses.

                         Component 2: Wastewater Network Investments. This component will finance priority wastewater
                         investments aimed at enhancing the existing sewerage network’s capacity to handle the increased
                         water supply in an environmentally and socially sustainable manner, including: (i) construction of the
                         secondary and tertiary sewerage network in the Durres Beach area; (ii) rehabilitation of critical parts
                         of the existing sewerage system and separate from stormwater drainage networks in Durres City to
                         reduce sewage overflows during heavy rain events; and (iii) provision of high-powered sewer
                         cleaning equipment for Durres Water Utility.

                         Component 3: Institutional Development Program and Water Demand Management. This
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component will support the Government’s broad-based policy and reform agenda at the national
                         level with specific interventions at the local level, focused on the Durres region on a pilot basis.
                         Investments would include: (i) the design and implementation of a Water Demand Management
                         Program; (ii) the support to the Performance Monitoring and Benchmarking Unit; (iii) preparation
                         and implementation of a Performance Improvement Plan and other support for Institutional
                         Strengthening of Durres Water Utility to improve efficiency of operations; and (iv) consultancy
                         services for technical studies, feasibility and design studies and for civil works supervision.

                         Component 4: Project Implementation Support. This component will support implementation of the
                         project including salaries for PIU staff, the PIU operating costs, provision of needed equipment,
                         consultant services technical analysis and reviews, as well as overall project monitoring, evaluation
                         and reporting.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project would finance investments within Durres Prefecture, including 5 municipalities
                         and 10 communes. Environmental impacts are largely confined to the construction phase. Limited
                         land acquisition is necessary in the Fushe Milot wellfield to be rehabilitated for the development of
                         six production wells and along segments of water supply transmission main.



                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Frederick Edmund Brusberg (EASSD)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Bekim Imeri (ECSSO)
                         Nikola Ille (ECSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes             The potential impacts and related environmental
                         BP 4.01                                      mitigation measures relate to general protection
                                                                      of the aquifer to be used for Durres water supply,
                                                                      protection of immediate zones around the
                                                                      extraction wells, and sustainability of
                                                                      groundwater use. Other impacts are related to
                                                                      general construction activities during Project
                                                                      execution – noise, dust, vibration, soil pollution
                                                                      from machinery, which can be mitigated or
                                                                      avoided by application of good engineering
                                                                      practice. The Project is not expected to have any
                                                                      severe negative or long-lasting environmental
                                                                      impacts if measures detailed in the environmental
                                                                      mitigation plan are fully applied. The project will
                                                                      not undertake works in any Category A
                                                                      subprojects. The project is classified as Category
                                                                      B in accordance with OP/BP 4.01 on
                                                                      Environmental Assessment. An Environmental
                                                                      Impact Assessment and Environmental
                                                                      Management Plan has been prepared and cleared
                                                                      by the Regional Safeguards Advisor. Both of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      these documents were disclosed in-country and at
                                                                      the Bank’s Infoshop on May 21 and 22, 2013
                                                                      respectively. A Consultations Workshop was
                                                                      convened on May 28, 2013 and no significant
                                                                      issues arose.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes             OP/BP 4.04 on Natural Habitats will be
                                                                      triggered as the pipeline transmission main
                                                                      crosses a “Protected Area? of an approximate
                                                                      distance of 9,000 meters. This area is comprised
                                                                      of some forested land (Ishimi Hills) and marshes
                                                                      and agricultural fields with a protection category
                                                                      of IV. Over time, much of this area has become
                                                                      settled and is now peri-urban with residential
                                                                      housing in the areas along the pipeline route.
                                                                      Within the Protected Area, the transmission main
                                                                      follows mostly existing roads, and would consist
                                                                      of a shallow trench and manholes. Forests are at
                                                                      sufficient distance such that disturbance during
                                                                      construction are expected to be minimal during



                                                              Page 3 of 8
                                                                         the construction phase, with no expected
                                                                         disturbances during the operation phase. Pre-
                                                                         construction mitigation measures have been
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         accounted for in design by identifying a pipeline
                                                                         routing in such a way as to minimize impact on
                                                                         natural ecosystems, namely by following existing
                                                                         roads for almost the entire length of the pipeline.
                                                                         In addition, the EMP identifies additional
                                                                         measures for the construction phase to mitigate
                                                                         remaining impacts on natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes            Based on the identified civil works OP/BP 4.12
                         4.12                                            on Involuntary Resettlement will be triggered.
                                                                         Land adjacent to the locations of the proposed
                                                                         production wells, as well as land along sections of
                                                                         the pipeline routing have been identified as
                                                                         requiring acquisition. A detailed Resettlement
                                                                         Action Plan has been prepared and cleared by the
                                                                         Regional Safeguards Advisor and a Resettlement
                                                                         Policy Framework is in place to anticipate any
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         further need for temporary or permanent
                                                                         resettlement or land acquisition. The RPF/RAP
                                                                         were publicly disclosed within country and at
                                                                         Infoshop on May 21, 2013. Public consultations
                                                                         were held on May 28, 2013.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International         Yes             The proposed investments would be situated
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            close to the Adriatic Sea, which is an
                                                                         international waterway. The project proposes an
                                                                         investment to draw upon a currently accessed
                                                                         well field that will likely increase the quantity of
                                                                         treated wastewater discharged. However, recent
                                                                         completion of a wastewater treatment plant in
                                                                         Durres, accompanied by a collector built with EU
                                                                         IPA funds would substantially improve the
                                                                         effective management of wastewater effluent,
                                                                         including its collection, treatment and ultimate
                                                                         discharge into the Adriatic. Notification of



                                                                 Page 4 of 8
                                                                                 riparians was initiated on March 11, 2013. The 45
                                                                                 day notification period concluded on May 5,
                                                                                 2013, and no objections were received from any
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 of the notified countries. The project is therefore
                                                                                 compliant with OP 7.50 requirements.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                N.A.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                There are no long term negative environmental impacts anticipated as a result of the project.
                              Detailed analysis of the source water aquifer suggests adequate quantity and satisfactory quality of
                              water. A hydrologist report prepared for the Project indicates that the aquifer is recharged at a rate
                              of 2,250 l/s from the Mati River and that about 1,210 l/s is extracted through licensed and
                              unlicensed production wells, leaving a quantity of 1,040 l/s, which is more than sufficient for the
                              proposed production wells. Several water quality testing samples have been reviewed and indicate
                              that water quality is within acceptable limits. Production well design documents specify measures
                              to be taken by the contractor to test and verify water quality prior to commissioning of the wells.
                              Additional measures are prescribed in the Environmental Management Plan for the project. In
                              addition, the Project supports a Water Demand Management Program that includes a public
                              awareness campaign to promote water conservation, as well as installation of meters on remaining
Public Disclosure Copy




                              household connections that are not metered to strengthen end-user accountability for water
                              consumption.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                Alternative wellfields were investigated, prior to the identification of the proposed Fushe Milot
                              wellfield, but were determined to be suboptimal due to risks of marine water intrusion or
                              inadequate water quantity. Alternative pipeline routing options were considered factoring in
                              economic, social and environmental impacts. The selected option uses a minimum distance
                              routing plan with a routing scheme designed to cause minimal disruption to settled communities,
                              avoid higher costs of land acquisition, and locating the transmission main at a sufficient distance
                              from densely settled communities to avoid illegal break-ins and the potential loss of water
                              resources.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared to set out the broad legal, regulatory
                              and institutional issues related to social safeguards. It is designed to address both the social
                              safeguard issues associated with identified investments, as well as those that may arise as designs
                              are completed for the remaining network civil works. A Resettlement Action Plan was prepared
                              for the identified production well locations and segments along the pipeline routing that would
                              require minimal land acquisition. An Environmental Impact Assessment has been prepared and

                                                                         Page 5 of 8
                           cleared by the Regional Safeguards Advisor and was publicly disclosed at the Bank’s Infoshop
                           and within country. A public consultations workshop was held on May 28, 2013.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Key stakeholders include the residents and local governments within the Durres Utility Service
                           Area, national level policy makers and the Durres Water Utility. Extensive consultations have
                           taken place to ensure stakeholder commitment to the project. Consultations were conducted on the
                           RPF/RAP and Project Affected Persons (PAPs) were consulted on the proposed land acquisition
                           plans under the project, including area to be acquired, compensation amounts and related
                           procedures. Consultations were conducted on the RPF/RAP with Project Affected Persons (PIPs)
                           on the proposed land acquisition plans under the project, including area to be acquired,
                           compensation amounts and related procedures. Public consultations have been held on the
                           disclosed safeguard documents.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-May-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-May-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Albania                                                          21-May-2013
                           Comments: EIA/EMP were publicly disclosed on the Ministry of Public Works and Transport
                                         Website and announced in two local newspapers.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-May-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-May-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Albania                                                          21-May-2013
                           Comments: The RPF/RAP document was publicly disclosed on the MPWT website and made
                                         available to the general public through announcement in two local newspapers.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         N.A.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?




                                                                    Page 6 of 8
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                             Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of critical natural habitats?
                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Stephen George Karam
                            Approved By



                                                                        Page 7 of 8
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)         Date: 05-Jun-2013
                         Advisor:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)   Date: 05-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Page 8 of 8
