                                                                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                               CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC474
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Jan-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Niger                                   Project ID:                       P127204
                              Project Name:                   Niger - Sources of Growth Project (P127204)
                              Task Team Leader:               Djibrilla Adamou Issa
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 12-Mar-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:             24-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  AFTFW                                   Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         General industry and trade sector (50%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (20%), SME Finance (15%), Central
                                                              government administra tion (15%)
                              Theme:                          Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (25%), Regulation and competition policy (25%), Other Private Sector
                                                              Development (25%), E xport development and competitiveness (15%), Legal institutions for a market economy
                                                              (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                          0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                50.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                      50.00
                              Environmental Category:         A - Full Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to contribute to the development of selected new sources of growth through industry based
                              investement climate reforms and improved enterprises competiveness. The related performance indicators are the increase in private investment
                              as a result of improved business environment; and the increase in production in supported value chains/sources of growth. Intermediate key
Public Disclosure Copy




                              outcome indicators would be the number of enterprises created and the number of jobs created. During project preparation the team and
                              Government will agree on key PDO and intermediate indicators based on available baseline and Monitoring and Evaluation system.

                              C. Project Description

                              Overall approach: It appears from the various policy and strategy documents mentioned above that to support private sector-led growth, actions
                              need to be taken in a number of mutually-supportive areas to create a minimum platform for private sector development. This platform involves a
                              combination of elements including: (i) providing policy, regulatory, and institutional support to key government institutions involved in private sector
                              development; (ii) supporting for technical and business management skills to improve productivity at the firm level; (ii) developing linkages with the
                              regional/global economy; (iii) promoting a conducive business environment, including in particular, financial services; (iv) trade and investment
                              facilitation regulations and institutions; and (iv) facilitating increased availability of critical infrastructure and services.
                              However, given the low capacity and while promoting such an integrated approach, prioritization and sequencing of the reforms are vital for a
                              successful implementation.
                              These priority reforms to be supported by the Project would aim to develop a minimum platform of conditions conducive for the private sector to
                              invest, and for Niger to attract more private investment in few selected high potential sectors and take advantage of the large neighboring Nigerian
                              market by strengthening regional integration with Nigeria.
                              The lending instrument is a Specific Investment Loan (SIL). A SIL (instead of the Technical Assistance Loan) is proposed as it is a flexible
                              instrument that can finance the diverse activities which are needed to support the private sector, such as technical assistance, equipment and civil
                              work, and provision of financial and non-financial services to SMEs.

                              D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                              Nationwide and selected sites to be confirmed during preparation.


                              E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                              The Government has little capacity to manage safeguards, but has benefited from experience in several Bank-financed projects in several sectors,
                              including: Agricultural and Rural Development, Energy, Transport, health, Education and Urban Development. In addition, the project is set out to
                              strengthen, as necessary, relevant stakeholders’ capacity to meet its safeguard requirements. In other words, the project shall implement any
                              capacity strengthening measures that will be identified in various environmental and social instruments applicable to this operation.

                              F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS)
                           Amadou Konare (AFTED)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies Triggered             Yes   No   TBD                                Explanation
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01      ✖                The Borrower will prepare the following instruments to be reviewed,
                                                                                      cleared and disclosed in country and at Bank InfoShop prior to
                                                                                      appraisal:
                                                                                      1.)           ESMF covering the potential impacts of the various areas
                                                                                      of project intervention: (i) the creation/rehabilitation of an Industrial
                                                                                      Economic Zone (IEZ) in Maradi, in terms of on-site and off-site
                                                                                      infrastructure, such as construction/rehabilitation of access roads,
                                                                                      utilities (i.e., water, electricity, telecommunication, facilities;
                                                                                      slaughterhouse, Cattle market etc.
                                                                                      2.)           Environmental audit to assess the environmental, social
                                                                                      and health impacts/liabilities of current production and processing
                                                                                      systems of the slaughterhouse in Niamey;
                                                                                      3.)           ESMP as it relates to the rehabilitation activities of the
                                                                                      slaughterhouse in Niamey;
                                                                                      4.)           TORs for an SESA for the mining sector in Niger. The
                                                                                      SEA should be completed during the 1st year of project
                                                                                      implementation
                                                                                      Environmental assessment needed to determine possible negative
                                                                                      environment impact of project activities
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                         ✖     The triggering of OP 4.04 will be assessed in the context of the
                                                                                      preparation of the ESMF, and if warranted, the ESMF will include
                                                                                      provisions for avoiding, mitigating or reducing impacts on natural
                                                                                      habitats.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                             ✖
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                  ✖                Investment in the Niamey slaughtering house; (ii) the improvement
                                                                                      of animal health and nutrition by training private sector para-
                                                                                      veterinarians; and (iii) the improvement of food safety throughout the
                                                                                      meat chain, will likely increase agricultural chemical, such as
                                                                                      fertilizers and pesticides (i.e., herbicides and other chemical
                                                                                      products designed to reduce the proliferation of disease vectors.
                                                                                      Further, improvement in livestock production and productivity implies
                                                                                      improved veterinary treatments for diseases prevention and care of
                                                                                      the livestock population.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                      In light of these activities, OP 4.09 is triggered. The project will need
                                                                                      to prepare a Pest Management Plan (PMP), which: (i) Promotes the
                                                                                      application of integrated pest management (IPM) techniques and
                                                                                      best practices, including use of biological methods, timing of crop
                                                                                      sowing, use of pest-resistant varieties of pasture and other animal
                                                                                      feed crop etc.; (ii) provides best practice guidelines and standards
                                                                                      for safe use and disposal of used pesticides containers and
                                                                                      outdated stocks; (iii) Protects surface and ground water quality,
                                                                                      livestock, human health, fish stock, aquatic habitat and wildlife, in
                                                                                      particular where run-off is likely to occur; (iv) Promotes natural
                                                                                      enemies of pests and avoid an increase in pest incidence or creation
                                                                                      of new pests; (v) Takes into account beneficial soil micro-organisms
                                                                                      and enhance micro-zoo genetic populations; and (vi) Ensures
                                                                                      conditions by which the application of pesticides is well targeted;
                                                                                      Limit the intense application and reliance of systemic chemical
                                                                                      pesticides and; and (vii) Limits handling of chemicals by
                                                                                      inexperienced farmers and requires the involvement or
                                                                                      strengthening of plant protection agencies and extension services
                                                                                      consultation of affected farmers.

                                                                                      Like the rest the safeguard instruments applicable to this project, the
                                                                                      PMP will be reviewed by the Bureau des Evaluations
                                                                                      Environnementales et des Etudes d’Imapcts (BEEEI) and the Bank.
                                                                                      Upon clearance by the Bank, the PMP will be disclosed in-country
                                                                                      and at Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11              ✖     Though it is unknown at this stage which sites of the project
                                                                                      intervention area may contain PCR, it would be prudent to use
                                                                                      caution when implementing the productive investments. This is
                                                                                      predicated on the recognition the West Africa sub-region, including
                                                                                      the country of Niger, is viewed by the international community as
                                                                                      rich cultural heritage area and Maradi, where the IEZ will be created,
                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No           TBD                                             Explanation
                                                                                                                                    appears to be one of the largest and most ancient cities in the
                                                                                                                                    country. The potential for triggering the PCR will be discussed in the
                                                                                                                                    context of the preparation of ESMF and if warranted dispositions will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                    be taken to ensure that impacts on Physical Cultural Resources are
                                                                                                                                    assessed and integrated into the design screening, impacts
                                                                                                                                    assessment, specific EIAs/EMPs preparation, as well as in the
                                                                                                                                    definition, implementation and monitoring of mitigation plan.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                                    ✖
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                 ✖                                   Depending on project activities, the creation of an EZ could involve
                                                                                                                                    involuntary resettlement and some households' incomes may be
                                                                                                                                    negatively affected by project activities. Though the specific sites
                                                                                                                                    and social impacts of envisioned physical investments are not yet
                                                                                                                                    known, there is great potential for the triggering of OP 4.12 in light of
                                                                                                                                    planned investments in on-site and off-site infrastructure such as
                                                                                                                                    construction/rehabilitation of access roads, utilities (i.e., water,
                                                                                                                                    electricity, telecommunication, facilities). The Borrower will prepare
                                                                                                                                    a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), which outlines the
                                                                                                                                    mechanisms and procedures for compensating for land acquisition,
                                                                                                                                    loss of economic activities and/or livelihoods on the part of Project
                                                                                                                                    Affected People (PAPs). The RPF will also detail the institutional
                                                                                                                                    arrangements for implementing and monitoring the framework,
                                                                                                                                    including grievance mechanisms, in event of discontent/
                                                                                                                                    dissatisfaction in addressing the needs of persons who will be
                                                                                                                                    affected by loss of economic activities, access to resources, land
                                                                                                                                    acquisition and/or involuntary resettlement. The RPF will be
                                                                                                                                    disclosed in-country and at InfoShop prior to appraisal, upon review
                                                                                                                                    and clearance by the Bank.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                                        ✖
                            Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                                        ✖
                            7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                            ✖

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Jan-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
                                Safeguard related studies will be undertaken during project preparation starting in September 2011.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name: Ndeye Anna Ba                                                                                   Date: 05-Jan-2012
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                     Date: 05-Jan-2012
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                                  Name: Paul Noumba Um (SM)                                                                             Date: 10-Jan-2012
                            Comments:




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
