                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC853

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Jul-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Uzbekistan                     Project ID:      P127764
                            Project Name:     SOUTH KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RESOURCES IMPROVEMENT
                                              PROJECT (P127764)
                            Task Team         IJsbrand Harko de Jong
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       19-Feb-2013                      Estimated        30-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: ECSS1                             Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:           Irrigation and drainage (80%), Crops (20%)
                            Theme:            Water resource management (70%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%),
                                              Other public sector governance (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                        50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                    100.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                               50.00
                              Total                                                                    200.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           the PDO of SKWRIP is to sustainably improve water management and restore irrigated area in South
                           Karakalpakstan in a financially efficient manner.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project contains the following components:


                           (i)    Development of Irrigation Systems.
                         This component will invest in the improvement of five sections of the Right Bank Canal (to increase
                         the conveyance capacity from 75 to 165 m3/s), construction of the Bustan Canal (concrete lined
                         canal of 70 km length with a design duty of 75 m3/s) and rehabilitation of existing main canals
Public Disclosure Copy




                         including Pakhta-Arna, Keltaminor, Old Bozgap and Bogap canals. The main canal rehabilitation
                         would eliminate the need for secondary pumping to distribution canals. In addition to earth and
                         concrete works, there are 90 main structures (control, cross drainage and bridges) to be constructed
                         and rehabilitated. More than 20 distribution canals (inter-farm canals) have been identified for
                         rehabilitation. Finally, hydromet measurement stations will be installed in the project area for
                         measuring key water management indicators.

                         (ii)    Institutional Strengthening
                         The project will improve the quality of main system irrigation management through capacity
                         strengthening as explained below, introducing performance indicators to provide incentives for
                         improved main canal I&D management, and developing a canal automation pilot. The pilot will take
                         advantage of a canal automation pilot that was financed by SDC in the Ferghana Valley, and that
                         provides valuable lessons.

                         Capacities will be strengthened at various levels. In the first place, PAN-ISA and Amu Darya Basin
                         Water Organisations (BVO) staff will be trained in better water resources management in the lower
                         Amu Darya to take advantage of the opportunities that the investments will provide. Secondly, water
                         management staff at regional and district authorities responsible for I&D management (AIS and
                         BAIS) will be trained in principles of rational management at main and secondary scheme level,
                         including M&E and feedback of information into improved operations. Thirdly, O&M plans will be
                         developed, and scheduling and prioritization for repair works will be agreed. Furthermore, capacities
                         for irrigation operation will be improved by establishing agreed operating rules, preparation of a
                         scheme operation plan and training of staff in its use and implementation. Lastly, water management
                         staff in AIS and BAIS will also be trained in the training of WCAs. In addition, WCAs will be
                         trained in I&D management and O&M at tertiary level to help ensure the sustainability of the
                         investments. They will be provided with modern tools that will be developed in close association
Public Disclosure Copy




                         with stakeholders. The project will pay in particular attention to the involvement of women in
                         WCAs, and will provide tailor-made training to women.

                         Farmer Field Schools (FFS) will be organized to disseminate good agricultural and water
                         management practices among farmers in the project area. FFS are implemented through the local
                         authorities of the three districts involved in the project. The project would provide the resources and
                         trainers, but the level of input would reduce over the implementation period with Districts authorities
                         encouraged to provide inputs to compensate. Special attention will be paid to the promotion of a
                         second crop after winter wheat. Three demonstration plots (DPs) will be established for each project
                         village (nine in total). DPs will include the following issues: deep ripping (sub-soiling), land
                         levelling / grading, crop rotation, crop diversification, field level irrigation water measurement, and
                         using appropriate watering methods to improve in-field water distribution. It is anticipated that at
                         least one DP in each village will focus on non-cotton/wheat crops. DPs will also be used as an
                         opportunity to strengthen capacities of WCAs through on-the-job training. As mentioned above,
                         women will be targeted specifically in FFS training.

                         (iii)   Project Management and Monitoring/evaluation
                         The component would (i) support the operation of the PIU, and finance overall project management,
                         as well as technical assistance in such areas as detailed design, contract administration and
                         construction supervision, procurement, financial management, capacity strengthening and
                         agricultural development; (ii) prepare a feasibility study and bidding documents for a follow-on
                         investment operation, possibly including the Right Bank Main Collector Development Project; and
                         (iii) establish a Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system and arrange for data collection and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reporting on key performance output and impact indicators, through baseline surveys, participatory
                         assessments and mid-term review and final evaluation.

                         While the impact of the project on water resources in the lower Amu Darya are negligible, the team
                         will investigate economically feasible options to further reduce the impact of the project regarding
                         international waterways in terms of water quantity, and to continue pursuing dialogue between
                         riparian countries on the project.

                         Important lessons were learned during implementation of DIWIP. These include:
                         1. Overall improvement of irrigation management requires addressing both “hardware? issues as well
                         as strengthening of capacities and institutions and providing incentives to adopt innovations;
                         2. Local water management authorities and local governments need to be closely involved in the
                         design and implementation of the project. This applies in particular to attempts by the project to
                         introduce more rational management of irrigation water, and to elaborate and implement operating
                         rules for Tuyamuyun dam.
                         3. While the overall environment in Uzbekistan is particularly unfavorable to a meaningful role of
                         WCAs in irrigation management, efforts need to be undertaken to strengthen capacities through
                         Farmer Field Schools and Demonstration Plots. These activities were highly satisfactory during
                         DIWIP.
                         4. Organizational arrangements should take into account the difficulty of coordination among key
                         government agencies, as well as between MAWR and the Government of Karakalpakstan;
                         5. Procurement requires pro-active implementation support from the Bank, and the procurement plan
                         will need to contain consistent packages that will attract adequate number of bidders and competitive
                         prices. Consistent responses by the Bank to attempts to negotiate prices after QCBS are required,
                         including declaring misprocurement.
                         6. Implementation of safeguards instruments will require close monitoring and supervision to ensure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         full compliance.
                         7. Pro-active communication of key results will help MAWR, PIU and local authorities take
                         ownership and ensure sustainability of the project achievements, and will help clarify some of the
                         sensitive issues that the project will be involved in.
                         8. Competent and efficient national management staff is necessary and should be recruited before
                         project effectiveness.

                         The design of the proposed project will fully incorporate the lessons learned from past experience.
                         The project will ensure involvement of all stakeholders at national level and in Karakalpakstan. It
                         will strengthen capacities at various levels, while project implementation will be entrusted to a
                         competent PIU that has already demonstrated its capacity to run a large and complex operation.
                         Adequate resources will be allocated to addressing critical “software? needs, including for canal
                         automation, capacity strengthening and institutional support.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the            safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project area is entirely located in South Karakalpakstan. Almost the entire drainage system of the
                         project area (100,000 hectares) has been rehabilitated under the on-going Drainage, Irrigation and
                         Wetland Improvement Project (DIWIP, P009127). The major change introduced by DIWIP has been
                         the suspension of Beruni and Kyzylkum pumping stations that released mineralized drainage water
                         into the Amu Darya and Lake Ayazkala. All drainage water from the project area now is now drained
                         via the former channel of the Janadarya to the Aral Sea. The newly constructed main drain and the
                         rehabilitated on-farm and inter-farm drainage system now flow by gravity, the areas of high water
Public Disclosure Copy




                         table are considerably reduced, and some of the institutional issues were addressed.

                         Following improvement of drainage, the major issues that threaten productivity and sustainability of
                         irrigated agriculture in the project area include the deteriorating irrigation infrastructure, the low
                         water use efficiency and associated high costs of pumping to the public budget, and the lack of
                         farmers’ incentives to improve production and productivity. In addition, as a result of hands-on
                         involvement of regional authorities mindful of meeting cotton and wheat quota, irrigation
                         management has been described as “routine emergency management?. More rational management of
                         irrigation and water resources is also constrained by over-caution and by the lack of pro-activity as a
                         result of weak water resources forecasting capacity.

                         Over 40 percent of the irrigation supply in the project area continues to depend on two major pump
                         stations that abstract water from the Amu Darya. The total annual electricity costs of pumping
                         amount to US$ 2.39 million. The project will remove this dependence on pumping by developing a
                         gravity off-take from Tuyamuyun reservoir and decommissioning the pumping stations, thereby
                         improving the reliability of supply and eliminating the need to release large amounts of water into the
                         Amu Darya to serve these stations. Studies have demonstrated that this will be possible without
                         increasing the annual volume of water abstracted from the Amu Darya (see annex A for a water
                         balance before and after the project). This will require construction of a new 70 km canal and
                         rehabilitation of the Right Bank Canal (RBC). In addition, secondary canals will be rehabilitated, and
                         deteriorated and damaged structures will be refurbished or replaced. To complement the investments
                         in hardware, the project will also strengthen institutions and capacities, introduce more rational
                         irrigation management at all levels that is more accountable to stakeholders to help ensure
                         sustainability, and promote production of a second non-cotton/non-wheat crop after winter wheat.

                         Expected benefits include increased production from rehabilitated, previously abandoned land in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         downstream project areas and from vertical intensification on rehabilitated and existing land, as well
                         as reduced costs of pumping. Production of a second non-cotton/non-wheat crop after the wheat
                         harvest will become possible in parts of the command area.

                         Land acquisition is anticipated in the project design. The project activities are expected to affect over
                         300 ha of agricultural land, some access roads and commercial enterprises (service and petrol
                         stations). The preliminary assessment carried out by the borrower estimated that about 63 houses
                         could also be also be affected. The Borrower will implement RAP (s) for all project activities
                         requiring land acquisition.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources (MAWR) will have the overall responsibility for
                         project implementation. In view of the good experience during implementation of DIWIP, the project
                         will support MAWR in implementing the project through establishment of a Project Implementation
                         Unit (PIU) that is adequately staffed with irrigation, agricultural, capacity strengthening and
                         fiduciary specialists. Close involvement of I&D management staff at Oblast, Raion and WUA level
                         will be ensured, as well as of regional governments. The PMU will maintain a main office in South
                         Karakalpakstan under the supervision of a Deputy Director. The PIU will be assisted by national and
                         international consultants for all aspects of project management and implementation, including
                           contract administration, management and supervision; M&E; preparation of follow-on investment
                           operations; and institutional development.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel Ghany (ECSS1)
                           Lola Ibragimova (ECSS4)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes             A draft ESA/ESMP has been prepared for
                           BP 4.01                                           SKWRMIP. The report is being revised to more
                                                                             clearly indicate the safeguard policies that will
                                                                             be triggered.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes             Improved water management is needed to
                                                                             sustain the required seasonal water flow to
                                                                             Baday Tugay, a seasonally flooded forest.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD             The recently prepared draft ESIA mentions only
                                                                             small amount of agro-chemicals being used at
                                                                             the moment. Yield increases as a result of the
                                                                             project are expected to be small and mostly
                                                                             derive from better water management. The team
                                                                             will confirm this during project preparation and
                                                                             determine whether or not OP4.09 will be
                                                                             triggered. If so, the IPMP that has been prepared
                                                                             during the predecessor DIWIP will be used
                                                                             during project implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD             One Mosque might be affected as a result of
                           BP 4.11                                           project activities, particularly land acquisition
                                                                             required for construction works. During project
                                                                             preparation, the team will ascertain whether or
                                                                             not this is the case. No other project activities
                                                                             will have impacts on physical cultural resources.
                                                                             However, “chance find? provisions will be
                                                                             incorporated in all works contracts.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             Preliminary results of ESIA identified 83
                           4.12                                              households (including small commercial
                                                                             structures), which will be affected by
                                                                             construction/rehabilitation works on Buston
                                                                             canal. There is a likelihood of demolition of 63
                                                                             houses. Land acquisition of about 427 ha is
                                                                             currently estimated with majority of territory
                                                                             representing agricultural land. The Resettlement
                                                                                                                                 Policy Framework and Resettlement Action
                                                                                                                                 Plan will be prepared for the project.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         Yes                           The project will affect Tuyamuyun Dam. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 2001 Tuyamuyun Dam Safety Inspection Report
                                                                                                                                 identified a number of dam safety issues,
                                                                                                                                 notably (i) safety of Sultansanjar Dam, (ii)
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitating the hydro-mechanical equipment;
                                                                                                                                 (iii) improving dam instrumentation; (iv)
                                                                                                                                 updating the O&M manual; and (v) preparing an
                                                                                                                                 Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP). The GOU
                                                                                                                                 will provide an updated “Dam Safety
                                                                                                                                 Assessment? report on Tuyamuyun dam that
                                                                                                                                 would clarify which of the proposed measures
                                                                                                                                 have already been implemented. In addition, the
                                                                                                                                 team's dam safety expert will visit Tuyamuyun
                                                                                                                                 dam.
                                 Projects on International                                         Yes                           The project area covers irrigation network
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            which will affect flows in the Aral Sea. Thus the
                                                                                                                                 project triggers World Bank OP 7.50 (Projects
                                                                                                                                 on International Waterways). The proposed
                                                                                                                                 investments under the project are for renovation
                                                                                                                                 of irrigation canals, and improvements of
                                                                                                                                 drainage infrastructure along with the
                                                                                                                                 purchasing of agricultural machinery. Water
                                                                                                                                 balance studies that have been conducted
                                                                                                                                 indicate that additional water abstractions are
                                                                                                                                 expected to be minimal, and that the quality of
                                                                                                                                 water of these rivers will not be significantly
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 changed. Nevertheless, the Government of
                                                                                                                                 Uzbekistan will be asked to notify Aral Sea
                                                                                                                                 riparian countries to ensure compliance with
                                                                                                                                 OP7.50. Uzbekistan has indicated that it is
                                                                                                                                 willing to notify Aral Sea riparian countries.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Dec-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Safeguards studies have almost been completed. A draft ESIA and EMP have been completed on
                                      July 5, 2012 and have been submitted for approval.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: IJsbrand Harko de Jong




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Approved By:
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)         Date: 13-Aug-2012
                         Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)   Date: 08-Aug-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
