                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC629

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Aug-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kenya                           Project ID:       P117635
                            Project Name:      Kenya - Enhancing Water Security & Climate Resilience (P117635)
                            Task Team          Gustavo Saltiel
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          04-Mar-2013                     Estimated         11-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTN2                           Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector:            General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (30%), Irrigation and
                                               drainage (20%), General agriculture, fishing and forestr y sector (20%), Public
                                               administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (20%), General energy
                                               sector (10%)
                            Theme:             Water resource management (40%), Other environment and natural resources
                                               management (30%), Land administration and management (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  350.00
                              Total                                                                        350.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to support the institutionalization of processes and water-
                           related investments to strengthen climate-resilient water resources development and management in
                           Kenya.

                           The PDO will support the higher level objectives of inclusive and sustained growth through the
                           achievement of water security and resilience to climate variability.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed Project is designed as a framework operation that would support the Government of
                         Kenya (GoK) in realizing its longer-term vision by establishing a rigorous selection process for
                         preparing priority water investments. Achieving climate resilient water security for economic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development and growth is far beyond the possibilities of one operation. GoK recognizes that its
                         vision of transforming the water sector requires a dedicated, long-term commitment that is best
                         approached at a practical level in phases, whereby the myriad and vast investment needs are
                         implemented according to a transparent process and quality assurance standards. The proposed
                         Project responds to this need through the development of an investment framework, with agreed
                         upon criteria and guidelines for selecting and preparing priority investments.

                         The investment framework would set the ‘rules of the game’ by making transparent the decision-
                         making process on investments selection, ensuring that selected investments are well-prepared,
                         amongst the most effective for realizing the objectives, and implemented in a sustainable manner.
                         The single, consistent investment framework could eventually be broadened beyond the proposed
                         project in order to facilitate implementation of GoK’s larger investment program, which would
                         include support from other development partners, the private sector, etc. The framework approach of
                         the proposed Project has been agreed with the Ministry of Water and Environment (MWI) and is in
                         line with their vision for an “umbrella program? for the implementation of the Water Sector Strategic
                         Plan (2011), through which they encourage Development Partners to coordinate support. The
                         advantage of the framework approach is that it would provide GoK and the World Bank the
                         opportunity to invest early in priority schemes provided that they are well-prepared, while
                         establishing a rigorous investment framework for selecting and preparing subsequent investments.

                         World Bank engagement is expected to span over an 8-10 years period. The first phase of the
                         proposed Project is expected to be in the order of US$ 350 million, with subsequent phases to follow
                         (either through an APL, new SILs or with Additional Financing). The total budget envelope will be
                         determined during project preparation and will reflect the vast water investment needs in Kenya,
                         which the Project aims to support. The longer-term and phased approach demonstrates the Bank's
Public Disclosure Copy




                         commitment to the sector, while providing necessary flexibility and opportunities for reframing the
                         subsequent phases, as needed and if conditions on the ground change substantially (particularly in
                         light of the evolving institutional and reform process).

                         The proposed Project would have three components: (i) water resources development; (ii) water
                         resources planning and management; and (iii) support to water sector institutional reforms. The total
                         budget, particularly for Component 1, could be increased with co-financing from other development
                         partners.

                         Component 1: Water Resources Development (US$ 305 million)

                         This component would support climate resilient water security and economic growth through water
                         resources development investments that are prepared in line with the eligibility and preparation
                         framework. Such investments could include:

                         •      Bulk water supply (large-scale, transformative water storage projects for single- and
                         multipurpose use);
                         •      Groundwater development.
                         •        Flood management infrastructure.
                         •      Activities to ensure sustainability of investments (e.g., catchment management for selected
                         sites, community outreach, etc.).
                         •        Enhanced productive water uses (e.g., irrigation development and water supply).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The investment framework will clearly specify the investment selection criteria and preparation
                         guidelines (covering various aspects, including technical preparation, financial and economic
                         analyses, environmental and social management, long term operations and management
                         sustainability, community participation, implementation arrangements and institutional capacity). In
                         orderto test the robustness of the investment framework and the capacity of the country to adequately
                         prepare investments in accordance with it, between one and three investments will be assessed using
                         the framework and appraised prior to project approval, with the expectation that at least one of the
                         investments will be financed upon project effectiveness (i.e. a "first mover" investment). These
                         investments will be selected from amongst the most advanced GoK priority projects, including
                         possibly ones under preparation with support from other World Bank-financed projects. Funding
                         will be committed to additional water resources investments during project implementation, as
                         schemes are selected and prepared in accordance with the investment framework.

                         Three to four candidate investments have been indentified are actively being reviewed for
                         consistency with the proposed PDO and for their readiness in terms of the investment framework.
                         The potential investments are:

                         -        Nzoia Irrigation scheme – currently being designed under the Natural Resources
                         Management Project. Additional work needed to fully prepare Nzoia irrigation scheme by appraisal
                         is being fast-tracked.
                         -        Ruiru wellfields in Nairobi – identified as a potential water supply option in the Water
                         Supply Master Plan for Nairobi, supported under Water Supply and Sanitation Improvement Project
                         (WaSSIP).
                         -        Maira Dam – a site located in Western Kenya that is currently being studied under the Nile
                         Basin Initiative/Nile Equatorial Lakes Subsidiary Action Program’s Sio-Malaba-Malakisi (SMM)
                         River Basin Management Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         -        Mwache Dam – a project that has been given high priority by MWI, Ministry of Regional
                         Development Authorities (MoRDA), the Coast Development Authority (CDA), and the Coast Water
                         Services Board (CWSB). Consideration is being closely coordinated with the preparation of the
                         Water Supply Master Plan for the Coast Region/Mombasa, supported under WaSSIP.


                         Component 2: Water Resources Planning and Management (US$ 30 million)

                         This component aims to support: (i) comprehensive water sector planning (including upgrading the
                         water resources monitoring network; improving the knowledge base, including facilitating data
                         sharing, and building analytical tools; strengthening decision support systems for climate risk
                         adverse planning and building a pipeline of sound and well-prepared investments; and associated
                         capacity building) and (ii) disaster risk reduction and climate risk management measures
                         (forecasting, early warning and preparedness plans, etc.). Specific activities could include the
                         following:

                         •       Upgrading water resources monitoring network. This could include enhancing the network
                         for hydro-meteorological, surface and groundwater monitoring; improving the water quality and
                         pollution monitoring network; and strengthening water quality laboratories.
                         •       Improving the knowledge base. Strengthening and consolidating the water resources and
                         climate information base, including strengthening information management infrastructure and
                         practices.
                         •       Strengthening analytical capacity. Building in-house water resources assessment capacity
Public Disclosure Copy




                         within the institutions responsible for water resources management and development, and
                         strengthening the capacity for water resources investment planning through the development /
                         application of decision support tools and models (economic, financial, technical, social,
                         environmental, etc.) . This might include improved decision support tools for climate risk
                         management in river basin planning and for coordinated water infrastructure operations.
                         •       Catchment/basin Planning. Support for integrated water resources planning through the
                         preparation of consolidated catchment/basin-level water resources development and management
                         plans (building on ongoing initiatives, including National Water Resources Master Plan, Water
                         Supply and Sanitation Plans for the Coast and Nairobi, Kenya Water Sector Investment Plan, etc).
                         •       Climate risk management. Activities could include: providing technical support for
                         forecasting, early warning and preparedness plans for droughts and floods in priority areas, building
                         on the ASAL and Western Kenya CDD/Flood Mitigation projects; improving the climate knowledge
                         base, analytics, forecasting and warning systems; and scaling up instruments for climate risk
                         management (e.g. climate insurance schemes, land use planning).

                         Component 3: Support to Water Sector Institutional Reforms (US$ 15 million)

                         1.       This component aims to support: (i) enhancement and strengthening of the ongoing
                         institutional and legal reforms associated with aligning the water sector to the Const itution of Kenya
                         (2010), with a view to creating the conditions for ensuring the sector’s long-term contribution to
                         sustainable economic growth; and (ii) implementing agencies to effectively implement and manage
                         the project, including the establishment of a Project Coordination Unit that will provide for effective
                         project implementation throughout the institutional transition and beyond.

                         2.       This component would also support the institutional and legal reforms associated with the
                         forthcoming National Water Policy and Water Act 2012. To align the sector with the 2010
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Constitution of Kenya, a new National Water Policy has been prepared and is planned to be
                         implemented starting in 2012. A Water Act 2012 has been submitted to the Committee for the
                         Implementation of the Constitution. It is expected that a new institutional framework for water
                         resources management and development will be created and that the transition to this new structure
                         will take place over a period of at least three years. This component would support the establishment
                         of mechanisms and measures to ensure that the project will be successfully implemented during a
                         possibly turbulent transition period, and beyond.

                         3.       Specific activities could include: technical assistance to GoK in reforming water sector in
                         line with the mandate of the 2010 Constitution; implementation support for overall project
                         management covering planning, design, and construction supervision phases, as well as required
                         training and capacity building; support for inter-agency coordination, as well as effective reporting,
                         monitoring and evaluation; and fiduciary and safeguard management, including financial and
                         technical audits.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the              safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The exact project location is not yet known for all potential investments that would be financed under
                         the Project. Investments under consideration are sites around the Nairobi metropolitan area, the
                         Coast, and the Lake Victoria Basin. During the project preparation period, feasibility studies and
                           Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) will be undertaken for priority investments,
                           identified by the GoK in consultation with the World Bank.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The GoK has established the Environmental Management and Coordination Act (EMCA) of 1999,
                           which empowers the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) with an oversight role
                           on environmental compliance. In accordance with the EMCA, NEMA is responsible for conducting
                           annual environmental audits and carrying out due diligence on the projects that have already
                           undertaken EIAs, as well as those in the process of undertaking EIAs. MWI has been implementing
                           World Bank-funded projects and has the necessary structures in place for overseeing safeguard
                           issues. However, overall capacity for implementation of environmental and social safeguards policies
                           is still low. Inadequate capacity to execute the required social and environmental risk mitigation
                           measures could lead to high negative social and environmental impacts and undermine project
                           results.

                           To mitigate this, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement
                           Policy Framework (RPF), and a Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups Framework (VMGF) will be
                           prepared to guide project implementation and preparation of site-specific environmental and social
                           impact assessments and resettlement action plans for specific project investments. Training programs
                           will target capacity issues related to the implementation of the social and environmental management
                           plan and the resettlement plan. The World Bank team will carry out close, field-based
                           implementation support and supervision.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Zarafshan H. Khawaja (AFTCS)
                           Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS)
                           Hocine Chalal (AFTN3)
                           Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTN3)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             MWI is preparing an Environmental
                           BP 4.01                                             Management Framework (EMF) that will
                                                                               establish the environmental criteria for selecting
                                                                               investments, the detailed procedures for
                                                                               preparing the environmental assessments
                                                                               necessary for those investments, as well as the
                                                                               details of potential impacts and suggested
                                                                               mitigation measures for the kinds of activities
                                                                               envisaged by the project. As part of those
                                                                               procedures, MWI will be conducting
                                                                               prefeasibility and feasibility studies to prepare
                                                                               for water resources investment schemes for
                                                                               water supply, irrigation, flood control and small
                                                                               hydropower generation, etc. These
                                                                               prefeasibility and feasibility studies will
                                                                               determine the extent of impacts that the
                                                                 identified projects may have on the
                                                                 environment. Relevant subsequent and more
                                                                 specific environmental and social impact
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 assessments, including the corresponding
                                                                 management plans, will be undertaken for each
                                                                 specific investment, with TORs and deliverables
                                                                 reviewed by the Bank. However, it is expected
                                                                 that for at least one of the priority investments
                                                                 considered (i.e. the "first mover" investment),
                                                                 the corresponding site-specific safeguards
                                                                 instruments (including the ESIA) will be
                                                                 prepared by appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   The project location is not yet known, so any
                                                                 potential impacts on national parks, sensitive
                                                                 wetlands, or other natural habitats are not yet
                                                                 known. The completed and ongoing
                                                                 environmental studies will be consulted to
                                                                 determine whether the project will affect natural
                                                                 habitats and trigger the policy.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                TBD   The project location is not yet known. The
                                                                 completed and ongoing environmental studies
                                                                 will be consulted to determine whether the
                                                                 project will affect forests and trigger the forests
                                                                 policy.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD   As the exact investments and locations are not
                                                                 yet known, any reservoir creation or agricultural
                                                                 development in the project area is not yet
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 known, but will be determined during the
                                                                 environmental assessment.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   The project location is not yet known. The
                         BP 4.11                                 identification of specific sites as well as the
                                                                 preliminary feasibility work for those sites will
                                                                 determine if the Physical and Cultural
                                                                 Resources policy will be triggered. The Bank
                                                                 will provide technical support and training at the
                                                                 regional and national levels for addressing
                                                                 cultural issues through the EIA process and will
                                                                 ensure "chance find" procedures are in place in
                                                                 the overall ESMF for the project as well as site-
                                                                 specific EMPs.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   While the location of the investments is yet to
                                                                 be determined, it is likely that some investments
                                                                 may be in areas where there are vulnerable and
                                                                 marginalized groups. In light of this, a
                                                                 Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups
                                                                 Framework (VMGF) will be prepared in
                                                                                                                                 accordance to the World Bank’s Policy on
                                                                                                                                 Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10). A Vulnerable
                                                                                                                                 and Marginalized Group Plan (VGMP)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 consistent with the VGMF will be prepared, if
                                                                                                                                 applicable, once investments are identified.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           Although the investment location is not known
                                 4.12                                                                                            at this stage, feasibility studies for the identified
                                                                                                                                 projects will determine the extent of impacts on
                                                                                                                                 people and their land. A Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                                 Framework (RPF) will be prepared by appraisal
                                                                                                                                 and disclosed. At the level of sub-projects,
                                                                                                                                 individual RAPs will be prepared and disclosed
                                                                                                                                 based on the RPF if needed. Capacity building
                                                                                                                                 for the preparation of the needed documents and
                                                                                                                                 implementation of the RAPs will be provided
                                                                                                                                 under Component 3. A Resettlement Action
                                                                                                                                 Plan will be prepared for the "first mover"
                                                                                                                                 investment.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         Yes                           The Safety of Dams Policy is triggered because
                                                                                                                                 the project will construct multi-purpose storage
                                                                                                                                 dams for water supply, irrigation, flood control,
                                                                                                                                 etc. Feasibility studies for storage options will
                                                                                                                                 recommend safety and mitigation measures for
                                                                                                                                 the design, construction, and operational phases.
                                                                                                                                 The Team will also work with the GoK to
                                                                                                                                 establish a Panel of Experts during project
                                                                                                                                 preparation for review of issues that arise during
                                                                                                                                 the selection of specific investments.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International                                         Yes                           Subsequent phases of the project may be
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            implemented in the Lake Victoria Basin, which
                                                                                                                                 is part of the Nile River Basin and may involve
                                                                                                                                 construction of water storage. Formal
                                                                                                                                 notification would be made under the Projects
                                                                                                                                 on International Waterways Policy. The
                                                                                                                                 framework prepared to govern the selection of
                                                                                                                                 investments under the project will clearly state
                                                                                                                                 when notification in accordance with OP 7.50 is
                                                                                                                                 required. All project outputs and reports will be
                                                                                                                                 shared with and discussed by all concerned
                                                                                                                                 riparians through the Nile Basin Initiative.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 14-Jan-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             The ESMF, RFP, and VMGF will be prepared, reviewed, and disclosed by February 2013.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:     Name: Gustavo Saltiel

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 02-Sep-2012
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (SM)                  Date: 23-Aug-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
