                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC1134

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Jun-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                           Project ID:      P130544
                            Project Name:      Karnataka Urban Water Supply Modernization Project (P130544)
                            Task Team          William D. Kingdom
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          19-Apr-2013                     Estimated        09-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDU                           Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector:         Water supply (90%), Sanitation (10%)
                            Theme:          City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                   150.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      190.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                      340.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve water service quality to a continuous supply across
                           the three project cities of Hubli-Dharwad, Belgaum and Gulbarga in the state of Karnataka, through
                           the establishment of sustainable service delivery arrangements at ULB level.
                           C. Project Description
                           This follow-on project was envisaged in the original design of the earlier Bank-financed Karnataka
                           Urban Water Supply Improvement Project (KUWASIP) as a vehicle to scale up continuous water
                           supplies in the cities of Belgaum, Gulbarga and Hubli-Dhawad (combined population ~2 million).
                           KUWASIP, the recipient of a US$39.5 million loan from the World Bank and closed in March 2011,
                           demonstrated that continuous water supply was technically possible and brought multiple additional
                           benefits including:
                         a)      Universal access to house connections – regardless of income group
                         b)      Reduced abstractions of raw water - consumers less wasteful/leakage reduced
Public Disclosure Copy




                         c)      Customer willingness to pay for improved service on a volumetric charging basis
                         d)      Acceptance that the private sector was able to deliver improved service
                         e)      Improvements in health outcomes

                         The project comes at a time of change in the urban water sector in India. There is more
                         understanding of the need for autonomy, accountability and customer orientation of service providers
                         through ring fencing of their activities and governed by performance agreements. In addition
                         partnering with the private sector is becoming more widespread and has evolved from BOTs,
                         consistent with bulk water projects, to include management contracts focused on distribution systems
                         and, in Nagpur, a 25 year concession contract. Financing of water PPPs is now more varied with
                         private finance alone replaced by mixed public and private financing which not only reduces private
                         sector risks but also reduces upward pressure on tariffs. An earlier reliance on international partners
                         is now seeing the development of national operators with nine out of 12 recently awarded PPP
                         contracts having the domestic private sector as the dominant partner.

                         The request from Government of Karnataka seeks World Bank help to scale up the KUWASIP
                         experience. A number of models appear technically viable, but deciding which to adopt will be
                         determined by each ULB through extensive consultation with stakeholders, including customers and
                         their representatives; KUIDFC; as well as from market feedback. As in KUWASIP the project plans
                         to eliminate public standposts and provide house connections to low income communities. This is a
                         critical element of the project and of its likelihood of acceptability among stakeholders.

                         A project goal is to catalyze GoK’s grant financing (assumed at 50% of capital costs) to establish
                         viable ULB-level service providers which, by project end, can continue to provide the new levels of
                         service and finance urban expansion out of their own revenues. It is too early to say whether this can
                         be achieved but will provide the starting point for the financial modeling. Initial work indicates the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         continuing importance of State Finance Commission grants for sector financing in the foreseeable
                         future.

                         The project is considering to assist GoK in operationalizing the Water Council -- an entity designed
                         as part of KUWASIP project -- which is expected to play a central role in sector monitoring, capacity
                         building and tariff policy.

                         The Asian Development Bank is financing a North Karnataka Urban Sector Improvement Program
                         (US$ 440 million) to address sanitation gaps in the project cities; hence sanitation investments under
                         the Bank project are likely to be minimal or none.

                         Project Components

                         Component 1 – Service Delivery Improvements

                         Investments in assets and systems to deliver 24/7 water supply in each city. Asset investments
                         include limited bulk capacity augmentation; enhancing capacity or resilience of transmission/feeder
                         mains; treatment plant renovations/capacity enhancement; pump station upgrades; service reservoir
                         improvements; distribution network sectorization, pipeline rehabilitation/replacement; water meters
                         for bulk supplies and consumer consumption; replacement of house connections; and new
                         connections to low income households. System investments include management information
                         systems, geographic information systems, call centers, billing systems and others expected in a
                         modern utility.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2 – Capacity Building

                         Activities to develop UWSS in the State including the following indicative list:
                         a.      Operationalizing the state Water Council with support in capacity building, systems (e.g.
                         M&E) and equipment.
                         b.      Supporting KUWS&DB to undertake activities to strengthen its operations and to improve
                         service delivery and financial performance in non-project cities.
                         c.      Supporting KUIDFC to create a PPP cell and develop resources for WSS PPPs etc. (e.g.
                         standard PPP documentation and processes)
                         d.      Capacity building at ULB level e.g. training for Board Directors of ULB SPV, monitoring
                         and contract management of PPPs, and other capacity enhancements.

                         Component 3 Project Implementation Activities

                         This component of the project will finance activities to ensure efficient and effective project
                         implementation such as equipment for PMUs, consultants for technical evaluations, third party
                         monitoring, safeguards and fiduciary auditing, construction supervision, communications and others.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the             safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in the three cities of Hubli-Dharwad, Gulbarga and Belgaum in the
                         state of Karnataka in India. The cities are 2nd, 4th and 5th biggest cities of the state by population
                         and are located in the arid / semi-arid northern region of thestate. Geologically, all the three cities
                         located in the Deccan Plateau and are known for their limited water resources (both surface and sub-
                         surface). The Limited Environmental Assessment (LEA) carried out for these cities for the earlier
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project (KUWASIP) indicates no environmentally or ecologically sensitive features in the project
                         cities.

                         Considering the limited water resources in the project cities, sustainable and efficient use of water
                         supply sources would be an important aspect of environmental management to be analyzed for the
                         project. The project by virtue of the proposed water supply improvements would also lead to positive
                         improvements in the quality of water delivered to the consumers (due to reduced cross contamination
                         and leakages) and associated health improvements (due to reduced incidences of water borne
                         diseases). The issue of wastewater management also is an important aspect to be analyzed in the
                         context of improved access to water supply facilities and associated wastewater generation in the in
                         the project cities.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Finance Corporation (KUIDFC), the nodal agency for
                         developing and managing the proposed project, was also the nodal agency for the recently completed
                         KUWASIP project. KUDIFC is also managing the Bank funded Karnataka Municipal Reform
                         Project (KMRP). In addition to the above, KUIDFC has implemented two urban infrastructure
                         projects (KUDP and KUIDCEMP) and is currently implementing another Project (NKUSIP)
                         supported by ADB.
                               By carrying out necessary safeguard management activities as per the requirements of World Bank
                               and ADB, in these projects, KUIDFC has gained good capacity to implement safeguard policies of
                               international development agencies. Environmental and Social Specialists of KUIDFC, regularly
Public Disclosure Copy




                               monitor implementation of agreed safeguard plans of the projects.

                               Similarly, the project cities with the help of environmental engineers have satisfactorily implemented
                               the safeguard management activities of KUWASIP and are also implementing ADB supported
                               NKUSIP.

                               While this experience and institutional arrangements provide a positive framework for safeguard
                               management for the preparation phase of the project, these shall be further strengthened (by training),
                               enhanced (by number of staff) or appropriately modified, depending on the scale of project activities
                               and the implementation models. The exact arrangements for the safeguard management for the
                               implementation phase will be finalized during the course of project preparation.
                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Ramachandran R. Mohan (SASDS)
                               Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      Yes
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   TBD
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     TBD

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 18-Feb-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             Depending on the nature and scale of proposed improvements, implementation of Component 1
                             activities could lead to environmental management, acquisition of private land and resettlement
                             issues. However, the exact nature and extent of these impacts are not going to be known, until the
Public Disclosure Copy




                             design of various sub-component activities are completed - depending on the final choice of
                             implementation to be arrived during preparation phase. The designs are hence expected to be
                             available only during the implementation phase of the project.

                             Considering this aspect, safeguards preparation plan for the project proposes to carry out a
                             ‘Sectoral Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA)’that will (i) determine key social and
                             environmental issues associated with the proposed water supply augmentation (continuous 24 hr
                             supply) and operational activities with specific reference to the environmental and social
                             sensitivities of the project cities (ii) develop a sectoral environmental and social management plan
                             (including Resettlement Policy Framework, Entitlement Matrix and Indigenous Peoples Plan – if
                             necessary) for the project that guides the design and implementation of the project and (iii) prepare
                             an ‘Environmental Code of Practice’ that ensures sound environmental management by the agency
                             implementing the project, including the necessary environmental and social due diligence required
                             for various sub-components (in compliance with the policies of the World Bank, GOI and GOK).

                             There is a favourable social and political climate for the project in the three cities based on the
                             results of the predecessor demonstration project. There is increasing demand from communities
                             and acceptance of the approach by the political representatives. However, there needs to be high
                             degree of consultations with key stakeholders as the project may involve new models. In order to
                             ensure full participation and involvement of various stake holders in the project cities, a
                             ‘Communication and Social Intermediation Study (CSIS)’ is also being carried out by the project.
                             The study through detailed socio-economic surveys and stake holder consultations will develop a
                             ‘Communication and Social Intermediation Plan’ to be implemented by a specialized agencies /
                             NGOs during the execution of the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The terms of reference for both the SESA and SICS are being finalized by KUIDFC and the
                             consultants are expected to be in place by September, 2012. The draft report of SESA is expected
                             in January, 2013 and CSIS in March, 2013 for Bank’s review.

                             A.      Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage
                             ISDS would be prepared: February, 2013
                             B.      For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-
                             stage ISDS: NA
                             C.      Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
                             needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:       Name: William D. Kingdom

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Roselind Rajan (RSA)                                Date: 09-Jul-2012
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Ming Zhang (SM)                                     Date: 05-Jul-2012
