                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC3726

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Uganda                         Project ID:      P144102
                            Project Name:      UGANDA REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH VOUCHER PROJECT (P144102)
                            Task Team          Peter Okwero
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          01-Jul-2013                    Estimated        31-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTHE                          Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):          Population and reproductive health (70%), Health system performance (20%),
                                               HIV/AIDS (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     13.30                   Total Bank Financing:            0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                              Financing Gap:                   0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                   0.00
                              Global Partnership on Output-based Aid                                    13.30
                              Total                                                                     13.30
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objective is to increase access to skilled care among poor women
                           living in disadvantaged areas during pregnancy and delivery.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed operation would be funded by a US$ 13.3 million grant from SIDA channeled through
                           GPOBA. The The project builds on the existing voucher model derived from the previous
                         Reproductive Health Voucher Program (RHVP) which closed in March 2012. The project intends to
                         expand the Reproductive Health Voucher Program (RHVP) and build national capacity to
                         mainstream voucher management functions for RHVP services in Uganda and comprises two
Public Disclosure Copy




                         components:

                         (a) Component One - Safe Delivery. The objective of the component is to provide subsidized
                         vouchers to vulnerable and poor pregnant women, enabling their access to a package of safe delivery
                         services from contracted service providers: four antenatal visits, safe delivery and one postnatal visit
                         as well as to treatment and management of selected pregnancy related medical conditions and
                         complicated deliveries from contracted service providers. The project will largely rely on health
                         centers to provide safe delivery services.

                         (b) Component Two - Capacity Building and Project. The objective of this component is to support
                         project management functions and build national capacity to mainstream and scale up
                         implementation of the safe delivery voucher scheme in the health sector. Under the component the
                         project will finance (a) specific project management activities/functions including: voucher
                         management agency, independent verification agent, quality assurance and audit, and monitoring and
                         evaluation; and (b) capacity building activities to harmonize, mainstream and scale up voucher
                         implementation in the sector.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented through existing health facilities selected on the basis of a set and
                         approved criteria and will neither involve any civil works/construction, nor any land acquisition. The
                         interventions with environmental and social implications center on component one, which involves
                         the handling of medical products and thus contributing to increased generation of medical waste in
                         the contracted health facilities.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Ministry of Health has substantial experience in the handling of medical waste in compliance
                         with Uganda's National Environmental requirements, and experience with World Bank safeguards
                         gained from implementation of Uganda Health Systems Strengthening Project (UHSSP - P115563).
                         Environmental compliance is the responsibility of the Environmental Health Division (EHD) of the
                         Ministry of Health which is charged with executing the National Health Care Waste Management
                         Plan under the overall policy guidance of the National Environment Management Authority. The
                         National Health Care Waste Management Plan for 2009/2010 – 2011/2012 was completed and
                         disclosed under the Uganda Health Systems Strengthening Project (P115563) on April 13, 2010.

                         A USAID (AIDSTAR-One project) commissioned study report of June 2012 on Health Care Waste
                         Management in Uganda, conducted jointly with Ministry of health in 99 health facilities (12
                         hospitals, 17 Health Center IV centers, 43 HC-IIIs, and 24 HC-IIs in 18 Districts), noted that Health
                         Care Waste (HCW) generated by facilities varies from under 20 kg per day in small health centers to
                         90 kg per day in big hospitals. Of this, 30% to 40% is considered hazardous. The study further
                         identified challenges affecting HCW management and recommended measures to improve the HCW
                         management practices in Uganda. These shall be taken into consideration when drafting the Project
                         Operational Manual. The government is working on a number of measures to improve HCW
                         management: (a) a new strategy for the handling and disposal of pharmaceutical waste is under
                         preparation; (b) the infrastructure standards were revised to take into consideration measures to
                         reduce infection control; (c) installation of incinerators is underway in 40 hospitals in the country;
                           and (d) infection control guidelines including tuberculosis infection control have been developed for
                           use in the hospitals. In addition, private operators have been contracted to handle the disposal of
                           medical waste generated by private practitioners in Kampala.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Under the project, the Voucher Management Agency working under the oversight of the EHD will
                           ensure that contracted service providers properly dispose medical waste in accordance to the
                           guidelines outlined in the Project Operational Manual. The Health Care Waste Guidance Note
                           developed in previous project will be updated to reflect the new changes and included in the Project
                           Operation Manual.

                           No social safeguards are anticipated to be triggered based on the project design. The project is based
                           on the voucher model/system of service delivery. Voucher schemes are ‘provider-led',-i.e., there
                           must be facilities in the area able to provide the contracted services. The IPs in Uganda reside in
                           areas where facilities with the capability to provide comprehensive emergency obstetric services are
                           lacking, making it untenable to offer the health voucher services in areas where IPs reside. In
                           addition, the project will not require acquisition of land, relocation/displacement of land use or/and
                           persons, loss of sources of income or means of livelihood and restriction of access to legally
                           designated protected areas.

                           The ministry of Health has undertaken an evaluation of the previous phase of a similar project, which
                           has recommended a reviewed attention to PMTCT of HIV/AIDS and targeting reaching poorer
                           women. The ministry will strive to have these issues addressed in this project with lessons from other
                           projects. Deliberate attention will be required in defining the realization of these issues at conception,
                           project development, implementation including monitoring and evaluation. The ministry has the
                           required capacity to address these recommendations.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Herbert Oule (AFTN3)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Constance Nekessa-Ouma (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              The project will contribute to generation of
                           BP 4.01                                                medical waste in the contracted health facilities.
                                                                                  However based on the scope and nature of the
                                                                                  project, no Environmental Assessment is
                                                                                  envisaged. Instead, Uganda’s National Health
                                                                                  Care Waste Management Plan, which was also
                                                                                  used in another Bank funded UHSSP
                                                                                  (P115563), will be used. Specific guidance on
                                                                                  the handling and disposal of the HCW is
                                                                                  included in the draft Project Operational
                                                                                  Manual, drawing lessons from the Health Care
                                                                                  Waste Guidance Note used under a piloted
                                                                                  Uganda Reproductive Health Vouchers Program
                                                                                  financed by the German Development Bank
                                                                                                                                 (KfW) and the Global Partnership on Output-
                                                                                                                                 Based Aid (GPOBA).
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            Voucher schemes are ‘provider-led',-i.e., there
                                                                                                                                 must be facilities in the area able to provide the
                                                                                                                                 contracted services. The IPs in Uganda reside
                                                                                                                                 in areas where facilities with the capability to
                                                                                                                                 provide comprehensive emergency are lacking.
                                                                                                                                 The issue here is not about population
                                                                                                                                 characteristics but the fact that there are no
                                                                                                                                 facilities that be contracted to provide services.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Public Disclosure Copy




                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 08-May-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The project is expected to generate minimal localized medical waste related impacts, and cause no
                                      resettlement. No safeguard-related studies are anticipated under the project. The Medical Waste
                                      Guidance Note developed included in the Project Operational Manual developed using the Health
                                      Care Waste Management Plan for 2009/2010 – 2011/2012 which was completed and disclosed
                                      under the Uganda Health Systems Strengthening Project (P115563) will guide implementation of
                                      medical waste management under the project. No social safeguard related studies will be
                                      undertaken and/or anticipated.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Peter Okwero

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Olusoji O. Adeyi (SM)                                                                                                Date: 12-Jul-2013



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
