                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC5222

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                            Project ID:      P144270
                            Project Name:      China's Economic Transformation and Institutional Capacity Building
                                               (P144270)
                            Task Team          Xiaofan Liu
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       10-Sep-2013                         Estimated        18-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASPC                                Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Central government administration (71%), Sub-national government
                                               administration (29%)
                            Theme(s):          Macroeconomic management (35%), Other public sector governance (20%),
                                               Environmental policies and institutions (20%), Managing for de velopment
                                               results (20%), Social safety nets (5%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     36.70                     Total Bank Financing:         35.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      1.70
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        35.00
                              Total                                                                        36.70
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objectives of the project to deepen economic reform and the development agenda are expected to
                           be realized over the medium term and incrementally, as with the earlier projects in this series. They
                           would be achieved through: (1) Diagnostic and advisory studies in key areas of policy formulation
                         related to institutional and structural reforms tailored to address specific challenges; (2) Improving
                         civil servants’ technical and managerial abilities and skills to fortify institutional capacity; (3)
                         Promote knowledge sharing and dissemination of knowledge products between officials operating at
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the central and sub-national government levels.
                         C. Project Description
                         A. Concept
                         1. Description
                         To achieve its development objectives, the proposed project is designed to consist of two main
                         components: (a) reform facilitation and policy research, and (b) institutional capacity building and
                         knowledge sharing support.

                         (a)     Reform facilitation and policy research

                         This component will support studies/research in the prioritized reform areas and put forward policy
                         suggestions/recommendations. Seven major areas were identified at the project preparation stage
                         based on the government reform agenda: (1) Fiscal system and financial sector reform; (2) Economic
                         restructuring and proposed changes to the pattern of development; (3) Rural and agricultural sector
                         reform and development, rural-urban integration, the building of basic social protection systems and
                         poverty reduction for an increasingly mobile population; (4) Environmental protection and the
                         construction of ecologically-sensitive and ecologically-sustainable communities; (5) Reform of the
                         scientific and technological innovation system ; (6) Government administrative system reform; and
                         (7) Strengthening the formulation of medium and long term development programs.

                         Adjustments may be made on the focus areas during project implementation based on government
                         reform priorities. The project may also support some emerging policy requests, when necessary. The
                         Bank task team will meet the Central PMO on a yearly basis to review the government reform and
                         development agenda, and discuss and identify the key areas to be focused upon and subprojects to be
                         financed in the following year. The relevant government officials and researchers will be invited to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         join the discussions.

                         This component will consist of a number of sub-projects which will be selected and approved on a
                         rolling-basis during the implementation. The first batch of sub-projects will be identified and selected
                         during project preparation. Each selected sub-project should have specific and clear development
                         objectives in the context of the specific reform programs it supports, and measurable outcome
                         indicators. Activities to be financed under this component include: (i) consulting services, (ii)
                         workshops and training, and (iii) minor equipment related to these activities.

                         (b) Institutional capacity building and knowledge sharing support

                         This component will support: (i) A series of training programs for young and middle-aged civil
                         servants selected from the central and sub-national government agencies. The training courses can be
                         conducted both abroad and domestically, through various well designed short-term and long-term
                         programs. An assessment framework will be agreed to track and evaluate the results of training; (ii)
                         The construction of information systems to improve public services and the institutional capacity of
                         government agencies; (iii) knowledge sharing platform construction to disseminate knowledge
                         products, including study results and experiences produced under the project.

                         The project is to be financed with an IBRD loan (USD35 million) and counterpart funding of GOC
                           (USD1.7 million) with a 7 year implementation period. GOC's counterpart funding will be mostly in-
                           kind (e.g. staff time of counterpart team, use of premises for training, etc.). Of the funds from the
                           IBRD loan, USD25 million will be used to finance policy studies and capacity building activities at
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the central government level and USD10 million for supporting those at local government level. All
                           central government departments and governments at provincial or municipal (prefecture) levels can
                           apply for subprojects under this project. In principle, a sub-project total cost under policy research
                           component shall not exceed $500,000, while a subproject’s cost under capacity building component
                           shall not exceed $1million. The aggregate cost of goods and equipment shall be restricted.

                           Institutional and implementation arrangements

                           Project Management Office. As in previous TA projects, the MOF, through a Project Management
                           Office (PMO) already set up in its International Department, will implement the project.
                           Responsibility of overall coordination and management of project implementation is vested in the
                           Technical Assistance Division, International Department of MOF.

                           Subproject Implementation Agency. Under the overall supervision of the MOF PMO, subprojects
                           will be managed by SIAs. The MOF PMO will require each SIA to set up, as condition for
                           participating under the project, and thereafter maintain until the completion of the subproject. A SIA
                           should be headed by a qualified officer and assigned with staff in adequate numbers to be responsible
                           for subproject proposal design and its implementation.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The proposed project is a TA project and main project activities are policy research and institutional
                           capacity building. The project will be implemented in phases. The first batch will be identified and
                           appraised in project preparation.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Project Implementation Office is located in the International Department of Ministry of Finance
                           (MOF). General speaking, MOF is familiar with Bank’s safeguard policies and requirements. Before
                           this project, there have been series of similar TA projects conducted successfully and there were no
                           outstanding safeguards issues found during project implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Chongwu Sun (EASCS)
                           Jun Zeng (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             This is a TA project and environmental policy is
                           BP 4.01                                              designed as a major theme. Therefore, this
                                                                                policy would be triggered.

                                                                                The project will be implemented in phases and
                                                                                the first batch will be identified and selected
                                                                                during project preparation. And as a TA project,
                                                                                it is not expected to have civil works and
                                                                 construction activities under the project. It is
                                                                 likely to have minimal or no adverse
                                                                 environmental impacts. However, as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 environmental policy is designed as a major
                                                                 theme, in case that the policy recommendations
                                                                 might have some some indirect impact on
                                                                 environmental aspect during or after project
                                                                 implementation, the task team is advised to
                                                                 prepare the Environmental and Social
                                                                 Management Framework (ESMF) during
                                                                 project preparation as the safeguards instrument.
                                                                 Public consultation and information disclosure
                                                                 will follow OP4.01 requirements during ESMF
                                                                 preparation.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   The project will be implemented in phases and
                                                                 the first batch will be identified and selected
                                                                 during project preparation. At the PCN stage of
                                                                 the project, it is not yet known whether the
                                                                 project will support policy studies in areas that
                                                                 indigenous people communities as defined by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 the Bank’s OP4.10 are collective attached to, or
                                                                 present in or not. The project will prepare
                                                                 guidance to address the issue as part of the
                                                                 Environmental and Social Management
                                                                 Framework (ESMF) during project preparation
                                                                 as the safeguards instrument.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    TBD   Due to the nature of the project, it is not
                         4.12                                    expected that the project will support any civil
                                                                 works, or directly lead to investment in any civil
                                                                 works. Land taking is not expected. However,
                                                                 the proposed ESMF will provide guidance on
                                                                 how to address involuntary resettlement issues
                                                                 just in case land taking is needed.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International        No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                         7.60
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 10-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      As mentioned above, the project will be implemented in phases and the sub-projects will be
                                      identified and selected in a rolling-basis. While the first batch sub-projects are selected during
                                      project preparation, the EA and SA will be conducted for those studies which may have direct or
                                      indirect impacts on social and environmental aspects. The assessment (if needed) will be carried
                                      out during October 2013. Such a review and assessment will be conducted per need over project
                                      implementation period.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Xiaofan Liu

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Chorching Goh (SM)                                                                                                   Date: 12-Sep-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
