                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC5569

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Bosnia and Herzegovina           Project ID:      P108000
                            Project Name:       Sava Waterway Rehabilitation Project (P108000)
                            Task Team           Moustafa Baher El-Hefnawy
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           19-Sep-2013                      Estimated        17-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSTR                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Ports, waterways and shipping (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Infrastructure services for private sector development (67%), Regional
                                                integration (33%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     30.00                      Total Bank Financing:         30.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:                  0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   30.00
                              Local Sources of Borrowing Country                                             0.00
                              Total                                                                         30.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective is to improve the operational performance and safety
                           of commercial and leisure vessels on the Sava River, contributing to improved utilization of the river
                           ports. The project proposes to achieve this objective through the following: (i) the rehabilitation of
                           the River Sava to Class IV/Va status (tbc) between Sisak and Belgrade; (ii) targeted investments in a
                         river information and vessel tracking systems; and (iii) necessary implementation assistance and
                         institutional support.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         THE TASK MANAGER AT THE TIME OF THIS ISDS WAS MR. RICHARD MARTIN
                         HUMPHREYS. HOWEVER, DUE TO THE INTRODUCTION OF THE PORTAL, THE SYSTEM
                         NOW SHOWS THE CURRENT TASK MANAGER INSTEAD OF THE AUTHOR OF THE ISDS.
                         THE CONCEPT STAGE ISDS WAS DISCLOSED ON MAY 17, 2011.

                         The proposed investments include activities related to the enhancement of the navigability of the
                         river/waterway, together with associated potential investments in port infrastructure in the river ports.
                         Specifically, works will involve dredging of the main fairway to increase the water depth,
                         construction of bank protection work, potentially involving land take, groynes and sills, to alleviate
                         erosion and impede sedimentation in the channel, and small bridge rehabilitation/construction. In
                         addition, the waterway has a number of areas along its banks that are protected, or of special
                         scientific or environmental significance. A more detailed description of the provisional components
                         is provided in the following paragraphs:

                         (a)     Component 1: The necessary river rehabilitation works. The first component comprises the
                         necessary civil works, involving river dredging and training works, riverbank protection and where
                         necessary land acquisition, site clearance, and the placing of rock or braced blocks, or geotextile
                         material, to return the Sava River to Class Va status between Brcko and the international border with
                         Serbia at the confluence of the Drina River and to Class IV status between Brcko and the confluence
                         with the Una River at the point where the border with Croatia diverts from the Sava River.

                         (b)       Component 2: Targeted investments to improve the operational performance of the river
                         ports. The second component has two sub-components: (i) targeted investments to improve the
                         operational performance of the river ports, including, but not restricted to, Brcko port; and (ii)
                         investments to improve road and rail access in Brcko to facilitate plans to concession Brcko port in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         parallel to the Bank financed project.
                         (i)       The first sub-component provisionally includes the following: (i) the completion of works on
                         the reconstruction of the quay wall; (ii) the connection of the main rail track with tracks within the
                         port; (iii) the procurement of forklifts; and (iv) the procurement of new bucket grabs for the gantry
                         cranes. A call to procure consultants to prepare the detailed design and ESIA for the civil works was
                         published on March 7, 2011; and
                         (ii)      The second sub-component supports the proposed plans of BD Authorities to reroute the rail
                         tracks away from the city center to avoid the need for freight trains to traverse the city center. In
                         addition, approximately 2.5 km of the road access to the port needs to be asphalted. A call to
                         procure consultants to prepare the detailed design and ESIA for the civil works was published on
                         March 7, 2011.

                         (c)       Component 3: Implementation Assistance and Institutional Support. This component would
                         provide necessary project management and implementation assistance to the project implementation
                         unit. Provisionally, the following sub-components were identified for potential inclusion in the
                         project: (i) the procurement of a qualified firm to supervise the civil works in the waterway, and for
                         the access rail and road links in Brcko; (ii) the procurement of a qualified firm to supervise the
                         safeguard aspects for the works in the waterway, and for the access rail and road links in Brcko; and
                         (iii) the procurement of consultants to prepare bidding documents to manage and maintain the
                         waterway using an output and performance based approach after the project.
                           The Project also involves the establishment and administration by the Bank of a free standing
                           Recipient-Executed Trust Fund (RETF) to manage the EU Instrument for Pre-Accession (IPA) Grant
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Monies. These monies will be used to undertake the necessary preparatory works for the Sava
                           Waterways Rehabilitation Project in BiH including the de-mining of the south bank of the Sava
                           River, between Belgrade and Brcko, and the preparation of a detailed design for the rehabilitation
                           works in the waterway, and the associated Environmental Impact Assessment (ESIA). The RETF
                           includes the following components and related activities:
                           (i)     Component 1 - The preparation of the detailed design, tender documents and the
                           Environmental and Social Impact Assessment, Environmental Social Management Plan (ESIA/
                           ESMP) for the rehabilitation works to return the Sava River to Class V a status between the port of
                           Brcko and the confluence of the Sava River with the Danube River in Belgrade;
                           (ii)    Component 2 - the demining of the south bank of the Sava River in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
                           between the confluence with the Una River and the Drina River, and the removal of any UXO in the
                           waterway; and
                           (iii)   Component 3 - the hiring the international demining expert to supervise the component.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The location of the project is the basin of the River Sava in Bosnia and Herzegovina, between the
                           confluence of the River Sava with the River Danube at Belgrade, and the confluence of the River
                           Sava and the River Una in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The broader program extends to the port of
                           Sisak in Croatia.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Borrower is familiar with the Bank safeguard policies triggered by this project given its
                           experience developed during preparation and implementation of similar Bank-financed projects. The
                           environmental and social aspects related to the proposed new investments will be implemented under
                           the supervision of an assigned specialist within the respective PMU. Civil works contracts for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           specific port rehabilitation investments will include provisions on how to address environmental and
                           social mitigation and monitoring aspects during works. The project environmental and social
                           management plan will recommend the appropriate institutions responsible to implement the related
                           environmental and social aspects.

                           The demining activities and removal of UXO and other related mine debris is the responsibility of
                           the Demining Commission at the state level (as per the BiH Demining Law), which has the BH
                           Mining Action Center (BHMAC) as its technical body. BH MAC will be acting, under the MCT, as
                           the implementing unit for the demining operations to be funded from the IPA grant. All mining
                           operations if BiH are following Standard Operational Procedures (SOP) that are built on the
                           fundamentals of International Standards for Mine Clearance Operations (IMAS). These include
                           adequate guidance on technical and safety measures (as well as training) that are implemented at
                           each site during all stages requested for demining activities (site survey, land release, mine clearance
                           and mine stockpile destruction).
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           I. U. B. Reddy (SASDS)
                           Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (EASER)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                         Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          The project is proposed as category A for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                     environmental assessment purposes given the
                                                                     specific rehabilitation infrastructure works
                                                                     related to Components 1 and 2. All EIA will be
                                                                     undertaken by parties independentof the design
                                                                     or works. The Client is finalizing theapproval
                                                                     process for the project EIA including an EMP
                                                                     related to the specific infrastructure investments
                                                                     proposed on the river sector
                                                                     between Brcko (BiH) and Sisak (Croatia) in
                                                                     BiH This EIA was prepared by Croatian
                                                                     authorities and reviewed by the EU experts/
                                                                     consultants and was generally approved with
                                                                     some recommendations to be done in the further
                                                                     phases. It also awaits Bank review and approval
                                                                     in line with OP 4.01. The EIA with EMP for the
                                                                     sector Bel grade-Brcko will be prepared as part
                                                                     of the IPA project and will meet the
                                                                     requirements of the national legislation and well
                                                                     as the EU and World Bank environmental and
                                                                     social provisions. Furthermore, an ESA with
                                                                     ESMP will be developed by Client for the
                                                                     targeted investments under Component 2 that
                                                                     will improve specific infrastructure related to
                                                                     river ports operational performance (e.g.,
                                                                     reconstruction of a quay wall and rail tracks
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     connection between city and port). For the de-
                                                                     mining activities funded by the RETF, the
                                                                     IMAS including specific measures for
                                                                     environment protection and safety and
                                                                     occupational health procedures will be attached
                                                                     to the Contractors technical specifications and
                                                                     implemented and monitored at the site. These
                                                                     international standard measures do meet the OP
                                                                     4.01 requirements. The actual demining
                                                                     operations will be supervised by an
                                                                     International Consultant during the entire
                                                                     duration of works and will provide assessment
                                                                     of activities progress as well as of
                                                                     implementation and application of
                                                                     environmental protection measures at site in line
                                                                     with IMAS provisions. Finally, the draft ToRs
                                                                     for the ESIA funded by the RETF will be
                                                                     disclosed in Infoshop and in-country prior to
                                                                     Appraisal to meet the OP 4.01 document
                                                                     disclosure requirement.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   The waterway has a number of areas along its
                                                                 banks that are protected, or of special scientific
                                                                 or environmental significance. The policy is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 triggered since project interventions including
                                                                 dredging, river banks rehabilitation, and
                                                                 possibly land clearing might be located in the
                                                                 proximity of protected areas including Ramsar
                                                                 sites, for which provisions of appropriate
                                                                 conservation and mitigation measures will be
                                                                 necessary during works.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The preliminary EIA (FS stage) has determined
                         BP 4.11                                 the possibility of archeological chance finds in
                                                                 the Sava riverbeds or river banks areas.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   A Social Assessment will be undertaken to
                         4.12                                    determine the social issues and local context
                                                                 within which the project is being implemented.
                                                                 This policy is triggered as the project activities
                                                                 anticipate potential land acquisition in the
                                                                 context of the river correction works, and the
                                                                 works in Brcko town. The team will support the
                                                                 client to prepare Resettlement and /or Land
                                                                 Acquisition Action Plan and Socio-Economic
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Census/Survey and disclosed in country and in
                                                                 the Infoshop.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International         Yes   The policy is triggered since the Sava River is
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                    an International waterway, passing through 4
                                                                 riparian countries, and is linked hydrologically
                                                                 to the Black Sea basin and the Danube sub-
                                                                 basin. As a follow-up to consultations with
                                                                 LEGEC and LEGEM, the team requested the
                                                                 Sava River Commission to inform these
                                                                 countries about the project goals (including the
                                                                 de-mining activities) during the 3rd Joint
                                                                 Statement Implementation Meeting that will be
                                                                 held in Vienna in April 2011. A copy of the
                                                                 final announcement of this meeting, the agenda,
                                                                 and relevant presentation and the Minutes of the
                                                                 discussions will be sent for Bank's records in
                                                                 order to meet the OP 7.50.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before
                                      appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and
                                      language that are accessible to Project Affected People. The final ESIA and the Resettlement
                                      Policy Framework would be expected to be commissioned and are expected to be available by the
                                      scheduled Appraisal date of September 15, 2012. The Bank's policy requires that the specific
                                      studies and expected timeline should be specified during the PAD-stage and recorded in the ISDS.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Moustafa Baher El-Hefnawy

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Juan Gaviria (SM)                                                                                                    Date: 04-Sep-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
