                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC3367

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kosovo                          Project ID:      P143055
                            Project Name:      Kosovo Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Project (P143055)
                            Task Team          Jasneet Singh
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Oct-2013                     Estimated        27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSEG                           Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (78%), Other Renewable Energy (22%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (80%), Regulation and competition policy (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        34.00                Total Bank Financing:       32.50
                            Total Cofinancing:                              Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           1.50
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 32.50
                              Total                                                                       34.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objectives are to: (i) reduce energy consumption in central government-
                           owned buildings; and (ii) enhance the policy and regulatory environment for energy efficiency and
                           renewable energy development.

                           To achieve these PDOs, the proposed project will provide:
                           (i) investment finance for EE projects in all eligible central government-owned buildings;
                           (ii) demonstrations on the commercial viability and program models for EE investments in municipal
                         buildings and RE systems, such as solar water heating, for heating in select public buildings;
                         (iii) support to develop a robust policy and regulatory framework which will help attract investments
                         in and scale-up EE and RE; and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (iv) support for project implementation.
                         C. Project Description
                         A US$32.5 million IDA credit will be provided to the GOK to provide the necessary investment
                         financing and policy support in order to meet the above PDOs. Given the nascent state of the market
                         in Kosovo today, it is proposed that the investment component focus onthe public sector, which can
                         demonstrate the benefits of EE/RE and help build the demand for related products and services. This
                         will help demonstrate commercial viability and enhance awareness of the public and other
                         stakeholders about the attractiveness of such investments, establish institutional capacity in the
                         government agencies and suppliers, and catalyze the supply chain for necessary goods and services.
                         The common ownership would also allow the project to be done at a greater scale than typical
                         market-based schemes, thereby creating more consistent and stable demand while helping to foster
                         various business models, such as energy service companies (ESCOs). In order to realize the PDOs,
                         four components will be carried out. These include: (i) EE investments in public buildings; (ii) RE
                         investments in public buildings; (iii) RE and EE policy and regulatory support, as well as related RE
                         resource assessments; and (iv) project implementation support. Details are provided below.

                         Component 1: Energy efficiency investments in public buildings (est. cost US$22.5 million). About
                         47.5% of Kosovo’s energy use is attributed to the buildings sector, with EE potential of 30-40% or
                         about 250 GWh/year. Although the total share of energy saving potential of municipal and central
                         public buildings is low (8%) in comparison with the residential and commercial sectors, public
                         buildings at present provide the best opportunities for achieving real energy savings because in many
                         cases they already meet the required comfort levels and can be implemented at a larger scale.
                         Eligibility criteria would be developed during project preparation. Key EE measures expected to be
                         identified include building envelope, windows, lighting, space and water heating, metering and
                         controls, fuel switching (including new connections to district heating where viable, switching will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         be to cleaner fuels, such as wood pellets), cooling, pumps/fans, and improved operations and
                         maintenance practices. Detailed eligibility criteria will be developed during project preparation.

                         Two sub-components are envisaged for this component. These include:
                         (a)      EE investments in central government buildings (est. US$18 million). There are some 330
                         centrally-owned government buildings across the country with more than 180,000 m2 of floor area.
                         Centrally owned buildings span several ministries, with the main users being Education, Health,
                         Justice and Culture. All these buildings have very high energy use and most meet or exceed norms
                         for internal comfort levels; estimates show administrative buildings consume 262 kWh/m2 and
                         hospitals 414 kWh/m2, significantly higher than European levels and show EE potential over 40%.
                         Further, reducing energy use in buildings supports the GOK’s obligation based on the Law on
                         Energy Efficiency and the Administrative Instruction on Energy Auditing and the new EU EE
                         Directive. Under this subcomponent, it is proposed to finance all eligible EE investments in central
                         government buildings—about 250 buildings, thereby significantly reducing energy use and public
                         expenditures in heating and power services.
                         (b)      Pilot EE investment program for municipalities (est. US$4.5 million). Municipal public
                         buildings account for 1,480 buildings, representing some 2.36 million m2, and include mainly local
                         elementary and high schools, kindergartens, family health centers, and municipal government
                         buildings. Recent study estimates that annual consumption of municipal family health centers,
                         schools and other administrative buildings can save about 32%. The Law on Energy Efficiency
                         foresees specific engagement in EE improvements at the municipal level through Municipal Energy
                         Efficiency Action Plans. A key deficiency is a lack of financing, due to issues of municipal
                         creditworthiness, restrictions on municipal debt and lack of viable financing mechanism for EE
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improvements. Until now, donors have either supported municipal EE programs through grants,
                         which have targeted municipalities in greatest need but are not sustainable, or only financed the most
                         creditworthy municipalities, leaving many municipalities in the “middle market? unserved.
                         Therefore, a pilot municipal EE financing program would be designed and implemented to test
                         schemes to accelerate the transition to more commercial financing, such as requirements for partial
                         co-financing, partial payments to contractors based on actual energy savings, and mechanisms to
                         allow the funds to revolve. This may involve competitive calls for municipal proposals for grants to
                         support building and street lighting improvements with some co-financing requirement, or possibly a
                         budgetary mechanism to recover part of the funds. Use of simplified ESCO contracts may also be
                         considered under this component, where by a portion of the final contractor payment would be based
                         on achieving agreed levels of energy savings, thereby demonstrating techniques to pass on some of
                         the project risks to the private sector. This component would test various schemes in order to help
                         MED formulate a broader program to address the full municipal market.

                         Component 2: Renewable energy investments (est. US$5 million). The RE market in Kosovo is very
                         underdeveloped, with only about 2% of power generation coming from RE technologies, mostly
                         hydro. Under the current national plans, the private sector would lead the development of RE
                         generation and the government has developed a series of policy and regulatory mechanisms (e.g.,
                         feed-in tariffs) to incentivize such investments. There is also significant potential to incorporate more
                         RE applications in space and water heating, since current practices rely on fossil fuels, such as lignite
                         and oil, electricity, or unsustainable biomass. Water heating, for example, represents 15% of heating
                         demand and is primarily done today using electricity, which is inefficient. This component would
                         promote the use of RE in Kosovo and demonstrate the market maturity of such technologies while
                         catalyzing local manufacturing and supply chains. RE systems, such as solar water heating (SWH),
                         geothermal heat pumps, sustainable biomass (e.g., wood pellets), could significantly contribute to
                         meeting this demand in a more cost-effective and sustainable way, but to date these technologies
Public Disclosure Copy




                         have not been sufficiently developed and promoted. SWH is identified as having the highest energy
                         savings potential in the 2010-2012 NEEAP and a Bank-funded market assessment is now ongoing.
                         RE system feasibility can be identified and assessed as part of the energy audit studies conducted to
                         support investments in central government buildings under Component 1 and would be fully
                         complementary. Installation of a critical mass of systems and dissemination of the costs and benefits
                         (to be supported under Component 4) would help further develop this market.

                         Component 3: Policy and regulatory support for RE/EE (est. US$3.0 million). The Law on Energy
                         Efficiency, first and second NEEAPs, RE Action Plan and other packages approved by GOK provide
                         a strong base for sustainable energy development within Kosovo. Now, greater effort is needed to
                         develop the necessary secondary legislation, regulations, rulebooks and other aspects to allow
                         implementation to take place, while conforming with EU guidelines and helping them to meet their
                         obligations under the Energy Community Treaty. In addition, reliable and complete resource data
                         does not exist in some sectors which has served to inhibit investments. Under this component, two
                         subcomponents are envisaged:
                         (a)      Support to ERO for RE development. In order to meet Kosovo’s stated RE goals, the further
                         development of the regulatory regime is needed. Monitoring of existing RE licenses, assessment and
                         revisions to RE FITs, FIT tenors, grid balancing costs, curtailment rules, financial modeling related
                         to RE generation impacts on retail tariffs, stakeholder roundtables on RE development , etc. as well
                         as training for ERO staff.
                         (b)      Support to MED for EE secondary legislation and RE resource assessments. While the EE
                         Law is in place, secondary legislation remains underdeveloped. Under this subcomponent, support
                         will be provided to MED to develop a sustainable municipal EE financing scheme (e.g., revolving
Public Disclosure Copy




                         EE fund) to scale-up the municipal EE pilot program under Component 1b. Other activities which
                         may be supported include the development of rulebooks for building codes and certificate s to be in
                         line with EU Directives (in cooperation with MESP which is responsible for construction codes),
                         relevant home owner association (HOA) legislation to enable borrowing for EE, labeling and
                         standards schemes, etc. For RE development, a key impediment has been the lack of complete and
                         reliable resource data. Select RE assessments and feasibility studies would be supported in areas not
                         covered by other donors and consistent with the RE development plan for Kosovo (e.g., solar,
                         geothermal) as well as dissemination of the analyses to relevant stakeholders.

                         Component 4: Project implementation support (est. US$2 million). The project will also support the
                         main implementing agency, KEEA, to help ensure effective project implementation of the other three
                         components. This would include: (i) creation of a project implementation unit (PIU) with in KEEA to
                         carryout Components 1-3, including support for procurement, financial management, technical
                         oversight, project monitoring and reporting; (ii) technical studies and supervision, including
                         conducting of building energy audits, development of detailed designs and bidding documents,
                         construction supervision, project commissioning, etc.; and (iii) targeted training of design firms,
                         construction companies and other EE/RE service providers and information dissemination related to
                         early project impacts and results; and (iv) training of KEEA and PIU staff to ensure effective
                         implementation of the project and sustainability of project activities and goals.

                         Grant funding in the amount of €700,000 has been mobilized from the Western Balkans Investment
                         Framework (WBIF) to help analyze the investment needs and potential of the central government
                         buildings. Specific outputs would include an update to the national public building stock inventory
                         and completion of 200 baseline energy assessments in government buildings (for investments in
                         Years 1-3).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Environmental impacts are foreseen to be positive due to the energy and carbon savings to be
                         achieved under the project. Project locations will be throughout Kosovo as the central and municipal
                         buildings.

                         The following environmental impacts may be relevant for this operation: asbestos which may be
                         present in some existing public buildings and mercury which may be both in old and new (efficient)
                         fluorescent lamps to be changed under the project. Asbestos is inert, but toxic during inhalation;
                         removal and handling by qualified and licensed contractors should be sufficient to avoid this, but
                         there may need to be an interim storage facility where appropriately packaged asbestos can be stored.

                         Regarding mercury, under EU legislation, the cap of mercury content in CFLs is 5 mg (if it is higher
                         than 5 mg per bulb, the mercury content would need to be restricted in line with Directive 2002/95/
                         EC "restriction of use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment"), so this
                         is expected to be automatically regulated. As Kosovo is in EU accession process, most of the
                         legislation is already harmonized or will be harmonized shortly with all EU legislation.

                         The WBIF which will analyze the investment needs and potential of the central government
                         buildings and help develop the implementation plan for the project will also include an analysis of
                           estimates of quantity asbestos presence in the buildings and provide information on good
                           international practice regarding removal and handling of asbestos as well as handling, packaging and
                           collection points for CFLs. It will also provide an indication whether there is a risk for presence of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           lead-based paints

                           There is also no proper permanent facility or interim storage facility operational in Kosovo which
                           could accept and properly store fluorescent lamps or service points where consumers can bring them.
                           Final disposal options for hazardous waste (including asbestos and fluorescent lamps) are outside the
                           scope of this operation. However, some options for interim storage together with necessary training,
                           licensing support (for contractors removing the asbestos) and public awareness for proper CFLs
                           discharge points (at municipalities or with the retail points of CFLs) and handling and storage
                           requirements will be explored.

                           An Environmental Management Framework will be prepared for all components under the Project.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           An Environmental Management Checklist will be developed for the energy efficiency component on
                           the basis of similar checklists for other Projects in the region. Safeguard capacity will be
                           strengthened in the PIU.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Katelijn Van den Berg (ECSEN)
                           Bekim Imeri (ECSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              An Environmental Management Framework for
                           BP 4.01                                              all components of the Project will be prepared.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     TBD              While not to be expected, it will be checked
                           BP 4.11                                              during preparation if any of the buildings to be
                                                                                renovated would be a historic building.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                           Projects on International        No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                           7.60
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The safeguard related study is the Environmental Management Framework; this document will be
                                      ready by appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Jasneet Singh

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Benoit Paul Blarel (SM)                                                                                              Date: 11-Jul-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
