                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSA1195
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Aug-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Vietnam                                 Project ID:                      P113151
                              Project Name:                  Vietnam Industrial Pollution Management Project (P113151)
                              Task Team Leader:              Jiang Ru
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 13-Jul-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:            25-Oct-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 EASVS                                   Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        Other industry (100%)
                              Theme:                         Pollution management and environmental health (100%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                  Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                  BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                        8.85
                                  International Development Association (IDA)                                                                              50.00
                                  Total                                                                                                                    58.85
                              Environmental Category:        A - Full Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The project development objective is to improve compliance with industrial wastewater treatment regulations in four of the most industrialized
                              provinces in Vietnam.

                              3. Project Description

                              Component 1: Environmental Policy, Monitoring and Enforcement. This will comprise three subcomponents: (a) Policy Review and Revision; (b)
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Environmental Monitoring and Enforcement; and (c) Information Disclosure and Public Participation. Subcomponent (a) will provide support for a
                              comprehensive review of the Recipient's legal and regulatory framework on pollution management, including reviewing and revising laws,
                              regulations, and other legal documents at central and provincial levels. Subcomponent (b) will support the development of environmental
                              monitoring infrastructure and the improvement in environmental enforcement activities, including: (i) acquisition of testing laboratory equipment,
                              standard samples, monitoring equipment, protection gears, and vehicles; (ii) acquisition and installation of automatic water quality monitoring
                              stations; (iii) monitoring of surface water quality, IZ wastewater discharge, and inspection and enforcement; and (iv) development and upgrade of
                              the environmental monitoring information management systems of MONRE and the Project Provinces. Finally, Subcomponent (c) will support the
                              development of an industrial pollution information disclosure system, including: (i) development of an environmental performance rating
                              methodology; (ii) disclosure of environmental monitoring, enforcement results, and public complaint records on a website; (iii) maintenance of close
                              communication with Industrial Zone developers to enable them to understand the rating system and ways to improve their ratings; (iv) disclosure of
                              final performance ratings through various media outlets; (v) awareness raising activities and dissemination of relevant informational materials; and
                              (vi) facilitation of communication with various media outlets.

                              Component 2: Performance-based CETP (Centralized Effluent Treatment Plant) financing. This component will provide performance-based sub-
                              loans to finance the construction of new CETPs, the expansion of existing CETPs, and the improvement of other relevant infrastructure of
                              industrial wastewater management in the Industrial Zones (IZs) of the Project Provinces. To qualify for such financing, IZ Developers (IZDs) will be
                              required to meet robust design criteria and to adopt improved technical specifications. Performance-based disbursements will be subject to
                              satisfactory quality of construction as assessed by VEPF (90% of loan) and a formal commitment letter by the IZD to meet compliance standards
                              (final 10% of loan). Recognizing that traditional CETP financing (either concessional or commercial) have focused solely on CETP construction but
                              paid little attention to actual performance of CETPs, this component uses performance-based disbursement to incentivize the IZDs to comply with
                              environmental regulations during the operation phase. Failure to do so will result in reductions in the loan repayment term if discharge violations
                              occur. Immediate full repayment will be required if three violations occur. Together with improved enforcement pressure and improved technical
                              capacity at IZDs, this performance-based concessional financing is expected to improve wastewater compliance of project financed IZs.

                              There appears to be a strong demand from IZDs with a total of 13 expressing interest in accessing finance through the project. Proposals for Chau
                              Duc IZ in BR-VT and Nhon Trach III IZ in Dong Nai are the most advanced and have been appraised and accepted for the first year of project
                              financing.

                              Component 3: Implementation Support. Through three subcomponents - (a) capacity building; (b) technical assistance (TA); and (c) project
                              management, this Component will support project beneficiaries to properly implement project activities. Subcomponent (a) Capacity Building will
                              support: (i) facilitation of training on, among other things, environmental management, surface water quality monitoring, CETP operation and
                              maintenance, and environmental information disclosure and public participation; (ii) facilitation of stakeholder consultation workshops; and (iii)

                                                                                                                                                                       Page 1 of 6
                         participation in international events on industrial pollution management, international study tours, and domestic sturdy tours. Subcomponent (b)
                         Technical Assistance will support the improvement of knowledge on sound industrial pollution management in the Project's river basin context,
                         including: (i) development of technical manuals; (ii) identification and demonstration of environmental management models with effective
                         economic, administrative and technological instruments; (iii) development of strategies for sustainable IZ development; (iv) establishment of site
                         assessment and remediation strategies for relocation of Industrial Zones; (v) institutional capacity assessment of the Nhue-Day River Basin and
                         Dong Nai River Basin within the scope of the Project, with a focus on the Project Provinces; (vi) development of CETP operation and maintenance
                         manuals; (vii) strengthening of the capacity of VEPF to perform technical and financial appraisal of CETP proposals, verify relevant performance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         targets, and manage relevant credit risks; and (viii) strengthening of the capacity of IZ developers to design and operate CETPs in a proper
                         manner. Finally Subcomponent (c) Project Management will support the Project management and implementation, including: (i) monitoring and
                         evaluation activities; and (ii) Incremental Operating Costs for the Project Management Units.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The four participating project provinces were selected from the two most polluted river basins of Vietnam: Ha Nam, Nam Dinh in the Nue Day River
                         Basin, and Dong Nai and Ba Ria-Vung Tau (BRVT) in the Dong Nai River Basin. These river basins and the industrial zones that are located in
                         them were extensively studied in an analytical report completed in 2010 and which served as input to project identification (Industrial Wastewater
                         Management in River Basins Nhue-Day and Dong Nai).

                         Industrial park development in the north is more recent and in most industrial zones wastewater treatment facilities have yet to be build. Industrial
                         parks in the south have for the most part treatment facilities built or under construction but many do not operate well or do not operate at all.

                         Data on the actual water quality of the two rivers are difficult to obtain as there is not a well operating monitoring system in place. The data that are
                         available do show that these are likely the two most polluted rivers in Vietnam with water quality that contravenes national standards for BOD,
                         COD, and many other parameters. Industrial zones are contributors to the pollution of these rivers but much of the water pollution in both the north
                         and south originates from domestic sewage sources.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Douglas J. Graham (EASVS)
                         Pilar Larreamendy (EASVS)
                         Tuan Anh Le (EASVS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes              The Project does not support the creation of new industrial zones nor will result in
                                                                                           increase of wastewater effluent or CETP sludge production above and beyond
                                                                                           what is already being emitted or is already planned and approved. OP 4.01 on
                                                                                           Environmental Assessment is nevertheless triggered under this project because of
                                                                                           impacts of wastewater effluents, sludge from the operation of the CETPs, and
                                                                                           construction impacts of AMSs and CETPs. The net environmental impacts are
                                                                                           positive.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           To ensure compliance with World Bank safeguards requirements, the Borrower
                                                                                           has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                                                                                           which has laid out clearly the procedures for screening of potential environmental
                                                                                           impacts and reviewing existing EIAs if available, for preparing CETP EIAs, for
                                                                                           addressing institutional arrangements, capacity building needs, monitoring and
                                                                                           reporting, and review and clearance procedures. Following the ESMF, each
                                                                                           participating IZ will prepare a CETP EIA. The EIA will include an environmental
                                                                                           management plan (EMP) including detailed mitigation measures. For minor
                                                                                           environmental impacts from construction activities, the borrower will follow the
                                                                                           ESMF to develop simple environmental codes of practice (ECOPs) to be followed
                                                                                           by all construction contractors.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      No               All project-financed construction will take place exclusively on the ground of IZs so
                                                                                           there will be no impacts on terrestrial natural habitats. No significant impacts on
                                                                                           aquatic habitats are expected as the project interventions will serve to improve the
                                                                                           quality of industrial wastewater discharges into nearby surface waters as
                                                                                           compared to the discharges that might have occurred in the absence of the
                                                                                           project. Following the ESMF, EIAs specific to each CETP investment will also
                                                                                           ensure that no natural habitats are being significantly impacted by any discharges
                                                                                           from IZs supported by the project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                               No               The project will not involve any financing of or involvement in forested areas or
                                                                                           plantations so this policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                          No               This OP is not triggered as no pesticides of any kind will be procured or used
                                                                                           under the project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11           No               This OP is not triggered as there are no known physical cultural resources at
                                                                                           project sites. As a standard practice, the ESMF includes a chance find procedure.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                    No               A screening for presence of IPs in the project's impact zone was carried out by the
                                                                                           Recipient and the Bank and it was confirmed that this is not the case and the
                                                                                           policy is not triggered.




                                                                                                                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              Yes              Although the project investments will not result in any new or additional involuntary
                                                                                                 resettlement, the OP 4.12 is triggered because the creation of some of the project-
                                                                                                 supported IZs have resulted in involuntary resettlement. At all project-supported
                                                                                                 IZs the involuntary resettlement process will need to have been significantly
                                                                                                 advanced at the time of project identification in May 2010. Due diligence review of
                                                                                                 the two first year IZs confirmed that they had fully complied with the government's
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 regulations, and there were no legacy issues pending to be solved. During
                                                                                                 implementation, the borrower will ensure that following the ESMF proper screening
                                                                                                 be carried out and reported for the Bank's due diligence review.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        No               The project does not involve construction of any dams and is not dependent on
                                                                                                 any reservoir area upstream.
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP        No               This policy is not triggered because the rivers to which the project-supported
                               7.50                                                              CETPs would discharge effluents are not connected to any international
                                                                                                 waterways.
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60            No               No part of the project will take place on any disputed territory.


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any potential l arge scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  Environment: The Project does not support the creation of new industrial zones nor will result in increase of wastewater effluent or CETP
                                 sludge production above and beyond what is already being emitted or is already planned and approved. The targeted IZs currently have no
                                 CETPs or under-capacity or intermittently functioning plants so as a result of the project interventions, they will be releasing into the
                                 environment wastewater effluent that will be of higher quality compared to a scenario without the project. There will be improved control over
                                 disposal of sludge. OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment is nevertheless triggered under this project because of impacts of wastewater
                                 effluents, sludge from the operation of the CETPs, and construction impacts of AMSs and CETPs. The net environmental impacts are positive.

                                 Minor environmental impacts can be expected from construction activities of monitoring stations, which will each have areas of about 10-20 m2,
                                 and of CETPs located within the selected IZs. For the construction impacts, both for CETPs and for AMSs, the borrower proposes simple
                                 environmental codes of practice (ECOPs) to be followed by all construction contractors. The ECOPs are included in the ESMF.

                                 The potential impacts of the wastewater effluent from the CETPs need to be assessed and mitigated. The operating capacity of the CETPs to
                                 be supported under the project will all be under 10,000 m3/day so they are small to medium-sized industrial CETPs. The wastewater effluent
                                 will be discharged into nearby watercourses. The effluents will have to respect relevant Vietnamese wastewater quality regulations which
                                 specify standards appropriate to the prevailing quality and water use of the receiving body. The standards to be followed are consistent with the
                                 corresponding standards of the World Bank Group's Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) Standards. The project will need to assess if
                                 there are sensitive receptors near the outfalls which could potentially be affected by downstream impacts and ensure appropriate mitigation
                                 measures.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 During the operation of the CETPs to be supported by the project, sludge will be produced and there are potential impacts related to sludge
                                 handling and disposal. In some cases the sludge could be contaminated but high levels of contamination are not foreseen because individual
                                 industries in each industrial zone are required to have their own pre-treatment systems before discharging wastewater effluent to the CETP.

                                 Social: The Indigenous Peoples Policy OP 4.10 is not triggered, because the project scoping confirmed that there are no ethnic minority
                                 peoples that could be potentially affected or benefited in the area of the project investments. During project preparation, the scoping of the
                                 zones proposed for the project investments confirmed that there are not ethnic minorities in these sites which, as per the policy, have the
                                 following characteristics: (i) self-identify as members of a distinct indigenous cultural group and recognition of this identity by others; (ii)
                                 collective attachment to geographically distinct habitats or ancestral territories in the project area and to the natural resources in these habitats
                                 and territories; (iii) customary cultural, social, economic, social or political institutions that are separate from those of the dominant society and
                                 culture; and (iv) speak an indigenous language, different from the official language of the country or region.

                                 The Bank's OP/ 4.12 is triggered by Component 2 financing of CETPs. For Component 1, seventeen automatic monitoring stations (AMSs) will
                                 be installed in four provinces, for conducting on-line and continuous monitoring of water quality in various rivers. The land to be used for these
                                 investments will be in all cases available public land or the facilities will be installed within public buildings. Therefore, for this component there
                                 is no associated involuntary resettlement and the project will not invest in any AMS which is not to be installed on available public land or in a
                                 public building, a condition included as part of the project's operational manual.

                                 CETP construction and operation to be supported under Component 2 will take place within IZs. In Vietnam, the process of creating an IZ
                                 typically involves land clearance. When an IZ is planned, land clearance following Government norms and regulation is carried out, but
                                 compensation usually would take place over a number of years. Because of the long period of time required to develop an IZ having industries
                                 in operation, IZs are typically developed in phases. Correspondingly, many IZs develop CETPs in phases, depending on the scale of activities
                                 within the IZ which requires expansion of existing CETP facilities over time. An IZ may have long-term plans for several CETPs, servicing
                                 different parts of the IZ as they are cleared and occupied by industries.

                                 For Component 2, CETP sub-project investments will thus take place on land that was acquired using the Government of Vietnam's eminent
                                 domain for the creation of Industrial Zones (IZ). In all cases, involuntary resettlement will have been completed or substantially completed by
                                 the time of project identification. Although the involuntary resettlement in the IZs selected for project investments was not caused by or
                                 attributable to the project, the policy is triggered because in some cases IZs will have minor activities related to involuntary resettlement on-
                                 going at the time of IZs' loan appraisal submission procedures.


                                                                                                                                                                             Page 3 of 6
                           There are no potential large-scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts anticipated from the CETP projects as known at the time of Appraisal.
                           The identity of all the IZs to be supported under the project, and therefore the nature and identity of industries present in the IZ and potentially
                           connected to the CETP cannot be known. As a precautionary measure, the project is thus classified as a Category "A" project. Individual CETP
                           subprojects during project implementation would be classified as equivalent to Category A or B; the preparation of appropriate safeguard
                           instruments is detailed in the ESMF.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                            No indirect, cumulative, or long-term impacts, other than positive impacts, are expected from this project. The positive impacts are less
Public Disclosure Copy




                           polluted effluents, better water quality monitoring, and better quality of rivers in the targeted watersheds.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                             The objective of the project is ultimately to improve the wastewater effluent quality from industrial zones and in terms of physical infrastructure
                           investments; there is no alternative to that of improving the functioning of centralized effluent treatment plants. Alternative technologies will be
                           carefully considered at the time of CETP design; the project includes technical assistance packages to do this.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                            Environment: For the minor construction impacts, both for CETPs and for monitoring stations, the borrower proposes simple environmental
                           codes of practice (ECOPs) to be followed by all construction contractors.

                           Before detailing the Borrower's plans with regard to environmental safeguards, as background information it should be noted that environmental
                           regulations in Vietnam require that for every industrial zone the proponent must carry out an environmental impact assessment (EIA), a
                           prerequisite for the IZ operating license. An EIA thus exists for every IZ considered for this project. These EIAs cover the construction and
                           operation of CETPs but at the time of preparation of the EIAs, in many cases the CETPs were only in early design phases.

                           Environmental regulations in Vietnam as of 2011 require additionally that the proponent of a CETP carry out a CETP-specific EIA. For CETPs
                           with a capacity greater than 5000 m3/day, the approval of the EIA is by MONRE; for those less than 5000 m3/day the approval is at the level of
                           the provincial DONRE. Approval of the CETP-specific EIA is a requirement for the licensing of the CETP and its construction. In addition, before
                           the CETP actually comes into full operation, the operator must prepare a discharge report to receive a discharge license, approved by the
                           Water Resources Department of the DONRE. The discharge report is a comprehensive document that not only includes sampling data from
                           initial start-up operations of the CETP, but also in effect is a combined EIA/EMP with full information on the industries operating in the IZ, on the
                           nature of the effluent, characteristics and vulnerability of the receiving environment, and includes a sludge disposal plan.

                           For each CETP to be financed under the project, at least an EIA for the IZ will have already been prepared and approved by the competent
                           authorities and in some cases, an additional CETP-specific EIA will also have been prepared and approved. For existing CETPs, which are
                           being expanded, a Wastewater Discharge Report will also have been prepared and approved. These documents together meet most of the
                           requirements of the World Bank safeguard policies but in some cases there may be some gaps in coverage and quality. To ensure compliance
                           with World Bank safeguard requirements, each participating IZ will prepare a CETP EIA consistent with Bank requirements and which will draw
                           information from the existing EIA(s) and the discharge report if available. If the existing EIAs are of insufficient quality or coverage, the
                           proponent will carry out supplemental work prior to elaborating the CETP EIA. The EIA will include an environmental management plan (EMP)
                           including detailed mitigation measures. The EIA will be reviewed and approved by VEPF and the World Bank.

                           The CETP EIAs thus will include a summary of information from the existing EIA(s) (supplemented as needed by any additional analysis carried
Public Disclosure Copy




                           out) on the wastewater outfalls: location, water quality of receiving waters, potential sensitive receptors (natural habitats, human uses of the
                           watercourses). It will include an analysis of site-specific information for each industrial zone (kinds of industries at the IZ, nature of pre-
                           treatment at individual industries, infrastructure providing connection to the CETPs, nature of influents to be expected at the CETP, proposed
                           types of CETPs); guidelines for the operation and maintenance of the CETP (each will also have more detailed technical operational manuals
                           and procedures); occupational, health and safety measures; capacity building programs; monitoring plan of environmental performance; and
                           sludge disposal plan (including a due diligence assessment of any existing or planned sludge disposal by third parties).

                           Since not all CETPs for on-lending will be definitively identified by appraisal, the Borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework (ESMF) which lays out clearly the procedures for screening of potential impacts and reviewing existing EIAs, for
                           preparing CETP EIAs, for addressing institutional arrangements, capacity building needs, monitoring and reporting, and review and clearance
                           procedures. The ESMF also includes a review of the overall positive and negative impacts of the project.

                           Monitoring of effluent quality during operation will rely on a number of different monitoring efforts. Individual CETPs will include AMSs as a
                           standard component, both for effluents and for influents from industries. As outlined in their EMPs, each IZ will supplement AMS data with
                           periodic monitoring exercises. Responsible state authorities also monitor on a regular basis the effluents of IZs to ensure they are in
                           compliance with standards that are prescribed in the CETP operating license. Finally, the Project itself through Component 1 is investing in
                           AMSs in the project area river basins which will provide additional data on water quality of the receiving waters.

                           Social: For a Component 2 loan for a CETP, the project will evaluate involuntary resettlement that has taken place in the "CETP service area",
                           which is defined as being: i) the land area within the IZ physically occupied by the CETP which will be financed by the project, or the area
                           already occupied by an CETP if the project is upgrading it; and ii) the entire land area within the IZ that will be occupied by industries that are or
                           will be serviced by the CETP.

                           The project's criteria to consider an IZ eligible for investment with regard to involuntary resettlement issues includes the following provisions:

                           a.       The Overall Compensation, Support and Resettlement Plan was issued and approved by the Provincial Authorities before the cut-off
                           date, May 2010, date of the project identification mission. This confirms that land was not acquired in anticipation of the project and that the
                           compensation process for involuntary resettlement is substantially advanced.

                           b.         The World Bank will have assessed the scope of completed of on-going compensation activities in a due diligence report (see further
                           details below) and will have determined they are consistent with Government of Vietnam's regulations and consistent with the Bank's policy
                           objectives. Two key elements to address will be the existence and functionality of a Grievances and Redress mechanisms responding to
                                                                                                                                                                     Page 4 of 6
                           claims, queries or any aspect related to the on-going resettlement plan implementation and monitoring of livelihood restoration of affected
                           peoples. If either the Government regulations and/or World Bank policy objectives have not been met, a remedial action plan to be
                           implemented by the IZ will have been prepared by the IZ and cleared by the World Bank.

                           The Bank's Due Diligence. Methods used for gathering the information for the DD report should include desk review of documents issued at the
                           levels of the province, district and communes, collecting and analyzing the qualitative and quantitative information gathered in the field, results
                           of the interviews with a representative sample of displaced persons, and analysis of other pertinent issues and documents related to involuntary
Public Disclosure Copy




                           resettlement and land compensation on a case-by-case basis. Information gathered will include:
                                     Number of people displaced
                                     Entitlements of people displaced;
                                     Eligibility criteria used for compensation payments according to the government regulations
                                     Types of land and methods used for valuing the land according to the government regulations
                                     Compensation status
                                     Description of grievances mechanisms
                                     Description of consultations and its outcomes
                                     Programs implemented for income restoration, including allowances pa id and capacity building programs
                                     Resettlement schedule and dates of compensation payments completion
                                     Grievance and redress mechanism in place and in operation
                                     Legacies or liabilities pending
                                     Disclosure of information to affected people

                           Monitoring. Based on the findings of the DD, the Recipient will carry out monitoring during project implementation of any aspect of the
                           involuntary resettlement and compensation that may be ongoing. In its supervision, the Bank will similarly review the status of any pending
                           compensation activities.

                           Proposed Subprojects for the first year of project investment. According to the DD review that has been carried out during project preparation,
                           and is available in project files, two industrial zones (IZ) meet the criteria for the construction of a CETP in the first year of the project
                           implementation. Regarding involuntary resettlement and compensation related issues: Nhon Trach 3 (located in Dong Nai Province) and the
                           Chau Duc IZ (located in Ba Ria Vung Tau Province). For the Nhon Trach 3 the DD review carried out confirmed that involuntary resettlement
                           and compensation for the CETP service area was fully completed by 2007. The Tin Nghia Company holds the LURCs (Red Book) since 2008
                           for the whole IZs area in compliance with government regulations and in line with the WB's OP 4.12, and there are no legacy issues pending to
                           be solved.

                           For the Chau Duc IZ CETP service area, the DD report confirmed that 224 people were affected, out of which 10 are actually the total number
                           pending to be compensated, of which 4 have relocated and remain to be compensated and 6 have not yet been relocated.

                           Capacity of Client: The environmental management capacity of the individual IZs varies. All IZs visited during preparation had environmental
                           specialists dedicated to management of environmental issues and who had familiarity with safeguard requirements. Some IZs, particularly in
                           the north, will need supplementary technical assistance to implement their EMPs. VEPF, which will appraise the individual proposals, has
                           environmental staff but are not specifically familiar with World Bank requirements. Some specific training for VEPF on environmental
                           safeguards will be needed and is included under the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Most staff from IZs are not familiar with the Bank's requirement on social safeguards. During project implementation, training will be provided (in
                           conjunction with environmental trainings) to ensure participating IZs understand the need for the Bank's due diligence review.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                            The key stakeholders, other than the participating government implementing agencies and the IZs to be recipient of the CETP loans, are local
                           communities around each IZ (they will be consulted as part of the preparation of individual IZ EIAs rather than during preparation of the ESMF).

                           The ESMF was consulted among key national and provincial stakeholders and is available in English and Vietnamese. It has been disclosed in
                           the InfoShop and locally. The ESMF is being formally adopted by MPI, MONRE and VEPF. The approach for translation, consultation and
                           disclosure for each CETP EIA has been spelled out clearly in the ESMF. EIAs for the first two CETPs have been disclosed in the InfoShop and
                           locally.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              24-Nov-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          06-Jul-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           01-Jun-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive           19-Jul-2012
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              24-Nov-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          06-Jul-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           01-Jun-2012
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                                                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 6
                            The dates above for disclosure of the Environmental Assessment refer to the dates of disclosure of the Environmental and Social Management
                            Framework (ESMF). In addition, subproject-specific EIAs were prepared for two industrial zones. These were all disclosed both in InfoShop and
                            nationally in English and Vietnamese (first disclosures on May 1; subsequent disclosures of different versions prior to beginning of Appraisal). No
                            Resettlement Framework needed to be prepared for the project.

                            The dates above under Resettlement must obligatorily be filled out in order to complete the ISDS. A RAP or Framework was not needed under
                            this project but the full details on how the Recipient and the Bank will carry out appropriate due diligence of resettlement that took place on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                            industrial zones is included in the ESMF. The dates here therefore correspond to the ESMF.

                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                   Yes [    ]       No [    ]        NA [    ]

                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the           Yes [    ]       No [    ]        NA [    ]
                              plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                   Yes [    ]       No [    ]        NA [    ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language           Yes [    ]       No [    ]        NA [    ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for        Yes [    ]       No [    ]        NA [    ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                   Yes [    ]       No [    ]        NA [    ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard         Yes [    ]       No [    ]        NA [    ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same             Yes [    ]       No [    ]        NA [    ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Jiang Ru
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Name: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA)                                    Date: 08-Aug-2012
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Jennifer J. Sara (SM)                                                     Date: 08-Aug-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                                       Page 6 of 6
